HONG LIU: This is a key relation between the bulk and the boundary. The more you go to the interior of the space time, then corresponding to the lower energy process when viewed form the field theory. So here, the same process is happening here compared to happening here, and here corresponds to the IR process, and the [INAUDIBLE] boundary corresponding to UV process. This is the IR-UV connection between the Bulk and the Boundary. It's called the IR/UV connection. the boundary theories. And also, this gives you an intuitive understanding where does this actual dimension come from from the field theory point of view. Then from a field theory perspective, this actualdimension can be considered as a geometrization of the energy scale. So any questions regarding this? Good. So now let's talk about some further aspects of the duality. The duality is that once you realize there's such relation, since the two sides are completely different objects, so the game is that you really have to do lots of guess work. How does this quantity translate into that quantity, et cetera? And then check the consistency. Just like you don't know two languages, and then you have to guess between the two languages and then build up the dictionary. We will be doing the same. So this is more like a review of what we already sad. We have N equals 4 super Yang-Mills theory. And then here, you have type IIB string in Ads5 times ds5. So here on this side, there is a conformal symmetry which we explained before. The low energy limit, as we said before, just has to be super gravity. But the interesting thing is that by definition, the supersymmetry on the gravity side is actually local. So if you look at this correspondence between each other, then you actually see a pattern. So the isometry is a subgroup of diffeomorphism. So why we are only talking about isometry? Why we don't talk about other parts of the diffeomorphicism? So what's special about the isometric? But let me just save time. HONG LIU: Large gauge transformation means the gauge transformations which don't vanish at infinity. The ordinary gauge transformation is just corresponding to redundancy of degrees of freedom. Gauge freedom is just redundant freedom. You never see it on the other side. And those large gauge transformations essentially is like the global part of the u(1) gauge symmetry, in some sense can be considered as.asymptotic geometry of the space time. But the corresponding part associated with the boundary is with the gauge symmetry on the gravity side. previously we said, from the relation of the d-brane, so the G Yang-Mills square here is related to the 4 pi GS here, string coupling. So the N is the same N on this side. And we can also, instead of using GS, as we said before, you can also use the Newton constant. Then you find, once you plug all those relations in, how the GS and alpha prime, et cetera related to N, then you find here actually, G YangMills have disappeared in this relation. expanding 1 over N squared. So as we said before, we often do dimensional reduction on S5. So these relations are often useful in the future. So now let's look at [INAUDIBLE] limits of this relation. So let's first look at the classical gravity limit on the gravity side. By classic, we always use h bar equal to 1. But quantum gravity is captured by this parameter, h bar times GN. So even though h barequal to 1, in the limit when GN goes to zero, then you are in the regime in which you can ignore the quantum gravity effect. they all should be treated quantum mechanically. It's just that you should consider this small. So let's consider what this means. So GN small as a dimensionless parameter, this translates into field theory side if we use this relation. So that means N goes to infinity. So this is the large N limit of the Yang-Mills theory. And then alpha prime goes to zero. From the relation between the alpha prime and here, when alpha prime go to zero, so this is in the downstairs. side is simple, we can just deal with quantum field theory in the curved space time, which we know how to do. But on this side, it's highly non-trivial because this is an infinite coupling limit. So this will tell you that the strong coupling limit is described by classical gravity. So that means that we can actually use classical gravity to, in principle, solve problems which are strongly coupled. So also, of course, there are corrections beyond this. So quantum gravity corrections on this. side, so this is a classical gravity limit if you take those parameters to go to zero. essentially the semi classical gravity limit because we still treat the matter fields essentially as quantum. HONG LIU: Yang-Mills theory lives on Minkowski space. And then you say you can imagine that this is the boundary, this relation is related to the bulk and the boundary. And this is a postulate based on that fact. Yes? AUDIENCE: I thought one of the motivations for thinking about the holographic duality was to try to escape [INAUDIBLE] And all of a sudden, it strikes me, so we're trying to get on the boundary of AdS. Then they will also exist in the massless particles. will give you a direct way to argue that. Also, in your p-set, you have checked this holographic bound. And so that's a confirmation of this. Yes? AUDIENCE: So what does the massless [INAUDIBLE] field on the right map to if it's the same representation of SO(d, 2)? HONG LIU: Sorry. Say it again. We are going to talk about it. So even though this relation was discovered in '97, actually in the '80s, people already worked a lot to consider this type to be supergravity on this space. On the string theory side, you always have this dilaton. And on the N equal to 4 super Yang-Mills theory, that's a local operator. And it turns out that operator is mapped to this Dilaton. So I won't go through those details. But let me just mention the most important such kind of mapping for these two theories. And actually does have consequences for the general story. So the mostimportant mapping. And then you can immediately see they actually map to certain representation of operators. theory side, we have this SO6 gauge symmetry. Then we have the SO6 conserved current. And it turns out this, on the gravity side, just maps to sO6 gauge field. And then another universal operator on the field theory side is the stress tensor. And this is mapped to-- turns out, to the metric perturbations. It's a deviation from the AdS metric. But physically, this is also natural. Physically, alsonatural. a few minutes. So now, given this mapping, any operator is due to a bulk field. Then you can ask some immediate questions. For example, the quantum numbers of these operators will map to the quantum number of the bulk fields. And that's something I said you can check their symmetries. So do you have any questions regarding this? So for local operator on the field theory side, so once we have this mapping we can immediately ask questions related to operators on this side, and try to ask what's the counterpart on the other side. When phi 0 is equal to constant, then this corresponding to a change in the coupling for this operator. If your Lagrangian previously already included this operator, and then if you add such a term, then you are just changing the coupling. So this is a natural thing to do. But in general, you can make it space time dependent. And the immediate question is, what does this operation-- so in the field theory point of view,you can always do this operation. guesswork is based on some very small clues. Good physicists do is that they can see non-ordinary things from ordinary things. So let me start with that relation. Related to the GS. GS string coupling can be considered as the expectation value of the dilaton field. The bulk field phi due to O has a boundary value phi 0. Any questions about this? Yes? AUDIENCE: Your choice of operator O should be consistent with all symmetries, right? HONG LIU: No. O can be anything. You can choose any O. methods. Now I'm saying because I already know it's true, but in real life, what you will do from this example, you will say, ah, this must be the case. Then you will start trying to find examples to check it. And we will describe it later. It's that any conserved curve in the boundary theory must be equal to some gauge field in the gravity side, and the stress tensor should always be due to the metric. So if we assume this, I can also use this to argue. I can make star and star star natural for any duality. and the field theory. And that also tells you that if you have a theory which due into a higher dimensional theory, and then that theory has a stress tensor, then this bulk theory must have gravity. So you can say, if any field theory is due to a theory of one higher dimension, that theory must involve gravity-- nothing about quantum gravity. Let's stop here. We're not going to get into quantum gravity right now, we're just going to talk about the theory of gravity.