Adam Martin: In this video, researchers are shining light into a mouse's brain to activate specific neurons in order to test whether they function in arousal. In today's lecture, we're going to work towards understanding how this experiment works. We're also going to talk about how neurons function and how researchers are able to control that function to modify behavior-- in this case, the arousal of this mouse. And here, you see the mouse is going to wake up. There it goes. It's awake now. The sciatic nerve extends from the base of your spine all the way down into your foot, OK? So that's an extremely long distance to transmit information along a single cell. And so we're going to go from thinking about how signals are transmitted in single cells, and this will evolve electrical signaling. Then we'll talk about synapses and how synapses function to communicate between neurons. And this is going to involve also sort of understanding how certain antidepressants, like Prozac, work. And then we'll end by talking about how researchers did this experiment to wake up the mouse. In a resting state, the cell's resting potential is negative 70 millivolts. The cell can lose this polarity and not have a charge differential, or it can flip and be positive on the inside. Stephen suggested opening ion channels. If you open these, it's going to depolarize the cell. Because remember, high on the outside, out here. And so if you open them, positive ions are going to flow in to make this less positive. So what is an action potential? Everyone see how it's a transient potential. There's electrical insulation around the axons of these neurons. This is provided by another specialized cell type called a glial cell. In multiple sclerosis, the myelin sheath is damaged. And if you damage this electrical insulation, you greatly slow down these action potentials. That has a significant impact on nerve impulses in the brain and throughout the entire body. And so this neuron will then have to decide whether or not to fire an action potential down its axon. And the way that the neuron decides this is to integrate the signals. Prozac, Zoloft affect this reuptake process. And what that does is it keeps the neurotransmitter in the synaptic cleft for longer, such that it enhances the signaling. So the idea behind these drugs is that if you are suffering depression from a lack of serotonin, then you can rescue that by preventing the rapid reuptakes of the neurotransmitters. All right, now I want to end by just telling you how this experiment works, where we're able to activate specific neurons in a brain and that leads to the brain.  optogenetics is an approach to control the activity of a cell with light. In this case, we're going to have light inducing depolarization. And the way this is done is there's a protein discovered from photosynthetic algae that's responsive to light. And this protein is called channelrhodopsin, specifically ChR2. And if that's expressed specifically in the neurons that you're trying to test, you can then shine a light into the brain of the organism and activate this type of neuron. you to test the function of the neuron in the behavior of an organism. So, in this case, this mouse, the light is shined into its brain, and they're testing a specific type of neuron that is involved in arousal of the mouse. And it's going to wake up right now. There it goes. It woke up. You see now its muscle activity is going, OK? So you can test thefunction of specific nerve cells using this approach, and it's because you have a light-sensitive sodium channel.