Judy Hoyt: We're going to discuss the accurate control and placement of active dopant regions through a process called dopant diffusion. The placement of those regions determines many of the so-called short channel characteristics of MOSFETs that we'll talk about. The doping of other materials, not just the silicon itself, but of the polysilicon gate affects things like gate depletion and limits how well the gate voltage controls the channel potential, Hoyt says. The equation numerically, essentially, for an arbitrary doping profile is 1 over the integral of the carrier concentration minus the background concentration. There's a fundamental physical limit on how much dopant we can put in the silicon and how much it will be electrically active. We need to find new ways to activate dopants to higher levels if we're going to be able to manage this design tradeoff. Being able to scale the device really amounts to, in the front-end processing to a large extent, to being able to control very precisely the shape of the doping profiles where the dopants end up. And what I'm going to spend some time in the next few slides is giving you examples from the present literature on device scaling. detailed device physics, but it's just to give you a flavor for why studying dopant diffusion is such an important topic. So let's go on to slide number 8 and talk about a topic called the short-channel effect. This basically takes place when the distance between the source and drain-- that is the channel length L-- becomes comparable to the MOS depletion width in the vertical direction. And then that the source-drain potentials themselves from theSource and drain regions end up having a strong effect on the control of the current in the device. refer to different lateral source-drain gradients. For lateral gradients larger than about 4 nanometers per decade, the Vt roll-off is just too large. You wouldn't be able to make a 25 nanometer MOSFET-- so, again, illustrates the importance of controlling the lateral doping profile and of controlling diffusion processes themselves. So given that brief introduction to the electrical effects, let me go on now on slide number 15 and talk about dopant diffusion fundamentals. In silicon IC processing, there are two different steps that we refer to in diffusion historically. Dopant diffusion is described by Fick's first law, which describes how the flux or the flow of dopant depends upon the doping gradient. When the concentration gradient goes to 0, essentially, the dopant or the atoms are uniformly distributed, say, in the solid, and the flow would stop. Later on, we'll talk about the more atomistic diffusion mechanisms and effects of dopants in the silicon lattice. We're going to consider macroscopic first-- macroscopy models for diffusion. given by that constant dose Q divided by 2 times the square root of pi Dt times the exponential of minus x squared over 4 Dt. So that's what's known as a Gaussian profile. And the important consequence of this are that one, of course, the dose Q remains constant. That means then that the peak concentration-- so the concentration at the origin-- is going to decrease according to the squareroot of Dt over time. So the peak Concentration goes down and the width of the profile or the diffusion distance from the origin increases. In semiconductor processing, linear scales for dopants are not all that useful. So we often care about how the dopant falls off over many, many orders of magnitude of concentration. In the second case, which is a fixed dose Q, just like we talk about, constant in time, but now we're diffusing near a surface. And the third case, essentially, that we can solve analytically is called the case of an infinite source. And what this is essentially is a infinite source of dopant which is made up of small slices, essentially each diffusing as a Gaussian. along the x-axis. That exponential squared over 4 Dt. So we're summing up all these Gaussians at the bottom of slide 30. The solution which satisfies Fick's second law is written down at the top of slide 31. The concentration is actually equal to concentration C prime over 2 times the quantity in square brackets 1 minus the error function of the argument x. And we can write this as C sub s times the complementaryerror function of x over2 times the square root of Dt, where the second equation and third gives you the definition of what we mean by the errorfunction. In the predeposition case, at the surface of the silicon wafer, the concentration of the dopant is fixed at the solid solubility. The longer you would do the pre-dep, the more dose you would deposit into this silicon surface. Let's go on to slide number 35 and talk a little bit about dopant diffusion coefficients themselves. And we'll talk about some interesting Fermi level effects that come into play as the dopants become modulated by the carrier concentrations of the species. of cases where there are analytic solutions. We talked about the diffusion of a Gaussian profile with a fixed dose. We apply this diffusion to a constant surface concentration. And finally -- we talk about the diffusion of a complementary error function, which we apply for a constant level of surface concentration. The diffusion of this error function can be applied to a fixed level of surface concentration, or a constant level of substance on the surface, for example.