Professor: If you have a perturbative treatment, even if you carry to infinite order, you have, formally, divergences if you have resonant interaction. Professor: I want to show you what are the tools to treat those infinity source diverGences in a consistent and a systematic way. MIT OpenCourseWare offers high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu. means to sum up an infinite number of diagrams. And OK, we want to understand the time evolution of this system. Our tool is a time evolution operator. And at the end of the class on Monday, I told you, well, let's simplify things. Let's get rid of those temporal integrations and multiple integrals by simply doing a Fourier transform. And this iterative equation where we get the nth order by plugging the n minus first order on the right hand side. terms, which are 1 over Z minus Eb. Sometimes, scattering and evolution equations are better formulated when you do it in the complex plane. Just remember, Z is the energy. And it is the initial energy. The initial energy is if it's a ground state and a resonant photon, we have a problem. Because the denominator is 0. So in other words, for resonant excitation, we are interested in the case that Z is on the order of this close to Eb. easy part, which has no divergence, we can make any kind of approximation we want without altering the physics. But the resonant part, this needs special attention. We want to figure out which of those expressions include this problematic term exactly twice or three times or four times. So we regroup those infinite sums, these algebraic terms, in such a way that we say, OK, which one has the occurrence of this once, twice, three times, four times? Colin: Is the definition of the S-matrix or the matrix matrix of the Fourier transform? non-trivial expression, the function of the kernel, has no divergences. And therefore, because there is no critical part to it, rather simple approximations can be made. That's an idea you may see often in physics. You have a theory whether it's something complicated, non-perturbative divergence. But you just rewrite the theory, transform the equations in such a way that structure of the equations now accounts for the physics behind it. And you still get the correct physics out of it. light scattering. I just go now and apply to an excited atomic state. So the state we are interested in is the atomic state b and no photons. And the property of the atomic. state is obtained when we know the function Gb of Z. And this is the matrix element between state B0B0 and the time. evolution operator. So we are calculating, of course, the Fourier transform of the time evolution of the state b by the. Fourier. transform through the resolvent G. Fermi's golden rule where we-- well, with a little twist-- have the initial state. The dipole interaction or the [? p.a ?] interaction takes us to an intermediate state with a photon with [INAUDIBLE] and polarization epsilon. We propagate in the intermediate state Ea. And now we have to go back with the same matrix element. So therefore the matrix element is squared. And we have a double sum. We sum over all possible states of the photon. The real part is this matrix element squared, but double sum. But what we use is the principle part of it, which is well defined in the theory of complex functions. So the imaginary part gets us Fermi's golden rule. And the real part has actually-- remember when we discussed the AC Stark shift. And such AC Stark shifts which appear as self energies, as energy shifts created by the state, this is nothing else than the famous Lamb shift. So that's what you have seen. I have already-- do I in this sum? The Markov approximation often means that some relaxation time or some response of a system is replaced by delta function. Well, we've done the same here. If you replace some temporal response function by a delta function, that means the Fourier transform becomes constant. And by neglecting the energy dependence, we are now saying everything is constant as a function of energy. And that means in the temporal domain that we have a deltafunction. And you should now-- well, this is what we may have expected. But there are two things you should learn. infinite summation of diagrams, if we had done a perturbative expansion, we would have never obtained exponential decay. We would have obtained some polynominal decay. If you do lowest order perturbation theory, instead of getting an exponential decay, you would just get a linear slope. And if you fix it, I think you get quadratic terms. So it's not really profound what I'm saying. It's pretty much an exponential function is non-perturbative. we have an atom in the ground state, and a photon comes along, and it takes the atom to the excited state b. Then we go back to the same state-- could be also another state-- by emitting a photon k prime epsilon prime. And the relevant matrix element of the time evolution operator, which is the T-matrix, involves now the matrix element, the initial energy minus the intermediate energy. The critical part is really-- you can do it mathematically. The excited state of an atom comes from an infinite number of absorption, of emission and reabsorption processes. The real nature of this state is that it couples to many, many modes. And you can often neglect that in the simple description of your experiment. But if you take certain expressions seriously, they would have divergences. The next chapter is called Derivation of the Optical Bloch Equation. And yes, what we really need for a number of phenomenon in AMO physics for laser cooling, light forces, and much more. A small system which I just described by Schrodinger's equation, now follows the density matrix equation, has relaxation, the entropy increases, and such. So in other words, we have coupling to the environment. And in this cause in part one, we've dealt with it and looked at vacuum Robi oscillation and a few really neat things. But what happens is that the system is an open quantum system. You can have spontaneous emission. And if your mirrors are not 100.00% reflectivity, some light leaks out. So this is our system. In general, if you write down the total Hamiltonian and do the time evolution, something will come out which, in general, is very complicated, very entangled. So you have to know, to keep track of all the photons, which have been scattered in the lifetime of an atom. But often, what we do is we simply put the photons in a trash can. We trash them. We're not interested in what the photons are doing. We really want to focus on what happens to the atom. How does an initial state of the atom propagate into a final state? This is done by optical Bloch equations. In quantum physics, we really want to find the full quantum time evolution. We have to be careful. The time evolution as a Hamiltonian, if you now bring in the environment, cannot be simply included by adding an imaginary term. And our derivation of the master equation will actually show what kind of operators applied to the atomic density matrix are consistent, are quantum mechanically consistent. This is actually something-- well, we're not doing a lot of equations or work today, so let me rather be a little bit chatty. processes. OK, any last questions? Well then, let's enjoy the open house with incoming graduate students, and I'll see you on Monday. I'll be back on Monday to talk to you about the classes we'll be teaching next year. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript of this interview. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to see the full Transcript of this Interview. Back in the page, please share your questions and comments.