Political philosophy is the oldest of the social sciences. It can boast a wealth of heavy hitters from Plato and Aristotle to Machiavelli, Hobbes, Hegel, Tocqueville, Nietzsche. The study of the great books or great thinkers of the past can easily degenerate into a kind of antiquarianism, into a sort of pedantry, says Steven Smith. Smith: Political philosophy is not just some kind of strange historical appendage attached to the trunk of political science; it is constitutive of its deepest problems. This course will be devoted to the study of those "academic scribblers" who have written books that continue to impress and create the forms of authority with which we are familiar. But one thing we should not do, right, is to approach these works as if they provide, somehow, answers to the problems of today. Rather, the great works provide us, so to speak, with a repository of fundamental or permanent questions that political scientists still continue to rely on in their work. Again, we still think in.influences, are usually the slave of some defunct economist. terms of the basic concepts and categories that were created for us long ago. Among the oldest and still most fundamental questions are: what is justice? What are the goals of a decent society? How should a citizen be educated? Why should I obey the law, and what are the limits, if any, to my obligation? And of course, the all important question, even though political philosophers and political scientists rarely pronounce it, namely, quid sit deus, what is God? Does he exist? The concept of the regime is perhaps the oldest and most fundamental of political ideas. Broadly speaking, a regime indicates a form of government, whether it is ruled by the one, a few, the many, or as more common, some mixture of these three ruling powers. Regimes are necessarily partisan, that is to say they instill certain loyalties and passions in the same way that one may feel partisanship to the New York Yankees or the Boston Red Sox, or to Yale. The study of regime politics is in part a study of the distinctive national character types that constitutes a citizen body. A regime is more than simply a set of formal structures and institutions, it consists of the entire way of life, the habits, customs, and sentiments that make a people what they are. The regime constitutes an ethos, that is to say a distinctive character, that nurtures distinctive human types. The study of regimes is inseparable from the study of political science, and we will consider this further over the term. see you back, and have a very good but thoughtful September 11^(th). See you back on 9/11/11. I'll see you back in a week or so. Thanks for your support and good wishes. I love you all, and see you on 11/11 /11. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. See you in a month or so, and I'll be back to see you in the U.S.