The Peloponnesian War was fought in 431 BC. After the war, Spartan power had grown to an unprecedented degree. For the first time there were lots of Spartans, who had lots of money. The Spartans had choices that they could take. They could either stay in the Pelop onnesus, or they could contest it in their power to control the entire Greek world in the east. Or they could have some control of the Aegean and the Hellespont. the great rhetorician and sophist Gorgias and he was also in the circle of Socrates, along with Plato and Xenophon and various other bright young men of the upper classes in Athens. Also, he was a poet, an orator himself, a philosopher and so on and some of his fragments remain for us to look at. But one thing that he was by 404 was a bitter enemy of the democracy. He had been exiled or had voluntarily taken exile, in order to get away from the democracy, and was determined now that there should be no democracy in Greece. Lysander Lysander set up the Thirty to rule Athens in 404. Lysander agreed to the idea of making the Thirty of twenty men who were oligarchs. Critias' oligarchs were very extreme, but allowing Theramenes, an Athenian general, who had taken part in the democracy, to remain in power. The oligarchic revolution of 400 year brought about the revolution of 411 and again, the Thirty had made something like something like that, although it's fair to call it fair to oligarchs, although moderate. Thrasybulus, the leader of the Thirty, was deposed by a group of 3,000. He appealed to Sparta for help against this democratic army that he had put out. The Spartans did vote to send an army in there to deal with Thrasy Bulus, but they did not put Lysander at the head of the army. Instead King Pausaniasas was sent out to do the job, they met under ThrasyBulus and defeated him. For one thing, as they had in the past, the Athenians fought bravely and well and inflicted serious losses on the army, but it was also obvious that Pausanas was willing to negotiate.