Prof: You know why I am dressed up? When I do this course and when I do the first half of the French course I do a lecture on the bourgeoisie, the middle classes. Middle class was a form of self-identity that was constructed in the way being a worker was constructed, or being a noble. When you look at me dressed like this, please try to think, knowing me a little bit as you do, why it was that it meant a lot to dress like this in the nineteenth century. of class identity for ordinary people, for working people, the bourgeoisie had as strong a sense of self-identity as any social class you could imagine. It was, as I'll make the point in a minute, difficult to get into that class if you weren't born into it. The fear of falling out of it was something that helps motivate lots of political things in the nineteenth century. Once we've got an increase in the wealth of the middle classes, then you wanted the political power. You wanted access to information through the press and print culture. The French Revolution opened the way by removing legal blocks in very many places to the career open to talents. Napoleon used to say tediously that in each soldier's backpack there was a marshal's baton, or staff that you could get promoted with good work, hard work, if you didn't get your head blown off in one of these battles. The bourgeoisie did anything but that. Work was part of how they believed to get ahead, and getting ahead is what they wanted to do. In the 1960s people really didn't study the middle classes because they didn't like them very much. But there's been an awful lot of good work done on the middle class. The middle class formed voluntary associations, and many of these were for extremely charitable purposes, particularly in Britain. In the nineteenth century, over a very long period, laws finally by the end of the century in most places made at least primary education obligatory, and in most cases free. The Society for the Protection of Cruelty to Animals is one of the classic examples of bourgeois voluntary associations doing good things. Religion was a fundamental part of the British middle class's view of itself. The percentage of people who went to church could be exaggerated. There's a massive kind of church building campaign that has its counterpart in almost every country as well. After the Paris Commune of 1871 they start building churches in France, and in other countries as well, including the U.S. and Germany. The church movement in France is well studied, but you still had this de-Christianization. How do we know who is middle-class? When they first started doing censuses--and censuses are really a nineteenth-century phenomenon, and subsequent centuries, as I said before. There was a whole lot of work done in the 1970s on what they used to call the new urban history, which is counting people up and deciding who might well have considered themselves middle class. Inevitably I have to talk some about Paris because the work is so rich there. A woman called Adeline Daumard wrote a dissertation that was subsequently published called Les Bourgeois de Paris. Hamburg, Bremen, and Lübeck, and Hamburg above all, have a very enormous bourgeoisie. Lyon has the most tightly closed middle class that you can imagine and still is. Naples is one of the biggest cities in Europe right through the early-modern period. The further east you get, the smaller the middle class gets. At the very top--think of Zurich. Think of any city you want. Zurich has a big middle class. So does Geneva for obvious reasons. The nineteenth century bankers will become much more important. There's a revolution in France in 1830, yet another one that you can read about. Arguably--Marx says this and in a way it's sort of true--what it does is it brings to power in France the big bourgeoisie. They have the ear of the king, Louis-Philippe, who calls himself the Citizen King. He would rule from 1830 to 1848. He was noble. But in the official government he was not any bourgeois. That's what he calls himself. He's still the king. Paintings of him you see people dressed like me who are coming into the throne room. They have power. He wants them in the painting with him. It's terribly interesting. Then you've got other layers of bourgeoisie. Here we have smaller bankers, not in size but in money, industrialists, merchants, these kinds of people. Lawyers rise up rapidly in popular esteem and usefulness. The middle class likes to see themselves as useful. You find lawyers reaching in there and, slowly, doctors. times, as you know, in the French Revolution--;the French revolutions, and in the revolutions of 1848. They're always there. These folks are here, too. People are always dumping all over them needlessly. I will give you some example. If you've ever read the great French novelist--;he was paid by the word, but Balzac is really the novelist of the bourgeoisie. When he describes Paris and the seventeen to nineteen percent of the population who are increasingly living in the western part of Paris, he describes it as a jungle. as a jungle. In several hundred brushstrokes, Daumier captures the look of panic on his face because he's going to go home without his hat. He's got to buy one, and they've got to put the money together so he is not going to fall off the ladder in this jungle. Then you have to imagine this as a ladder, like this. In order to really give an image of what it was like, he's got this one magnificent print called the "Street of the Four Winds" mobility is the goal. You want to have enough money to leave to your 2.2 children. Then you'd have to grease this pole through bad economic times. What happens down below here? Holy cow! That's the big sea. I saw this wretched movie called the Poseidon Adventure once. It had an image where the water is kind of coming up below and it's going to finally get to the top and there's no more room to breathe. This is how the people on the bottom part of this ladder viewed the demands of the working class. Daumier is the greatest caricaturist in the nineteenth century and arguably ever, to make an extreme assertion, but it really is pretty true. This is what he captures, the prevailing mood in much of Europe in that money, more than blood if you were going to exclude places like Hungary, Poland, Spain, and Prussia. What is the.down here? This is ordinary people. The chances are that in these bad years you're going to fall down. But yet lots of people get up and the ranks of the middle class increases everywhere. man doing? He's counting his money. That's a very nineteenth-century profession, as it is for every subject. This guy, if you have extraordinary eyes and can read upside down, you will be able to see that he is reading a newspaper on the price of colonial goods, imports. He's one of these people that's at the very top of my triangle there. Look, this guy's got his coat, too. This is early in the century. You can tell. Some of these images, this is really not very interesting art, but that's not the point. The bourgeoisie didn't kiss and hug a lot. They still had arranged marriages. Love could count for something, but marriages were still essentially, less so for the middle classes than for ordinary people. That's what they were. They were economic relationships, wrangling over the dowry and that kind of thing. Look at our guy on the left. He's working very hard there. He had probably not secondary education. Most people didn't go to high school, secondary, lycée in France or gymnasium in France. in Germany, et cetera, and et ceta. It represents this world. By the way, we also know that this takes place in the center of Paris, right behind a big department store, subsequently the Hotel de Ville, but right near the town hall. This is very common. You see this in the book you're reading, I think. These things can be represented spatially very easily. One of the themes of the long run is the emergence of prosperous western Paris, prosperous western London, prosperous center Vienna and other places. minute. In Zola's great novel, L'Assommoir, Gervaise dies like a dog on a bed of straw, because there was no more mattress. She must be at the very top. Now these rooms then became in the twentieth century student rooms and then were transformed into enormously expensive lofts. But this is a way of visualizing the special concomitance of what I'm talking about. The more you go up there, you're still within the middle class. People were aware of what these symbols meant. This is your classic Hamburg financier's apartment. Ordinary people did not wear slippers. Domestic servants cost almost nothing. It was considered to be a way of moving up the ladder to say that you had four domestic servants instead of three. You've got brass or copper here on the heater. That's a good sign. You're on one of the lower floors. Why? Because you see the trees outside the window. And you've got a domesticated animal. Pianos were expensive, but the middle class has pianos. The piano replaces the harpsichord. The middle class wants privacy. They want their own rooms. There's the kitchen. This is the domestic with her children, who are part of the team who has been hired to help run this. There is more than one room. You'll see in a minute there's even more than two rooms. It's all obvious stuff. There are lots of rooms. These are very good chairs, sort of Louis-Philippe chairs. The notion of childhood, childhood didn't exist for ordinary people. Nobles did not send their children to public schools or even to private schools. The whole salon, the idea of going to art shows starts in the seventeenth century. The middle class wants to be seen rather like the Dutch. They wait in line in line to go to theatres. This is all Daumauau, the piece that you're obliged to swallow after dinner. Here's the little girl being trotted out to play a few notes. birthday, papa." You didn't take time out to celebrate a birthday if you were an ordinary person having to get to the fields at 4:00 in the morning in the summer, or going to work during the day. There's a whole notion, and here again this would probably fit rather awkwardly into the birth control description, but there's this whole sense of being prepared that emerges with the middle class. It was the idea of protecting that one suit. We didn't carry umbrellas, because it rained all the time anyway and I'd just lose it. The bourgeoisie, the middle classes, want the right to bear arms. They want to be in the national guard. The national guard might hypothetically be there in case there was an invasion of France or Germany by, I don't know, some distant place. You had to be defined as a property-owning citizen to have theright to vote. They didn't want to pay a lot of taxes, but property reflects one's belief in one's own social worth. No longer was it the worth of blood. H.D. Daumier's light lines, and this is the last one, disappear in this painting, which is called the Rue Transnonain, April 15, 1934-don't write it down, in Paris. It's a street that no longer exists. It disappeared when Haussmann built the boulevards in the 1850s and 1860s. The middle classes, for all of their insistence that they have access to information, at least in the case of France they cheered on a press law in 1835.