angular momentum is a set of operators that provide observables, things we can measure. They're particularly important for systems in which you have central potentials. A v of r that depends just on the magnitude of the vector r is relevant to cases where you have two bodies interacting through a potential that just depends on the distance between the particles. Professor: We showed that any component of angular momentum, be it lx, ly, or lz, commutes with l squared. The eigenvalue of this operator should be positive. are the Legendre polynomials. Solve this equation for m equals 0. Are there any questions? Anything about the definitions or? Yes? AUDIENCE: Why do we care about simultaneous eigenstates? PROFESSOR: Well, the question is why do we want to know what are the properties of the states? In general, you will be led in any physical problem to look for the maximal set of commuting operators. The most number of operators that you could possibly measure. and an electron we can reduce this system to as if we had one particle in a central potential. So that will be also very important physically. And here there is a simple observation that one can make. Is that the differential equation for p l m depends on m squared. We expect to need values of m that are positive and negative. The complex conjugate ones should be thought as having m negative. So we expect positive andnegative m's to be allowed. So how did people figure this out? They, in fact, figured out that if you have these polynomials you can create automatically the solutions for this equation. that don't diverge. So this is very important. It shows that there is one more constraint on your quantum numbers. This formula you may forget, but you should never forget this one. This one says that if you choose some l which corresponds to choosing the magnitude of the angular momentum, l is the eigenvalue. You will have several possibilities for m. There will be several states that have the same l, but m different. So for example you'll have l equal 0, in which case m must be equal to 0. The spherical harmonicas are going to be those wave functions. And they have a normalization, n l m, an exponention, and all that. So let me write, just for the record, what a y l m looks like with all the constants. The only one I really remember is that y 0 0 is a constant. It's 1 over 4 pi. That's simple enough. No dependents. Here is another one. y1 plus minus 1 is minus plus square root of 3 over 8 pi e to the plus minus i phi sine theta.