Professor Amy Hungerford: Today it is my very great privilege and pleasure to introduce Andrew Goldstone, a TF in this course. Andrew is a fourth-year student in the Ph.D. program in English, and he is writing a dissertation on the autonomy of the work of art in modernism. In preparation for that, for next week I'd like you to finish the novel and then read his essay, "On a Novel Entitled Lolita." It should be bound at the back of your book. The novel invites ethical questions but also holds them off through parody. Nabokov uses the tropes of romanticism and romantic love and parodies them. Humbert's techniques of rhetorical seduction relate to a kind of intellectual problem that Nabokovsky sets himself of trying to make you identify with this villainous character. The novel has only its purpose to afford aesthetic bliss, Nabokovan says. It takes something meant to be serious and turns it in to a dirty joke, he says. sense that civilization itself is being overturned. The idea that culture itself is the saving, most important activity that people can engage in. Fourth--and this goes along with that--a rejection of convention, especially sexual convention, sexual morality. Fifth, spatial form, the idea that in place of a linear narrative you have a system of cross-references and repeated motifs that give the structure of works. Sixth, this is a term from the critic Joseph Frank: spatial form. And then, this anticipates my last points: Modernism is self-consciously international. The strategy of the knight's move is to frustrate your expectations, to leap over the apparently important events into something else characterized by a kind of aesthetic play. Nabokov, in 1966 he said this: "The greatest masterpieces of twentieth-century prose" are, in this order: Joyce's Ulysses, Kafka's Transformation"--that is, "Kafka's Transformation," "Ulysses" and "Lolita" The parentheses are a real icon of that. A critic has counted 450 sets of them in this novel. is, The Metamorphosis--"Bely's St. Petersburg," a pretty obscure Russian avant-garde novel. Proust is himself gay. One of his big subjects is homosexuality, and Nabokov's reaction to this is really homophobic. It's about a relationship to predecessors who are seen as too similar. This should cue you to think about the theme of doubling in this novel, to think of the possibility of desire between men here, says David Bianculli. he's attractive to all women, about his supposed virility. And it should just make you wonder whether pedophilia is in itself a kind of knight's move from homosexuality. In other words, is there another form of perverted desire hiding behind the one that's in front of us? Just a suggestion: look on page 20, still in Humbert's early life, near the bottom. It happened for instance that from my balcony I would notice a lighted window across the street and what looked like a nymphet in the act of undressing before a co-operative mirror. Nabokov's relationship to this modernist past is not just the burlesque that he visits on Eliot. An element of admiration is also present, and that's really part of his relationship to Joyce. I'm just going to name for you four features of Joyce's style that are important to Nabokov: stylistic virtuosity, the ability to imitate any style; at the same time, a scrupulous attention to the banality of everyday life and all its detail. Third characteristic, the constant use of a superimposed structure. A list of names leads up to this aesthetic sensation, the revelation of a poem. The ordinary materials of life become the basis for a kind of artistic achievement. Even the ordinary names are kind of plants, because almost every name on this list comes back elsewhere in the book. McFate is the icon of the difference between the realistic world of Joyce and the already artificial, already aestheticized world of this novel. No one was ever really named McFate. McFates are a parody of real. Nabokov's Lolita is a kind of artificial, processed, bland, easily consumable version of fate. In other words, chance is already fated. The thing that stands for randomness in this book, the thing that looks like ordinary detail, has already been arranged to give you artistic pleasure. This kind of transformation of arbitrary, real fated events into conspicuously artificial tricks is a response to exile, in particular to Nabokov’s condition of exile. foreign country, lives in a kind of denaturalized world, a world where, instead of everything making instant sense everything has to be decoded. In that afterword to this book, Nabokov says he had to invent America. That's because he didn't know it already; it wasn't given to him. In a way this is a terrible state, a state of discontinuity with the world you exist in. But it has a payoff, kind of, a payoff which is the possibility precisely of inventing. because Humbert is a foreigner--into something you can laugh at, something youCan enjoy, something that you can apply the knight's move to. Gaston Godin says about the school that Lolita's going to go to, the girls are taught "not to spell very well, but to smell very well" The foreigner's love for this kind of move is a response to this denaturalized world of the exile. It's important, in this connection, to remember that the Knight's move as a way of avoiding obstacles keeps skipping over forms of violence. turn of the staircase was glazed with ruby, and that raw wound among the unstained rectangles and its asymmetrical position--a knight's move from the top--always extremely disturbed me. Nabokov will say that his private tragedy is that, let's see: [His] private tragedy, which cannot, and indeed should not, be anybody's concern, is that I had to abandon my natural idiom, my untrammeled, rich, and infinitely docile Russian tongue for a second-rate brand of English. evocation of the landscape: By a paradox of pictorial thought, the average lowland North American countryside had at first seemed to me something I accepted with a shock of amused recognition. "Inutile loveliness" is kind of the key word of Nabokov's technique, and he says the novel has as its only purpose to provide aesthetic bliss. So, a European artist actually appears again there, with Claude Lorrain, but kind of made strange: given that knight's move, given a new twist. Nabokov tried to become an American writer, as Nabokov says he's doing: trying to invent America, trying to bridge the gap between Russian and English. He translated Lolita back in to Russian later on, and he added a second afterword where he said: That wondrous Russian tongue that, it seemed to me, was waiting for me somewhere, was flowering like a faithful springtime behind a tightly locked gate whose key I had held in safekeeping for so many years, proved to be nonexistent.