Protein three-dimensional structure and its implications for the binding of small molecules such as drugs. The ABCs -- the alpha helix, the beta sheet, and the coil -- can be characterized by the hydrogen bonds that hold it together. How can we use these to recognize other macromolecules, other proteins and nucleic acids? We will in short order get to the scary pumpkin-like molecule. It's a catch-all phrase that includes everything except alpha and beta, but a particularly well-formed type of coil has its own nomenclature. We have these motifs that we could find, weight matrices for them by aligning lots of sequences. Now instead of aligning sequences, let's see what we can do by mutating both the protein part and the nucleic acid part. This is a way. of getting a really good empirical data set, which in principle, you can combine it with similar functions on the flanking ones, and you can dial up sequence of a protein interaction, at least with this class of proteins. you can get the binding at a lower concentration, which means a stronger binding. How you relate that to the binding constant we had in the previous slide is the subject of this slide number eight. Now we call this the apparent equilibrium association constant because these experiments, just like many binding in living cells is not at equilibrium. It's a dynamic process in the cell and in vitro. There are ways that you can measure the equilibrium constants, but what this is apparent is that you need to wash off the excess fluorescence in order to detect the fairly low signal. of the protein maintaining almost perpendicular to the DNA axis. But again, so on the left is the three tandem repeats, and on the right is a dyad axis. These are the two major symmetry classes, and it's amazing how many nucleic acid protein interactions fall into one of these two classes. Can we extend this to RNA? This is a much more complicated situation with RNA because you don't have these long perfect double helices anymore. You have these very short RNA helices that I found. showed in the last couple of classes. This is transfer RNA, one of our favorite molecules here, with the anticodon at the bottom of each of the pink structures. And the amino acid acceptor three prime end of that 70-some nucleotide-- 70 to 80 nucleotide nucleic acid. So the pinks are all the tRNAs, and there are at least 20 different types of amino acid and has 20 types of transfer RNAs and 20 type of proteins that add amino acid onto the three prime ends of the transfer RNA. If you wanted to create a new code, as these authors have, you'd have to find homology among the proteins or graph domains of recognition between each one. You can arrange to make a new amino acid by carving the pocket the amino acid recognizes and grafting on the appropriate nucleotides. OK, you've had some programming experience that hopefully will prepare you for the real world of interacting with input and output from various devices. The topic today is proteins, and this really is the main contact between the exquisite regulatory mechanisms. that you can basically program the almost digital nucleic acid world inside the cell but via clearly analog inputs and outputs. We also-- I've listed some of the scariest proteins that I could think of. And we're going to talk about three of them. One of them in the slide, which is the proteins that are actually involved in causing the symptoms that come from when you're worried about anthrax. And then we'll talk about HIV yet again, this time, polymerase mutants that cause drug resistance. not inside the cell. But the whole complex gets internalized. Still, topologically, it's as if it were outside the cell when it's inside this little vesicle. So you can see that when we're talking about protein three-dimensional structure, whether we're predicting it or solving it, protein is not a static object. Here, it associates with one factor. It associates seven of itself. It interacts with lethal factor. You need to think of these as dynamic systems with many different states. minus 9th seconds. That's atomic motion. Transcription that we talked about, all of the regulatory mechanisms of transcription last time, the rate of the constant for that process is around 50 nucleotides per second. Not entirely coincidentally, that's about the rate at which it is translated into protein. That could be used as a timer in a circuit of these longer time frames, like cell cycle, circadian rhythm, very long time frames in ecological systems with bamboo and various pests. then development and aging, which can be on the order of hundreds of years, at least for humans, turtles, and whales. So what we think proteins are good for depends on the accuracy. And the accuracy depends upon the method. As you get to 1 Angstrom or better in your accuracy, as you can get from NMR and X-ray crystallography, you now are in a position to study catalytic mechanism and design and improve ligands, such as drugs. There may be a day where we can do this all from ab initio prediction or modeling at very great distances. HIV is one of the most sequenced molecules on Earth. The HIV gene encoding the reverse transcriptase polymerase. It's been sequenced many times because as a patient takes the drugs, their population of the AIDS virus changes. And that causes a drug resistance in the HIV, with unfortunate consequences for the patient. We can take-- now, making mutations in polymerases is not entirely of negative consequences. And I'm going to show you a really beautiful example where a DNA polymerase, you want to change it so that it can now handle what would normally be an inhibitor. This has an 8,000-fold effect on the specificity of this polymerase. Now, that's how we program a particular atom to achieve an important goal. Point mutants are not the only way to generate conditional mutants. Many of them historically were. But there are ways that you can program, and conditional, meaning you can regulate under what conditions. It's the ultimate where we go in and if the protein is already present, we can change that particular nucleotide in situ in the correct place so it's properly regulated and everything. the protein is expressed or not or active or not with an entire domain, or with single nucleotide polymorphisms. Now, so this is one way. This is the nucleic acid way. Another way is by modulating the activity of the proteins from the outside with drugs or drug-like molecules and chemical kinetics. And under the subheadings for that, you can make these by combinatorial synthesis-- and we'll show an example of that. But combinatorially synthesis can be based on design principles, not just completely random. In the case of the zinc finger, we made an altered specificity. We made new zinc fingers with bind to completely new trinucleotides. With the DNA polymerase, by changing one amino acid, we could make it now accept almost four logs better an inhibitor is very useful. These are not that unusual. And those can be designed or naturally occurring. They can have a very important thing to do with conserved charge. They tend to be highly conserved. That's a general way of looking at the conservation of single-nucleotide polymorphisms. That might have impact on pharmacogenomics. The idea of chemical diversity, in a way I hope nicely connects to where we've been with RNA arrays. RNA arrays, and the double-stranded RNA array that we used earlier in class today, can be generated in a commentorial sense. Solid phase comes up again and again in arrays. It's very obvious why you have a solid phase. You want to be able to address it by its positions in x and y on the array. And it's a fantastic way of getting purification of your products simply by washing rather than doing complicated purification procedures.  Synthetic way of getting short peptides, either by directly synthesizing the peptides or synthesizing nucleic acid that encodes that peptide. And you can think of these as drug-like molecules. These are naturally related-- they can be analogs of nucleic acids and proteins, not just straight ones. And we'll talk about opportunities for making these analogs. And the process is cyclic in the sense that each cycle, you return, and the polymer gets a little bit longer. You start with one monomer. on a solid phase, shown by these little hexagons on the far right side of the slide. And you add-- you remove the protecting group on the immobilized polymer, one protecting group. And then you bring in this reactive group, otherwise protected. And there's really one major product that you expect. You wash off all of the excess. You now have one longer. You deprotect. This DMT group is removed. There may be additional steps, such as oxidation, which will stabilize the new bond. I said there's an opportunity here for modifying the nucleotides or oligopeptides or other chemicals to make them so that they're related to, but not identical in every property, to normal constituents of your body or of a bacterial cell that you're aiming at. And why would you want to make derivatives? Why not make the exact thing? And examples are, in the previous slide, you can make modified bases. And in slide 29 here you can change the backbone itself. to a template-independent polymerase, [? thermotransferase, ?] which will extend a few nucleotides of completely random nucleic acid sequence. This is one of the examples in biology where you generate sequence de novo. The proteins themselves, these little arrow-shaped things with boxes in them along the top, labeled Module 1 through 6, those proteins are, of course, made on ribosomes. But then they act kind of like the solid phase synthesis. In next class, we'll talk about ways of getting direct information on protein through cross-linking and mass spectrometry. Another way is indirectly setting up these reporter assays, where you take advantage of the binding properties of known proteins to analyze two unknown proteins. This is a source of information, which is intrinsically computational in the sense that there's a large amount of it. And typically we want to select targets for solving the structures of proteins in order to look at their ligands in more detail.