David KAISER: In the last few class sessions, we were looking at some changes in high energy particle theory. And then in our most recent class session, we looked at some of the shifts within the fields of study. And today, we're going to focus on a kind of example of that new subfield, a relatively new sub field that's known as inflationary cosmology or simply cosmic inflation. So it's a framework for trying to understand the evolution of our universe over a huge expanse of time, increasingly using tools at the interface. lecture notes on the Canvas site which go into a little bit more detail of some of these parts from the lecture. Again, strictly for your own interest as your interest and time allows. There's some more material there. And again, I'd be glad to chat more about this if questions come up beyond that. OK. So oftentimes, astronomers will describe the most salient features of our universe in terms of what they call large scale structure. It's really quite remarkable. And this [CLEARS THROAT] picture's been emerging really over a century, for 100 years or even more. or our own Milky Way galaxy. Or if we zoom in even closer to home with the solar system or even really in human terms, there are concentrations of enormous matter and energy and activity separated by huge voids. The question is, what could account for that structure across these scales from meters or kilometers up to tens of billions of light years? It turns out that ordinary gravity-- even Newtonian gravity, let alone Einstein's fancier version that we looked at in class, general theory of relativity-- that these gravitational frameworks are sufficient. for an infinite expanse of time. But other colleagues showed at least it was consistent with his own equations to have universes that would change over time, that could either expand or contract. That was actually a prediction made by some of these colleagues even before some empirical evidence began to come in starting in the late 1920s. Hubble found this remarkable trend that the further away from us a given galaxy was, the faster it tended to be moving away from me further still. So you can actually then work backwards and say for how long has our observable universe been stretching? When did this stretching or expanding phase begin? George Lemaitre was an ordained Catholic priest and an MIT trained PhD astrophysicist. He studied briefly in Cambridge, England with one of the first converge to general relativity, Arthur Eddington. He then came to MIT to finish his PhD and then was finding many of these solutions to Einstein's field equations even before Einstein did. And, in fact, Einstein came thinking he must be wrong, and then Lemaitres kept being right. But Einstein started off by always being frustrated that Lemaitr found solutions that Einstein found abhorrent or disgusting. After the Second World War, new groups began coming back to these somewhat old questions. Some of the newer groups had experience with things like the Manhattan Project and in general were much better versed in things like nuclear physics than had been known even in Lemaitre's day. One of the most active groups soon after the war was based at the advanced-- excuse me-- the Applied Physics Laboratory. Here's a famous composite photograph. They're making a not so subtle gesture to the fact that Gamow was widely rumored to enjoy his drink. So his head is emerging from the vapors of Cointreau, of a liqueur. At early times in cosmic history, the universe should've been opaque. You literally wouldn't have been able to see anything because the mean free path of any given photon would be very, very short. The photons would each be trapped, kicked like soccer balls between all these loose electric charges. They begin to piece all this together. At early times, you would have an electrically charged plasma, that the universe would not be filled with electrically neutral atoms because they literally couldn't form yet. Lemaitre: As the volume of space stretches, as you have an expanding universe, the average temperature of all the stuff inside it should fall. At that time, a new phase in the universe would begin to unfold, he says. The universe would be filled with neutral atoms of hydrogen, and now you have a mean free path for light that's arbitrarily long, says Lerman. Lerman: Today, this bath of remnant radiation from that early hot, dense state should be filling the sky in every direction. out I don't attend dance parties very often. This is what the internet tells me they look like. If you just Google "dance party" and throw away the bad pictures-- anyway. So at early times, the DJ's playing some raucous house music, and everyone's just jostling around. The average energy per dancer is very high. That's like the charged particles where the mean free path is effectively zero. No one could cross that dance floor. And then at a calculable moment, if the DJ knows what she's doing, she'll put on some slow music. And you start having couples form like in Harry Potter at the Yule Ball. Scientists predicted as early as 1948 that there should be this remnant glow from the Big Bang. They were using a new horn antenna sensitive to radial microwave and radial band frequencies. This should've been among the most precise instruments available on the planet for that band of the spectrum. But they found this remnant hum in their electronics, and they couldn't get rid of a residual hum. The group here, these folks are rediscovering many of the ideas from George Gamow and his group, actually at the time unaware that Gamow had even done these calculations. In the early universe, there was a huge plasma everywhere, not just in one corner, but everywhere. The photons were everywhere. And it's like sitting in a bathtub full of these photons. And they're just losing their energy as the overall size of space continues to grow. The Big Bang happened at x equals 0, and x equals 1, equals 2. Any place we could put spatial coordinates to on this model, those all experienced the Big Bang at the same time. But that's the reckoning that people like Lemaitre got comfortable with starting in the '20s and '30s. This day or let's just say earnest disagreement over what's called the cosmic distance ladder. We can get the velocity from these very fancy spectroscopic-- I say we. The people who do it are actually astronomers. They kindly share their information. I don't know how to do it well. But one can do it very, very well. What's hard to do is to calibrate. How far away is that object right now, let alone how quickly is it continuing to move away? Astronomer Hubble measured a much quicker average rate of expansion than what we have mostly settled on today. The picture was enough to get a small number of people to pay attention to Georges Lemaitre's otherwise quite obscure mathematical solutions. This is actually called conformal time, which might remind you of our beloved friends, the 19th century Cambridge Wranglers. We're really doing a very similar thing here, to adopt coordinates for the rate at which time takes into account changing rates over time. According to Einstein's equations, the shape of space could either have a positive geometry where it closes back on itself like the surface of a sphere, an open or negatively curved geometry, or a flat geometry. What controls which geometry you have is this ratio of the actual amount of stuff per volume, the actual density of matter and energy per volume. Robert Dicke introduced this conundrum in 1969, so soon after the discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation when people began to take the Big Bang model more and more seriously. We receive a remarkably uniform signal on the sky today from opposite sides. But those photons were emitted at a finite age when the universe was only a short portion of its current age. So the horizon distance was actually a factor of 100 shorter than the smoothness scale across which we receive remarkably uniform information. And how could that be? If this portion of the sky never had a chance to become in any kind of physical equilibrium or even exchange a single tweet, to have absolutely no information about what the average conditions are in this part of the universe? The Big Bang model has still had to assume by fiat with no real explanation that there was some initial lumpiness, there's some inhomogeneity that over time could then grow to become this cascading hierarchy of scales. So we'd have super clusters of galaxies separated by huge voids and all the rest. That's the point of this series of ping pong balls distributed through space. And that's what it's like to have these causally disjoint regions emitting these photons with the exact same energy. the Big Bang model had some amazing successes but some pretty stubborn quandaries as well. So I'll pause there again and ask the questions about that. Any questions on the shortcomings of the Big Bang as people began articulating them throughout the '60s and '70s? Feel free to jump in or use the chat or either way. And again, there's more on the quantitative details of that in that optional primer you can find on the Canvas site. So Fisher asks, is it useful to think of the universe as spherical still? Yeah. These pictures get pretty hard. like circa 1980. He was not originally asking questions about the cosmos, but he was haphazardly encountering some of those questions, again, very much like Tony Zee around the same time. What Alan was interested in was in things like spontaneous symmetry breaking and the Higgs mechanism. If there were a time during which the matter that's filling the universe could be temporarily stuck in a metastable state in which it had some non-zero potential energy, that could have implications for the global shape of space. even as the volume grows exponentially. That could happen. Alan began wondering if you have this weird state of matter that was at least hypothetical and of right interest to particle physicists. Alex, I'm going to skip the monopolar problem, but it comes from this discussion as well. And I'd be delighted to chat more about that if you'd like afterwards. But in the interest of time, Alan was worried about some exotic features from these Higgs fields that can get twisted up in some topological shape. But he was really just wondering what happens if the universe gets stuck even temporarily. equations exactly in the form that he began learning from Bob Dicke from that series of lectures, then you have these very different solutions for the average size of space. It grows exponentially quickly. And as Alan and others were quick to confirm, this happens very naturally, or at least it's a kind of feature that one stumbles upon readily, if when studying these exotic Higgs-like fields from particle physics. And then again, realizing that if you study the dynamics, the behavior of these exotic quantum fields like a Higgs field. in a stretching space time, if you take that stretching of space seriously, then you don't even need to cook up those exotic Higgs-like potentials that Alan was first thinking about. Quite generically, you'll have a damped oscillator behavior. This comes from the fact that space itself is stretching. And that alone it turns out is enough to find these self-consistent solutions in which the field moves very slowly. You can imagine it rolling down this hill, rolling down-- sorry-- rolling down slowly as a function of time. The latest measurement from the Planck collaboration using a satellite is that this parameter in our actual universe today is 1 to better than a percent level accuracy. In grad school, it looked very much like omega was 0.3. And if you squinted at it, you could maybe make it 0.35. It was not 1 according to the best. In more quantitative detail in the primer, we'll go into more detail about the new measurement in a few minutes. We'll be back next week with a look at some of the other things we've learned about the universe this week. If inflation happened, there should've been a very brief period before what had previously been called the Big Bang. So we're adding more real estate along our time axis. We're unfurling a little bit extra time that hadn't been taken into account in the standard Big Bang model. And so the universe was so tiny, it could very easily have been in a kind of equilibrium or at least a causally self-connected state. So during this tiny blink of an eye, the universe grew exponentially. moment, that field would be subject to slight, slight quantum fluctuations in the distribution of energy across space. That starts to yield this tiny little fluctuation in why there's slightly more matter and energy in this region of space than the other one. So now those very tiny quantum scale fluctuations get stretched as the whole universe stretches. As the scale factor grows exponentially, you have the average length between the distance between crests of those tiny wiggles get stretched to galactic and even super galactic scales all within that blink of an eye. higher energy photons in the CMB and slightly lower energy photons. And the idea now is that the regions of the sky from which these photons were emitted are telling us about the very, very tiny unevenness in the distribution of matter and energy. The photons we receive today had to spend less energy gravitationally to overcome that very tiny gravitational potential. So we can actually map the quantum fluctuations which leave an imprint in this dynamical fabric of space and time that then maps to this distribution. solid green line is the generic prediction from the simplest models of inflation, what's the pattern of bumps and wiggles on the sky you should see today. The red dots are the actual observations from Planck team. And in many cases, the error bars are expanded so we can see them with our naked eye. So now not only do we know do we live in a universe that is indistinguishable from flat as inflation suggests we should, but the actual pattern of those wiggled matches predictions to, again, better than a percent level accuracy. should be slightly more or less energetic depending on the quantum fluctuations of that Higgs-like field. There should be primordial gravitational waves as well. This is now much like the waves that Rai and his huge team found locally from the collision of, say, black holes. Inflation says similar kinds of things should've been happening in the earliest moments everywhere in space through this very violent, rapid stretching of space. So a version of these were found by the LIGO collaboration and announced early in 2016. These are not primordial. this periodic, very particular pattern of squeezing and stretching. So while the atoms are forming, gravity waves would be rippling through them. That should yield a characteristic twisting or curl pattern of polarization in that cosmic microwave background radiation. If you zoom in by a factor of another 20, you should actually see a corkscrew pattern. In March of 2014, a team using the BICEP satellite at the South Pole announced they had actually measured exactly that twisting pattern. Unfortunately, pretty soon after that, it turned out the BiceP team had measured data consistent with local noise. makes specific predictions for what we should see on the sky today, including very minute statistical predictions for things like the cosmic microwave background radiation. The simplest models fit to unbelievable accuracy despite what my mean dormmates used to say in the mid '90s. So why is the universe lumpy? Why is this cascade of scales? Because space time is wiggly, and matter is jiggly. Now, there's an alternate hypothesis, my final set of slides. I mentioned this last time. And I just want to make it clear. why the universe is so messy is actually because Alan's been generating the mess in his own office, and it's expanded to cosmic scales. So if you want to study that part of today's lecture, it's probably the most important lesson, you'll ever take away. And I'll be glad to stay a bit longer if people have questions. Again, I'm sorry for running late. Feel free to drop off if you need. Any questions on that? The photos in Alan's office are on Canvas.