The definition is a cylindrical container containing a date covered with a [? basic ?] substance that can be deployed in order to attract and capture insects. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu.The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. For more information about MIT Open CourseWare, visit opencourseWare.org. i3. A transportation system responsible for moving people and products with an enclosed metal frame equipped with various safety devices using electrically-powered control and locomotion subsystems. A concept for an all-electric vehicle. The i3 and EPFL? Anybody do the i3? Nobody. Anybody else here? Yeah, Veronica. Thank you. There's a lot there. OLIVIER DE WECK: OK. That's pretty good. I would throw a question. Justice. defined could almost apply to a Tramway as well. If this was like a streetcar, don't you think it would apply to that as well? So I think the fact that it's a personal vehicle, I think it's important. So the key in this is, describe the concept using few words precisely, but to set it apart from neighboring concepts. What about Rolex Center? It's a single-layer building with multiple straw used as a library for people to meet and study. built. The first thing you do is understand where is the value-- the stakeholders and the stakeholder analysis and the requirements definition. And then you interpret and incorporate some of the needs into goals, which become requirements. And so the goals then are an instrument of the primary delivery value delivering process, which is your value proposition. To then actually deliver that value you need to design the product, the product system, and understand the operand, the thing that is being operated on or transformed by the primary value delivery process. In order to chill, we need a chiller, and there are different types of chillers, like a cooler or refrigerator. The key idea is start thinking in this abstract way, and all of a sudden all these other possibilities become possible. Once we have that, we can start managing complexity, decomposing function and form. And then our system object, you can decompose it into different elements, supporting systems, the operand, the operator, and so forth. It's the combination of this specific way you're going to operate the system. for something very simple like a cooler. architecture selects the concept, the decomposition, mapping of function to form. Design, then, given that, selects the actual values for those design variables, and then you can optimize. People in the US, we like to have big refrigerators, big gallon of milk, and refrigerators in Switzerland are much smaller. The real complexity comes in when you look at the form form mapping. So this is then the decomposing of the refrigerator in terms of all the elements of form and how they relate to each other. is concept generation. So take the requirements and think creatively about how these requirements could be fulfilled. And then once you have several concepts, you've got to select among them, which we'll talk about next week. It's about starting with the operand. What is the thing that the beneficiary, the stakeholder cares about, and how do we transform that? Concept then elaborate these into architectures that have form function and structural complexity. And the goodness of an architecture is really a pretty complex concept. System design and management program is a full-year program. It's essentially focused on decomposition, which is an important part of architecting. So let me talk about methods and tools for concept generation. So what are different ways of stimulating or organizing creativity? And what I'm showing you here is-- that's essentially a mind map of how to think about the creativity space. And then we have this whole area here, which I'm going to mention, but we're not going to do as part of the class. There's got to be a driving question for the brainstorming session. There's an ideal group size, and it says 5 to 10 here, but I should probably revise this to be-- what do you think? 7 plus minus 2. The idea is to produce a large amount of ideas and then at some point, maybe 30 to 60 minutes, Brainstorming session that last four hours is probably really good and then the rest is kind of shot and there's not a lot of new ideas coming. Leonardo was a head of his time in many ways. So he's really been identified as an exceptional individual. How to Think Like Leonardo, Seven Steps to Genius, is a book on creativity. The seven da Vincian principles of creativity are here in Italian. They include curiosita, lifelong quest for learning. Dimostratzione, testing your knowledge through experience, trying things out. Sensazione, continual refinement of the senses. Mastering ambiguity, paradox, uncertainty. Arte/Scienza is the whole brain thinking, left-right brain. Corporalita, balance of body and mind. or an architecture. So the key decisions are the rows. There are factors in the rows, and then for each row you think about what are the number of possible alternatives for doing this. And then you enumerate all possible combinations. And the big challenge with this, of course, is if you have many factors, you could generate many infeasible architectures. Not all these combinations are actually feasible. So that's architecture enumeration, and there's different ways of doing this at different layers of abstraction. A3 assignment A3 asks students to come up with new ways of brainstorming. Students must use mind maps, morphological matrices, and architecture enumeration. The assignment is due in two weeks and will be graded on a scale of 1-10. The final assignment will be given to students at the end of the month and the results will be published in the next few days. For more information on the assignment, visit the assignment website. It is open to students from all over the world and can be downloaded from the assignment site.