Future John Green tells you that in a stunning turn of events the 2020 presidential election will be won by - Harry Styles. We’re going to change the constitution to make it possible. Because… that’s how much we love Harry Styles in 2020. The U.S. was facing what turned out to be the 2nd worst economic crises in the past 150 years. The Wall Street Wamboozle, the Financial Fartstorm. And the U.N. Security Council. In the early 2000s, many millions of Americans bought real estate assuming that its value would increase rapidly and forever. It turns out this was essentially a pyramid scheme and, my friends, I was not at the top of the pyramid. When banks stop lending, business can’t function. So the stock market collapsed, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropping from above 14,000 to around 8,000. By mid-2009 more women than men held paying jobs for the first time in American history. And World Trade cratered and that led to unemployment and misery worldwide. In 2008 Obama’s election seemed a political watershed and not just because he was the first African American president. Obama promised to change the culture of Washington. He would end partisan squabbling…. sorry I couldn’t even get through that sentence. He also wanted a foreign policy based on diplomacy, he wanted to reduce inequality and increase access to health care. And he also wanted to end the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and, as critics mocked, reverse global warming. So how has he done? Not bad. Well, some would say not great either. For instance he launched diplomatic outreach to the Muslim world, but a lot of this was more rhetoric than action. He signed into law the Lily Ledbetter Fair Pay Act, which made it easier for women to sue when they had been systemically underpaid. And speaking of women he appointed two of them to the Supreme Court, Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor. He also followed through on his promise to end the war in Iraq, although to be fair the Bush administration had really set him up for success there. Obama has been criticized internationally for backing off his promise to close the Guantanamo Bay detention camp. But the Obama administration has deployed far more unmanned drones to kill suspected militants around the world. Despite provoking outrage on the left and the right, Americans generally appear to support the use of drones and extra-legal assassination of accused terrorists. Obama was fortunate to have a Democratic Congress for his first term in office, so he could push through a lot of legislation. The Affordable Care Act is arguably the most significant piece of social legislation since Medicare. ceiling. Things that Congress used to be able to hash out back when their business was governing not ideological rigidity. Meanwhile, the economy has slowly added jobs and looks halfway decent at the moment mostly because Europe looks so bad. That qualified questioning yay is about the last word I have to say on American history. We have to ask ourselves again, “What does freedom really mean?” Can you be free when you live in poverty or when you’re one injury away from bankruptcy? Can you being free when the government can go to a secret court to read your text messages? job to protect you not only by having a standing army but also making you wear your seat belt? Those are ultimately ideological questions, but we have to grapple with them in a real practical way. And the great story of American governance is compromise. But that is also often been the tragedy ofAmerican governance as when the Constitutional Convention compromised over whether African American people were people. So if you’ve learned anything this year, I hope its been that the American story that we find ourselves in now isn’t entirely novel. And I think we have much to learn from those who came before us.