Robotics is a really cool and important direction for the future. I really believe that in the future we will have AI assistance whether they are embodied or not to act as our guardian angels. These agents will help us with cognitive and physical work. With AI we will see such a wide breadth of applications for instance these technologies have the potential to reduce and eliminate car accidents. We have three types of learning and you have seen different aspects of these methodologies throughout the course we have supervised learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning. The images that get fed from the camera streams of cars are fed to the decision-making engine of the car. Machine learning is very powerful for building perception systems for robots but as we employ machine learning in the context of robots it's important to keep in mind the scope when they work when they don't work and then it'simportant to think about what my what kind of guard rails we might put in place at the decision time so that we have robust Behavior. "With all small perturbations you can turn the stop sign into a yield sign and you can imagine whatkind of chaos this would create on a on a physical Road" to do given input reinforcement learning is causing a huge revolution in robotics. Reinforcement learning is concerned with how intelligent agents ought to take action in an environment in order to maximize the notion of a cumulative reward. In order to get the simulation to drive a real robot we actually need to think about the Dynamics of the robot and so in other words we have to take into account what the vehicle looks like and its kinematics what are its Dynamics and so it's really cool because really we are now able to train in simulation. In 1995 a Carnegie Mellon project called nav lab built a car that was driven by a machine learning engine called Alvin and Alvin drove this car all the way from Washington DC to Los Angeles. The car was in autonomous mode for a large part of the highway driving but there was always a student there right ready to um to take control and the car did not did not drive inonomous mode when there were when it was raining or when there was a lot of congestion or when the car had to had to take exits. In 1986 a German engineer Ernst Dickman started thinking about how he could turn his van into an autonomous vehicle. Alexander: We have very effective and Deployable solutions for robot cars that move safely in Easy environments where there aren't many static nor moving obstacles. Many companies and research teams are deploying and developing self-driving cars. Many of these preconditions revolve around certainty in perception planning learning reasoning and execution before we can get to Robo taxi but we can have many other robot solutions that are much that that can happen today. Alexander: We can use deep learning and reinforcement learning to take us from images ofroads onto steering and throttle and what you can do with this is really great. Machine learning can be used to look for the presence of language which is a major sign of intelligence. We are trying to understand the phonetics the semantics and the syntax and the discourse for whales. We have a big data set consisting of about 22 000 clicks. Using machine learning we can identify coded types. We can identify patterns for Coda exchanges and we can we can begin to really ask ourselves how is it that that that Wales exchange information and if you're interested in this problem please come see us. that model to run on edge devices or on huge devices uh you have seen that many of our Solutions are Black Box Solutions and sometimes we have brittle function we have we have easily attackable models. There is so much opportunity for developing improved machine learning using existing models and inventing new models. If we can do this we can create an exciting work world where machines will really Empower us will really augment us and and enhance us in our cognitive abilities and in our physical abilities so just imagine waking up enabled by your personal assistant that figures out the optimal time. Robots can help us with cognitive and physical work. There's the garbage ban the garbage bin that takes itself out. After a good day when it's time for a bedtime story you can begin to enter the story and control the flow and begin to interact with the characters in the story. These are some possibilities for the kind of future that machine learning artificial intelligence and robots are enabling. I'm personally very excited about this future with robots helping us with Cognitive and physical Work but this future is really dependent on very important new advancements that will come from all of you. Thank you very much and uh come come work with us.