Barbara Imperiali: We are going here now from the smallest carbon atom. She says in order to make proteins like hemoglobin and antibodies, we need large entities. The things that will feature today are the transfer RNAs and the ribosome, she says. IMPERIALI: And what to me is intriguing is that the size of theribosome is pretty similar to theSize of the rhinovirus, a little smaller than the hepatitis virus, but quite a bit smaller than some of these other viruses. messenger is single-stranded RNA, obviously. It has a 5 prime cap, which has got this funky 5 prime, 5 prime bridge that's resistant to exonucleases. Somewhere in that sequence is a start codon. It's something that says this is the bit I want to translate. Often, there's a lot of stuff here that you don't translate. Part of what's known as the ribosome binding site. And there are many features in this part of the sequence that are very important for translation. The genetic code, which forms the basis of this entire concept, has some features to it where it does have some degeneracy. But we'll go through the degeneracy, and we'll take a look at the genetic code because it will tell us exactly how the three letter-- the words made of three bases encode everything we need for translation. The ribosomes were discovered a decade later, and that was the work that was awarded a Nobel Prize for. And then, later on, things started to get to the point where you know, these are sort of things you want to get out to. The genetic code gives you the identities of what are known as the codons, which is how we designate the triplet of nucleotides. The way you read this table is you read the first letter. So, if I'm going here, here, it's going to be starting UU. And then, within each block, there are the four alternatives for the other four bases. The third one, basically, just designates those. It is the absolute-- the sort of Rosetta Stone for translating messenger RNA to amino acid sequence using codons. small and large subunits. In orange-- well, that's kind of a burnt orange-- is a sneaky little bit of the messenger. In yellow are the transfer RNAs. And there's one more unit on here that I won't describe too much. It's a protein factor that helps all the processes occur. And, in each step, you're bringing in a tRNA that's loaded with an amino acid where the anticodon of the amino acid is complementary to the codon that's within the messenger RNA. "I think this field is fascinating. Once you get used to the mechanics of it, it's really cool to think of how you go from DNA to RNA to folded proteins," he says. "Don't forget my office hours on Monday if you need them," he adds. "I'll be in the lab all day, every day, if you want to talk to me about it." "I've got a lot of questions for you," she says, "but I'll be happy to answer them."