Professor: Can you explain the physical significance of the crystal momentum? Professor: Let me answer that in a slightly backward way. Let's step back and think about the momentum, and ask what the momentum is. Professor: If you have a wave function, sine of x, such that, the expectation value of the wave function is x, then the momentum of that function is 1/x. The momentum is the same as the speed of light, which is the speed at which light travels through the air. in the state SI of x in the stateSI is equal to x naught, and the expectation value of p in SI is p naught. Then if you want to change the momentum, increase momentum by h bar k, the way to do that is to take SI and build a new wave function, SI tilda. So all the intuition you have about momentum, you can translate into intuition about the spatial variation of the phase of the wave function. So let's turn all these facts around into the crystal momentum. just constantly increases. For the crystal momentum, that's not the case. You turn on a force, it increases according to the conservation law. But it's not increasing constantly. It's periodically defined. So it increases then it ends up at a smaller value. It increases and ends up in a phase. So developing an intuition for the crystal. momentum, I think, is best done by just playing with examples. And you'll do that more in the course on solids, which I encourage you all to take. Because it's really beautiful stuff. Glossing over in the entire story here. Which of the following. So, is u of x a real function? Well, so when we started out asking what are the eigenfunctions of the transit by l operator, all we showed was that, and I'm going to do this on a separate board just to make it clearer. Tell me if this turns off, because it kept bumping. OK. So we've determined is that if we take q l is equal to alpha, then Phi sub q if eigenvalue label by its eigen value, q, can be written in the form e to the i q x u sub q of x. Professor: "I need to do this carefully, because it's incredibly difficult to get the straight" "I have a hard time drawing these things" "So for every value of q, there's an allowed energy that's different than what it would have been for the free particle" "If we wanted to put it in the fundamental domain, this is what we get" "You can't stop me. You hand me a function, I will hand you a different function" "This is what the first band and the second band together look like" to plot u with respect to k instead, would that just be a parabola dotted line? If so, why do we not have really-- PROFESSOR: If we just wanted-- sorry. Say it again? AUDIENCE: E as a function of k instead of q. PROFessor: Oh. But k is not a well-- so what is k? K is just defined as h bar squared, k squared upon 2 m is equal to e. So this doesn't tell you anything. This diagram is telling you is which e's are allowed. If you put on a capacitor, played across your perfect lattice, you don't get any current. So the particle, the charged particle in your lattice just oscillates back and forth in a block oscillation. And that is manifestly what happens with copper. But the experimentalist comes back to you and says look dude. That is a ridiculous model because the copper isn't in fact perfect, it's messy. So how do you test the model? Well there are two ways to test the situation. One is you improve the model to incorporate properties that copper actually has. And see if you can actually get the same conductivity. The equation for light going through a dielectric can be put in exactly the same form as the Schrodinger equation for the time evolution of a wave function. And so you can build a system which incredibly, cleanly, has a periodic dielectrics constant and no disorder. The most elegant experiment that I know of was done by Wolfgang Ketterle, who's here at MIT. And he got three data points because it was preposterously difficult and declared victory. But it really needs to be done well. this part of the field right now is we know that it's true, but we want to see it. We want to feel it, so various people around the world are working on making a truly beautiful demonstration of this bit of physics. But, the basic question is how robust is this. And the answer is it's not robust at all. But which you can tell because everything in the real world has enough impurity that it conducts. Or as an insulator. Yeah. And that's actually, it depends on the lattice. situation, it depends on the system. And exactly how it depends is something that is an active area of research. So don't throw away the model. Observe that you've modeled the wrong system. If you find a system that fits your-- that is-- that shares the assumptions of your model, that's when you ask did it work. And it worked like a champ. OK. So now let's talk about real materials. This is going to close up our discussion bands and solids. But that's OK. There are lots of questions and they were good questions. In order for the system to be neutral, I must have one electron for every well. In order to induce the current, I. must put the electron into a higher energy state and in a particular superposition of higher energy states. If I put in the n electrons I need to neutralize a system, where do those n electrons go? Yeah, they fill up the first band. And if we let the system relax with the lowest energy state in this band, every state will be filled. In order for light to scatter off a crystal, you must have electrons in superposition states so that they can have a dipole and absorb and radiate that energy. In order for that to happen, the light has to excite an electron across the gap. Light along wavelength will not have enough energy toexcite an electrons across this gap into the next band to allow there to be a current, which could oppose the electric field. So we have these two materials which one has the larger band gap? Diamond, because it's transparent.  spin in one dimension is little-- I'm lying about spin. Electrons spin up, and electrons spin down, will generically have different energies. In 3D, this isn't such a big deal, because those splittings are tiny. But in 1D they can't. So I mean, that's also not exactly true, but it depends on exactly the details of the system, is what I wanted to get to. Curse you. But do you really want me to get in spin? Man. In three dimensions, you guys did an interesting thing, when you studied, you didn't know this was about the structure of solids, but it really was. When you studied the rigid rotor, you found that you had energy eigenstates and they were degenerate with degeneracy 2 l plus 1. And what you found is that these guys split. There's one that changes, one that doesn't. And then this guy has five. One, two, three, four, five. is the length of the energy of the last electron that you put in. How much energy do you have to give the system, do you. have to add the system to excite the electrons into excited states, in. particular into superpositions so that the electrons can move? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] PROFESSOR: Yeah. Preposterously small amount. An amount that goes like one over the number of particles. So in the continuum limit, it's zero. There's an arbitrarily nearby energy. called a band insulator. Because there are other ways of being an insulators. So what determined the exact band structure in for a 1D periodic potential? Two properties. One was l, the periodicity. And that came in the q l and k l. And the second is the detailed shape of the potential. Now in three dimensions, the things that are going to determine the potential are not just the distance between atoms, but you have a three dimensional lattice. And so when you solve the problem for the energy eigenvalues is a function of now the three different components of the crystal momentum, you'll get a different set of equations. the atomic orbital structure of the individual atom, the crystal structure, and the resulting band structure. You will almost always find overlapping bands in three dimensions in sufficiently high energy. What we need is one of two things. We need either the band gap coincidentally is ridiculously small, or we need a free particle that has no band gaps at all. That's a good example of that? A free particle, these band gaps go to 0. And so that's a conductor. Just an electron. It conducts, right? OK. The temperature controls an energy scale for a real material. If you have a hot piece of copper, then the lattice is wiggling around. And every once in a while, an ion can hit one of the electrons and excite it, give it some momentum. And so there's an available reservoir of energy for exciting individual electrons. So when I say small, that doesn't mean anything. I need to tell you small compared to what.what that means. OK. Delta e is very small. Now delta e has dimensions. It has units. excited above the gap. And now it's in a super-- and generically, it's going to be in asuperposition state of one of these excited states. It can radiate. It will eventually fall back down. The sea of electrons is constantly being buffeted by this thermal fluctuation. And as a result, you constantly have electrons being excited up, cruising around, falling back down, so you end up with some population of electrons. And they can ask-- and both when asked, although not quite in this language, how likely are you to get an electron up here? Photonic crystals are periodic arrays of dielectrics. They have bands of allowed energy and gaps of disallowed energies where no waves propagate through. The structure of a photonic crystal on the surface of a butterfly wing makes it shiny and blue. It looks like it's a crystal reflecting in a specific frequency. At some sharp blue. And the reason is, it is exactly this form. If you look at it under a microscope, you see little rays of protein which have different dielectric than air. and metallic without actually being shiny and metallic. And it's not a pigment, so it doesn't absorb light and decay over time. It's like the best thing you could ever do if you wanted to be a shiny, fluttery, flying thing. OK. So that's it for band gaps. And I want to move on to the remainder, the last topic of our course. Which is going to be entanglement and quantum computation. And here I need to give you one quick observation. The probability of finding the particle at point A is given by chi a squared. This is normalized, so when we integrate against it, we get 1. And similarly, the probability that we find the second particle at b is this thing norm squared. And it's independent of what a is. But we also studied the symmetric configuration, which was equal to 1 over root phi, root 2. And this tells us something totally awesome. We either find it at chi of a or chi. So there's a factor of one half. Quantum physicist David Wheeler: Measurement of one particle tells you something about the second particle. Wheeler: I could've taken these particles, put them in this entangled state, and sent one particle off to a distant planet. And my sister measures this second particle and determines what state it's in and is immediately determined what state the first particle is in over in this distant planet Zorg, right? So that's deeply disconcerting, he says, to those of us who have studied quantum mechanics up to this point. Einstein created a thought experiment which we're going to study in detail next week called the EPR experiment. There's a beautiful historical story about the setting and the meaning and the particular person. Einstein moved to Princeton in 1933. He left Germany in 1932 December, about three weeks before Hitler took power. And he did so with decisiveness and dispatch and a head of almost all of his-- in fact, I think all his German-Jewish physicist colleagues and those German physicists for whom the Hitler regime was unacceptable. Hard to find. It's really sweet. Jeremy Bernstein, who is a physicist. A physicist and writer. He's in his eighties now. He lives in Aspen. He worked with CERN for a number of years. He wrote for the New Yorker. Bell had a friend named, I think, Bartelstein. Who had two quirks. An unusual color sense and a taste for mismatched socks. Bell used to say, if you saw one leg and that sock was pink, you knew to a certainty that the other sock was not pink. I think-- I'm trying to remember who this is originally attributed to. Same thing. If you have a coin and you cut it in half down the-- so you've got two coin shape disks. And you see the head that you know somebody-- somebody at some other casino is cheating by tossing in the half coin that only has a tail on it. So there are lots of ways to represent this. And many physicists being very witty indeed have come up with different metaphors for it. if you're sort of approaching it naively. What Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen argued was actually something a little bit-- in fact, the paper comes to an end on that note of queasiness. And they have definition for what reality is. And that is something whose-- if you can perform a measurement, you know that quantity absolutely. But you can't do the-- so on the one hand, quantum mechanics says you can’t know physical reality to this level of precision. they claimed was a paradox. And this paper was published. And it received a range of reactions from indifference by younger physicists who said, we don't care that it's weird. And most notably Niels Bohr found this paper really troubling. And he spent about six weeks, apparently, discussing this and trying to come up with a response to it. And what he responded was essentially that-- in some ways, it was in some way a paradox, as well as a good thing. Einstein had argued that the EPR paradox suggested that quantum mechanics was incomplete. Bohr essentially responded in effect that Einstein's description of quantum mechanical explanation was inadequate. The experiments were done, and I imagine are still being done, as sort of demonstrations. And they showed that Bohr's interpretation was correct and that yes, quantum mechanics produces results that are non-local just as Allan described to you. And that the world really is as strange as people first glimpsed in 1925, '26, and '27.