which we are to for next week and here and I'll talk about that actually week from today because it's callay on Monday so it will get behind but if we get any further behind I'll have to make it up sometime. If you don't have that you be copies available upstairs is it c um come to my office okay to dany's office he doesn't have copies of it there that's six six upstairs in the first floor immediately after CL and then on the next Friday I will talk about the parts in the in the inquiry that were assigned and also a that essay of of the oral concept well last time you call. I was attempting to formulate what I call social compact Criterion of the legitimate form of government. There's a distinction between express consent and P consent Express consent incorporates us into society as full member and as a Perpetual or presumably taxic consent does not do this. There's a point while it's a bit vague what the details are from the text that the point for us that's important is that when you read hum's account of the original contract he gives arguments against unlocks View and you have to ask yourself how effective is K's argument against each of these two parts of lock view. The English Constitution was at that time widely regarded this a sort of accepted view on all sides it's a hex Constitution that this problem as I say arose during the exclusion crisis of 1679 and 81. The original part of the second CH was written it believe about 79 and 880 and then other chapters that were were added in 81 83 and two chapters added after. James was Theos James and Harry this room in I think February of 1689 so those parts were add it afterwards but really I men talks about the earlier crisis. means that is there's no legal framework within which that is within the Constitution for settling the conflict there is no way to do it at law. In paragraph 168 he says if there is a conflict of the sort then the people have the right to appeal to Heaven which is a euphemism for for go to war that is Civil War and uh the power then refs to them and they have theright of resistance I'll come for that the moment now I might mention that in our constitution there are devices that tend to prevent this sort of conflict from happening. of Andrew Johnson although didn't past and it tends to make it politically impossible for president to persist over a period of time and a long drawn that conflict of with Congress. Mar's problem is to justify existence of the crown in this kind of situ situation. The source of Lock's constitutional Doctrine the source and thought is a book where at least is belied to be uh a book and many evidences of this uh by man Nam George wson written in 1657 published in 1660 calleda sais. power as a p power it connects up with the idea that political Authority is the right of making laws only for the public good says that the very beginning in three since given all of the constraints on parties to the social compact it can not be given uh for any other purpose now I don't know whether I ought to do this I might Ting out kind of what the form of the social Compact might be suppose we're imagine ourselves to be sort of loocking constitutional lawyers and we want to write a Social contact what are all the Clauses it might contain. changed his mind he thought perhaps it was not all together safe never knew in England the English were regarded in those days as very unstable people. Mark says nothing about the details of of this process that is how does he Enis that this constition power is actually to take place he doesn't give any institutional account of how he supposes actually might be done laon is also vague on this he says something has the idea that it would begin in the county courts and they organized there and would then they presented Des sent to a parliament. L's view was that James had just advocated or meod from bacon and the Parliament finding a bacon Throne had simply found an occupant for it and that act did not imply the parliament was Supreme that is a view that they prepered to maintain. Why did L refuse to alter his view I think we have to assume that he didn't change his mind and he persisted in the doctrine that he formed earlier in 79 and 880 I think partly because his views are more radical than the standard view of his college that would be one reason but also because he felt I think that it was inconsistent. protected it's the importance of this notion now I'm not I want to mention at the end I gu about the last for some minutes um I'm going on to mention a witness in lock view from from our standpoint. Mark is presupposing and taking for granted that only a few people vote relativelyFew people vote to whole certain amount of land or Capital assets that add up to a certain some of money and so the in accurate I don't know the exact size of the scent I me to look it up rather small percentage of it is able to vote on this view.