John Stuart Mill is the principle expositor of neoclassical utilitarianism. The rights-utility synthesis signals that we're looking for an attempt to put together both a commitment to utilitarian efficiency and respect for individual rights. The transition for classical to neoclassicals utilitarianism really went on in all fields of thinking about the human sciences at more or less the same time. The emotivist doctrine is an endpoint in a philosophical evolution that really begins in the seventeenth century. The theory of value was going to be tremendously influential and important in the way utilitarianism evolved. Hume's famous for the idea that an ought cannot be derived from an is; that there's a fact-value problem. But he thought, nonetheless, people are pretty much the same, and so if you can figure out what makes one of them tick, you can find what makes all of themtick. And that was most emphatically Jeremy Bentham's view. It's presupposed in everything we discussed last time. If you think about the idea of doing interpersonal comparisons of utility, and making the judgment that taking that dollar from Donald Trump and giving it to me would be better, that's what Bentham would have said. it to the bag lady increases her utility more than it decrease his, you're assuming that they basically all have the same kinds of utility functions. Stevenson questioned that idea radically. He said, "We don't actually know. We should take Hobbes much more seriously in his critique of Aristotle than he was willing to take himself" And so that was thought to be a radically relativist doctrine because it seemed to undermine the possibility of making ethical judgments of any sort across people. That is a doctrine to which we will return, as I said, when we get to the anti-Enlightenment and, in particular, Alasdair MacIntyre's book, After Virtue. But today we're going to focus for the rest of our time on the economics of the transition from classical to neoclassical utilitarianism. And I'm going to ask you to suspend disbelief for the whole of today's lecture and just trust me, because what I'mgoing to do is I'mGoing to go into this backwards. I'm Going to look at a very different problem that the neoclassicals economists were concerned with that had nothing to do with utilitarianism, or rights, or anything that we've been talking about. we would know about this person A, as I said, is that they prefer four to three, three to two, two to one, one to zero. But we can't say anything about how much they prefer those things because these distances don't actually mean anything. All we get is an ordered ranking. One other thing we can say is, that this is a no-no. These indifference curves cannot cross. Can anybody tell us why? Why can't they cross? Wait for the mic. you get it that way. But so now we have a diagram with two people on it, okay? So this is person A, and this isperson B. And these axes, the X-axis, here, is A's utility function. Remember A in the previous slide was trying to get from P towards Q, right? A was Trying to go up here. So it looks like A's happier than B, but that's misleading. If the different distances are taken to imply in your mind that A's happiest than B disabuse yourself of that thought right away. use, yeah, let's use J. If I put a point here, J, we would say that A's gone down and B's gone up. Now, to make this a bit more real imagine in here this is the sphere of market transactions. This is where A and B will go voluntarily, right? So A will say to B, "Well, I have all this wine, and you have all that bread, how about I swap you a bottle of wine for a loaf of bread?" And you say, "Okay." The Pareto principle out of which the whole of neoclassical economic theory was constructed depends on this idea of indifference curves. A is trying to get up on those indifference curves, and B is wanting to get along on them. When they get to a point at which no matter what swap A is willing to propose, B says no, then you know they've hit that frontier, what's called the Pare to possibility frontier. Once they wind up anywhere on this indifference curve they're not going to move of of improving one person's utility. diagrammatically, and then if anybody doesn't get it we'll wait up and I'll go through it more slowly. But think about the diagram we just did, okay? Think about A is here in the corner,Okay? But basically now we're putting the two previous diagrams together. We're putting this diagram, where we have two commodities and one person, and this diagram where we've got two people and just utility. And so you'll see why this is helpful once we get to the end of it.