Learn how the solar cell device converts sunlight, the input energy, to some usable output energy, which is in the form of electricity, typically, from a solar panel. Learn how to minimize the amount of light reflected or not absorbed into maximizing amount of life that's actually absorbed. Learn about the duality of light, or how to think about light as a particle, or alternatively, as a quantified particle. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on MIT OpenCourseWare. a particular refractive index. It's comprised of a real component which indicates the phase velocity inside of the material and an imaginary component, which can be thought of as an extinction coefficient. We use that information to calculate engineering relevant parameters such as reflectance of light off of a surface. So this is a method for you to gain a foothold in this new area of understanding the refractiveIndex of a material based on something you've already seen before. So I would advise taking this analogy as far as it will go until it breaks down. And you'll see at some point it actually does. We need to understand how light gets absorbed inside of matter. We apply a very simple formulation inside of this class, which is called Beer-Lambert's Law. As we increase the thickness of the polyethylene, we will plot the total transmitted light as measured by that photodiode. And so I'm going to come up with a hypothesis of what's going to happen. And it's a logical thing you might assume. But we're going to test it. And then we'll walk through a derivation that will correct our missed logic. As we keep increasing and put one layer of polyethylene, that drops to 0.75. The amount of light that's absorbed is following a curve looks something like that. So if we assume that light is coming in a medium and light is decaying in some function to that medium, we know, of course, from our little experiment that it follows some exponential function. But how do we justify that to ourselves? Well, first off, we're going to ignore reflections off the front surface. These things don't reflect a lot of light. by some sort of scattering intensity within the medium-- and this sigma here can refer to a variety of processes. If we increase the total thickness, we're going to decrease the total amount of light coming through via that exponential function. The alpha, obviously, is going to be very different for our atmosphere than it was for these little polyethylene sheets. Because the nature of the scattering and absorption processes are very different. for the atmosphere than for here, the density of the material and so forth. Most solar cells that you see of crystalline silicon are on the order of 100 microns. The record efficiency of gallium arsenide solar cell is a few hundred nanometers thick. If you absorb 90% of the light on the first pass, you'll absorb 99% of it on two bounces, right? Or in one bounce, rather, and two trips, two optical path links through the material. And over the next few slides, we're going to learn how we engineer that. electrons instead of the system is changing from one medium to another. The light path will obey what is called Snell's Law, which is the product of the refractive index and sine of that angle, the angle relative to the surface normal. So there are two benefits to texturizing your front surface. One is you have an additional pass, additional bounce, an additional encounter with the material. And the second benefit is that you're able to increase the optical path length by the delta in refractive indices. most often, depending on the angle. You have what is called total internal reflection, which is this case right over here. You might change the nature of the anti-reflection coating on the glass. Even if the panel looks black, there are some really aesthetically pleasing solar panels out there that look completely black. They may still have white back skin, but the glass is just very good at absorbing that light and preventing it from escaping. To engineer front and back surface reflectances, you really have to carefully select your refractive indices. When you look down, the ray of light is traveling like this and it bends toward the normal and likewise symmetric. So you're seeing material down there. What change of property would give you these two images over here? In one of those two images, the refractive index of the medium inside the pool is not 1.3. It's 0.9. And in another one of these two, therefractive index is actually going to be negative. So which of thesetwo do you think is which? There is a limit to how much we can trap light simply by modifying or corrugating the surfaces. A gentleman by the name of Eli Yablonovitch, who's now a professor in Berkeley calculated these parameters I think back in 1982. He came up with an upper limit to the optical path length. That's a pretty good litmus test for the ability of a material to trap light. If you have silicon, for instance, with a refractive index of, let's say, in the infrared some around 3.6, your Yabonovitch limit is around 50. In most solar cells, we want to suppress reflection. We go to great lengths to make sure that this thickness as well as the refractive index of the material is optimized for a particular system. So calculate for me what is the optimal thickness of an anti-reflection coating of silicon nitride? And we'll give it a refractiveIndex of, say, 2.1. Let's call it 2, just make our lives simple. And the peak of the solar spectrum is 550 nanometers. surface of a material, let's say right here, then you can cause each node, each point within your material, to lag by an increasing amount, so that your wave front now bends. And that will cause the light, essentially, if you trace through the points of maximum intensity, say the pink, you'll see that the light is bent. And so it's really exciting. There's stuff coming up every day. This is the point. We can, in principle, if this is hot off the press-- and then of course there's a whole flurry of researchers out there trying to figure out how to use this to our advantage. on light trapping and light management. Mostly it's for photonic devices, but they can be transferred over into solar cells as well. And another example of the photon up/down converters, there's recent reports in SPIE, a lot of interest in the optics community. There was a TR35 award given to a person who studying this topic. So it is, as well, a very exciting and up and coming field. Again, the opportunities there of manipulating light are large, are vast.