Professor Donald Kagan: We are living in the early years of a polis sometime in the eighth century B.C. The date that's typical for the general phenomenon of colonization coming out of the mother cities of Greece is 750 roughly. The earliest date according to Greek tradition, if my memory is correct, was something like 773 where the Greeks date the foundation of what they thought was the earliest colony they ever established -- a place that they called Pithaecusa, which is the island of Ischia. The Greeks were terrified of the sea for very good reason. The vast overwhelming majority of people needed to farm land, in order to stay alive. One answer, and it's the one that is most widely believed among Greek scholars, is that the growth of population that we have mentioned in connection with the rise of the polis is still working. But I don't think that's the only answer. I think the desire for commerce would have been also--I agree with the traditional view which is that this would be at a lesser consideration. In any group of people there is a small minority, I want to emphasize small, who just love to do risky things. They just love adventure; they're never happy if they're safe, and so off they go seeking adventure and seeking to make a fortune however they're going to do it. The Greek word for this is, apoikia, and most literally it would mean a home away, an away home. They are establishing for themselves a household, a home someplace away from where they started, and that's the name. Delphi was thought by the Greeks to be the navel of the universe, the center in every way. There the god Apollo had established an oracle. Gases would escape through this gap in the earth and there were priests who worshipped Apollo there. They would place a young woman there who would sit as these gases came up and she would speak in tongues. John Hale of the Yale Class of 1973, who is now an archaeologist at the University of Louisville, investigated this. He found evidence that totally confirmed the Greek story. Greeks and barbarians came to Delphi to consult the Delphic Oracle. Most of the things they asked were questions that really had a yes or no answer. The oracle probably gained its fame for being very good precisely at answering this question. These people knew more than anybody else about these things, and so consulting that oracle was a very act of rational thought, says John MacIntosh, professor of ancient history at the University of California, Los Angeles, and author of the book, "The Lost City of Syracuse" will decide whether it's a good idea for him or not. Recruiting is tremendously important because you need to have a certain number of settlers to make the settlement viable. So however many that is, that is what you try to recruit and you recruit typically at a time when it's easy to get people together so you can tell them the story. There are festivals held in each city just for its own citizens and my guess is that when you could do that, when you felt that you could recruit a full colony from your fellow citizens in Corinth, let us say, that's what you did. were not enough Corinthians who were ready to go with you on your expedition. So, you would try to take your message to one of the Pan-Hellenic festivals which were getting organized about this time. So now you have everything in place, you've recruited your settlement, you get on your ships and sail, in this case out to the west central Mediterranean. You find your way to Sicily, work your way into the harbor at Syracuse and things work out, and now we have this apoikia called Syracuse. The city of Corinth sent out a lot of colonies, which is why we know something about their arrangements. When Potidaea got into trouble with Athens, and found itself besieged, Corinth sent a real army to go in there and fight. At the other end of the spectrum it's again Corinth and they have a colony up in the northwest called Corcyra. The first relationship between them is a navel battle, and thereafter we hear of them quarrelling and fighting with each other just about at least once a century right on down. Kagan: The overwhelming normal situation is the first one I described, friendly relations. colonies to send representatives back to the mother city for the religious observations that were common to them all, so that those create good feelings. Corinth always needs that kind of stuff, so we sell you our wheat, you sell us your pottery, we sell good wine that we can't grow yet and maybe never will be able to grow in our neighborhood, so on and so forth. So you can see why it would be very natural for all sorts of ties to unite these colony and mother city. There are no Greek cities as you keep coming down and pass Palestine. You reach Egypt, and of course, Egypt is one of the great empires of antiquity. The Greeks settle a single colony in the Delta of the Nile of Egypt at a place called Naucratis. You can actually go, now that I realize that Libya is now open; it's no longer a closed territory. You will find very rare cases of a Greek city founded away from the sea; they always wanted to be close to the sea. what can we speculate is the meaning of that? What we find is that the states who are doing most of the colonizing are located where most ofThe trade was going on at this point in history. When I say manufacturing, you understand everything is done by hand, but you see things like shops that contain a number of slaves working for a master. In some cases, especially the later on you go, some shops that have quite a few slaves that worked to produce these things. Well, these places are the ones that have the trade, the industry, and also engage in colonization. Greece's impact was greater in the west and the north than it was in the east and the south. The Greeks lived among people who were more civilized than they. They had very little to teach or to impose upon those people rather than vice versa. It is inconceivable the Greeks could have developed a civilization that they did without contact with these eastern civilizations and learned a great deal from them. It's evident that they borrowed stuff from the Greeks in every part of their lives, in a potent, fundamental way. who have interests rather different from those of the most primitive polis you could imagine. Some scholars early on in the century, moved by Marxist theories, suggested that you had a capitalist class growing up, there's just no evidence of that; it's just wrong. My guess is that the earliest traders of any scope were probably noblemen who also had land and estates back home, but who had the opportunity, the know-how, the connections to make it possible to make a lot of living in trade. is going on. More and more farmers are becoming independent, self-sustaining, hoplite farmers of the kind that I've described. They're not going to feel the same way about it, there's going to be pressure from them for a better participation in the decisions that are made in the state. And also there will be some rich people, very rich people,. rich in a different way from the way people used to be rich; rich meant the best land. There will be people who will have wealth in the form of precious things and I would use the word money. come to mean weights of silver or gold. So now you have a change in fundamental economic things. Well, all of this is tied up with this colonial story I've been telling you. Finally, I think, it works in both directions at the same time in terms of the impact all of these changes have on the political situation. On the one hand the changes, that is (A) the rise of the hoplite class; (B) the development of lots of commerce and industry and wealth in a new kind. especially, some scholars have pointed out, I think persuasively, also for some considerable time provided an answer to that problem in the form of an escape valve. Americans didn't have the kind of terrible class warfare and the terrible warfare within cities that the Europeans had experienced throughout most of their history. Really unhappy and angry people could always go west, get new places. I mean, fundamentally, Kansas is a colony in a certain Greek sense, all of these places are. So, that's part of the story of why America had the very lucky early history that it had. that colonization provided something analogous to that for the Greek people. So now, here we are somewhere in the seventh century, most of these places I've been talking about have been settled, the currents that I have been describing are flowing and the kinds of problems they have give rise to what will be felt in most of the towns. That is the proper introduction to the next topic, which I'll discuss next year. No not--it seems like a year, but it's next Tuesday actually.