JACK HARE: Let's do a little recap on electron cyclotron emission. We expect to have multiple different peaks, even from a single particle. These peaks are going to be occurring at frequencies. These tend to be in an optically thick regime. We can go back and we can use these measurements to identify three specific points inside our plasma that we've been using as part of this example. But, in general, you can get it all through the way through the plasma. temperature as a function of frequency. Then we can say, well, that frequency corresponds to a certain magnetic field. And then we can says that magnetic field corresponds to. a certain spatial coordinate. And so, this is a technique which will give us, by looking at the spectrum for lowish frequencies, the first or maybe the second harmonics of this cyclotron emission, we can work out what the temperature is as a. function of space. This is correlation ECE, often called CECE. what we want to do is measure very small temperature fluctuations. We want to measure temperature fluctuations within the plasma that are maybe on the order of 1% of the baseline temperature. If the mean temperature is just Te, and we have some fluctuation around 1%, this intensity will also fluctuate by about 1%. And that 1% is actually extremely hard to measure. And this is because the noise is just too high on these systems. There are lots of different contributions to the noise. But, in general, they all add up to make it very hard toMeasure these very small fluctuations. want to understand in plasmas so that we can build an economically viable fusion reactor. Now, the fact that the noise is too high does seem like a big limitation. But there are some clever tricks that we play where we use correlations. And I'll talk now about what exactly these correlations are and how they provide us with information that allows us to get a signal out despite the overwhelming [INAUDIBLE]. So our setup here is borrowed from ASDEX Upgrade. And, in effect, I referred to Alex Creely's PhD thesis, which you can find online if you want more information. can get very detailed. So in ASDEX Upgrade, we don't really have a circular cross-section plasma, but I'm just drawing it like that, be a nice D-shaped plasma, got our plasma inside here. And our system, at first glance, looks an awful lot like the system that we sketched out up here. We're going to have some sort of special lens. It turns out, you can make lenses for microwaves. And that lens is going to collect light from a region like this. some sort of top hat. It's centered around the frequency where most of the electron cyclotron emission is. And this has a bandwidth of 10 gigahertz. So we've cut out an awful lot of the radiation in bands that we're not interested in. We are no longer going to study those, any bremsstrahlung, any higher order things. This is going to capture all of the information in, say, the first harmonic within some relatively small window. frequency range. Once we've got our bandpass filtered signal here, 110 kilohertz is still too fast for us to digitize. This would be an extremely expensive digitizer. So, what we actually do is we downmix it with the signal at 100 gigahertz. And so, then we get out our beat signal, which we can digitize, which is at 10 gig ahertz here. So this is-- actually, I will write this as 0 to 10 giga hertz. This is the sort of signal that we can actually digitize now. downsampled these is that digitized is now much less expensive. We're doing it something like 4 mega samples a second. And that is quite an affordable digitizer compared to the ones you would need to digitize this signal. So I have not yet told you anything about how correlation ECE works. I'm just giving you an outline of exactly how these measurements are made with an example from ASDEX Upgrade. But there are other similar devices on other tokamaks. many oscillations. And so, it will average out to-- well, because it's power, it'll average out out to 1 or something like that. So it's some DC offset that we can subtract off after. So all this is doing here is mixing the signal down so it gets to a regime that we could effectively digitize. Yeah, another question. [INAUDIBLE] JACK HARE: So if we were doing geometric optics, which we're not, then you would have a lens like this. That lens could collimate your beam. The idea here is that there was some region over which, in the transverse direction perpendicular to your collection volume, you have a very narrow scale. This means that you can actually collect from a very small region on the order of 100 microns. What they were actually doing with this system is all of these were very tunable. And so, if they wanted to look at turbulence in the edge or turbulence near the center, they could actually tune all their bandpass filters to do that. Watts: The technique is used in a variety of applications. He says it's used to extract temperature from the noise of plasma. Watts: The noise is uncorrelated at random, but these two signals will correlate together, and we'll be able to measure it. The temperature and the noise are correlated, he says, and that's what makes it useful in a lot of cases. The technique can also be used to detect cancerous cells in the human body, Watts says. is an example of nominative determinism. Someone called Watts goes around making power measurements. Yeah, and this technique is incredibly powerful because it's enabled people to measure, again, delta Te upon Te on the order of 1%. And they've done this at 13-- on ASDEX Upgrade-- 13 radial locations. So 13 positions they can measure these temperature fluctuations. And they have done this with a time step of 100 kilohertz. So 100,000 times a second they've been able to measure these temperatures. we have positioned these two volumes, which are producing frequencies omega 1 and omega 2. And we think that that distance is smaller than the size of our turbulent eddy. The temperature should be the same going up and down. And if you do this correlation and you get out nothing, that probably means your volumes are too far apart because there is-- this T correlation would just go T1 T2. And there's no good reason to believe those temperature fluctuations are correlated, because they'll be part of a different turbulent Eddy. situation where, at some point, your eddy has moved across, and these two are no longer correlated because the next two are correlated. So it-- yeah. I think we're reaching the limits of my knowledge. JACK HARE: I mean, there's no reason to believe that each of the fluctuations is the same size. So this is going to be a time-evolving system here.Yeah, exactly. Cool. Any other questions? Anything online? Now we're going to go to bremsstrahlung. here with the ions and electrons as point particles. There's a semi-classical approach where you start bringing in some quantum physics and treat, I think, the electron as a wave. And then there's a full quantum approach. What's remarkable about all of these approaches is they all give the same answer with just a very slightly different coefficient. So we get a small change in coefficient. The scalings are the same. So, in some sense, although it's important to get the exact coefficient, it doesn't matter exactly which one of these techniques you use. from the point of view of this course, it makes no difference. Yeah, I think it's kind of remarkable that it doesn't make any difference. So, again, if you want the full treatment, go have a look in Hutchinson. And there's also a long treatment in Jackson of this same problem. I'm just going to quote some results. I kind of already spoiled it now. It's here. For the Maxwellian average, because we can have all sorts of different distribution functions, but our plasma tends towards a Maxwellian. This, therefore, has units of watts per hertz per meter cubed. And these constants are things like e, the electron charge, and the electron mass, and epsilon 0, and h bar, and c, all arranged in some way to make all the dimensions work. And you'll also find this Gaunt factor varies very weakly with the temperature of the plasma here. So this is a pretty weakly varying function. We can change it by two orders of magnitude in this parameter here, but this only changes by one order of. In general, it's reasonable to just treat G as being a constant and then, for this calculations we're doing, where we're going to drop the absolute intensity, we can just drop G with all the other constants as well. But if you want to go back and do this properly for some measurement that you's doing, then you'd have to include this. And so, this emissivity, as a function of photon energy, is a very simple function because it just decays exponentially with photon energy. And that is all you need to do Problem Set 3. In reality, for some plasma, we might have a spectrum that looks like this. So it goes back to being optically thin here for the high energy photons. But the low energy photons will get absorbed as well. There's actually another effect, which is in Hutchinson's book, which I haven't covered here. And so, the spectrum will be even further modified because that wave will be evanescent. But we're skipping over that this year. But it's in there if you're interested. at synchrotron, yes. So cyclotron is when the particles are spiraling around the magnetic field. Synchrotrons are used as a source of X-rays for diagnosing many other things. So it's interesting in its own right, but I don't know whether people use it as a diagnostic. It depends mostly on the magnetic fields and the radius in a tokamak. But maybe there's a really clever diagnostic you can do, like fast particles or something like that. That entire acceleration yields one photon, one energy. And so, initially, we have a kinetic energy, a 1/2 mv squared. Then, afterwards, we're going to have an energy 1/ 2 mv prime squared minus h nu. Now, if h nu is less than the initial kinetic energy here, then we still have some kinetic energy left. So v prime is greater than 0, our particle is still free, and it can continue. But, of course, there's another case where this photon takes away so much energy that this starts, I guess it becomes imaginary. where we have a range of different discrete energy levels that the electrons can occupy. These energy levels are labeled by the principal quantum number n. n equals 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on. And, up here, infinity, this is ionization. If your electron gets this much energy, it becomes free again. And the energies of these levels are given by this unit, Ry, which is the Rydberg z squared of our ion over n squared. And that's the thing that we're going to see with our spectrometer. The spectrum, therefore, looks like we had something like this for bremsstrahlung before, and now we have a spectrum that contains a series of edges, like this. And this lowest edge here-- I should draw this as a straight line-- this is n equals 1, 2, 3, 4, and all the way back up here, where, again, this is our brems result, and this isOur recombination.n of jn here. So if you're asking, what happens if you can't fulfill that, it just doesn't happen. Quantum mechanically, that would be a forbidden transition. we just did it in reverse. So this long tail here is due to the fact that we have electrons not just with v equal 0 but much more than that, yeah. So if you've got some helium with 2 times ionized helium, and some hydrogen, then it will have different recombination lines here. And that's because, fundamentally, the energy levels are in different places inside here. We'll go into some ways of actually making some use out of all this stuff in a moment. JACK HARE: We're going to get to that and the idea of detailed balance and thermodynamic equilibrium and things of that ilk. One use of this is a diagnostic called bolometry. It cares not at all about the detailed spectrum of what the emission is. It just wants to know how much power is being radiated by the plasma. So, bolometry is focused on measuring the total power that's being emitted. And we'll talk more about how to do that in the next step. Bolometry was one of the first diagnostics that we had on many MCF devices. Now, this itself is a very simplistic system, and it does not work because it is very susceptible to noise. So we have to, as always, come up with a clever system, which is noise resistant. And then, using heterodyning techniques, we can then measure it very cleanly without noise. This may be an experimental technique you're familiar with with the head of a bolometer. This is often made out of gold. Gold is chosen because it absorbs all wavelengths relatively evenly. This thin layer of gold has been deposited on top of a substrate. And it's on the back of the substrate that you have your resistor. And depending on whether it is M or R, you either have this open to the plasma or you have a thick block some distance in front of it so it can't see the plasma. It's the heat capacity of the absorber, c, that goes into our previous equation. difference between those. neutron damage leads us to use much thicker substrates, which gives us a longer time response and so, therefore, a worse bolometer. So, ironically, the bolometers that will be used on [INAUDIBLE] are significantly worse than the bolometer used on existing devices. And I'm sure that [? Spark ?] will have exactly the same problem. Almost everyone in the world uses this design of bolometer that they pioneered on ASDEX Upgrade in the '80s. No one has come up with a better system yet.