Jake Xia: This is the second time we are having this class. We had it last year in a smaller version. That was for six units of a credit, and we had it once a week. And mostly practitioners from the industry, from Morgan Stanley, talking about examples how math is applied in modern finance. And so we got some good response last year. So, with the support of the math department, we decided to expand this class to be 12 units of credit and have twice a week, as you know. WebEx.is has added math lectures focusing on linear algebra, probability to statistics, and some stochastic calculus. The purpose of this course is to give you a sampling menu to see how mathematics is applied in modern finance. Last year when we finished the class, we had a few students coming to work in the industry. Some work at Morgan Stanley, some work at elsewhere. So it's open door. You're very welcome to attend the classes here. And at the same time, obviously, you will further solidify your math knowledge and learn new content. and the Sloan school here. So anyway, thanks for that. We will be doing a bit more polling along the way, mainly to get feedback of how you feel about the class. Last year we had it online, so if you feel the class is going too fast, or the math part is. going too slow or the finance part is a bit confusing, the easiest way is really just to send us. emails, which you will find from the class website. So Anyway, I will start today's lecture with a story, and a quiz at the end. Don't worry, it's not a real quiz. Just going to ask you some questions you can raise your hand and give your answer. my personal story. I want to tell you why I tell the story later. But the story actually was in the mid '90s. I just left Salomon Brothers -- that was my first financial industry job -- to go to Morgan Stanley in New York. So the first day, I sat down, I opened the trading book, I found something was missing. So, I turned around, I asked my desk quant. I said, where is the vega report? So, let me show you. Kappa is actually a Greek letter. Kappa is also called vega by some uneducated traders at the Salomon Brothers. So obviously, I learned how to call kappa very quickly. And I called it kappa in the last 17 years, but you will hear people calling it vega. But anyway, so that's my first day at Morgan Stanley. But why did I tell you the story? What point I try to make? So this story is actually-- when you think about it, mathematical or quantitative finance is a rather new field. from mostly under-educated traders. Some of them typically joined the firms in the mail room and became trader later on. And to nowadays, if you walk on the trading floor, you talk to the traders, most of them have advanced degrees. So, financial products is really just one form of trading. There are many other ways of trading aside from exchanges. And the different regions have different exchanges and markets, as well. And they typically specialize in local products, local company stocks, local bonds, and local currencies. After 1933 Glass-Steagall legislation, there were two main types of banks. Commercial bank is supposedly, you're taking deposits and lend out the money. Investment bank supposed to focus on the capital markets, raising capital, trading, and asset management. So that's how banks are organized. Outside banks, other players, basically, the asset managers, are obviously a very big force in the financial markets. So the really bank.type of player is really the investment bank. The investment bank is the player that is really bank-like. In the current environment, when you have a savings account, you don't really earn much at all. And so you would have to take more risk to generate more return, or you have longer horizon CDs, other type of products, or trade the stocks. So, when somebody has money, you're essentially-- you're buying a stock, you give the money somewhere. Supposedly, it will go to the company to generate a better return. And for the borrowers, whoever needs money, they need to have access to the capital. Brokers take principal risks, market makers make the trade happen, earn commission. Hedge funds find opportunities to profit from inefficient market positioning or pricing. Private equity funds look to invest in companies and either take them private or invest in a private equity form to improve the company's profitability. Government always have a very large impact on the market, because they are the policymakers, and the different policies they push out will generate different outlooks for the future markets, therefore, profitability. The first type is really just hedging. That means you're not proactively adding risk to what you have. In the new regulation, obviously, proprietary trading is banned, right? And so the third type is really the proprietary trader, the risk taker. These are the hedge funds or some portfolio managers. They need to focus on generating return and control the risk. That's where the beta and alpha, the concept comes in. It's a format. You want to beat S&P 500, so you want to basically have certain tracking of this index, but you. want to return more on top of that. stock, I think a lot of people know pretty much where it is. But if it's not transparent, so what do you do? So, if instead of asking you where Apple is, probably you're going to tell me $495 today. So you're probably less transparent. So that market maker comes in to provide that liquidity, and then takes the risk. They manage the book by balancing those Greeks, which I mentioned earlier. That's called delta. Gamma is really the change of the portfolio. Take the derivative to the delta, or to the underlying spot. "VaR" concept is also, obviously, a very important concept. And we talk about the volatility exposure was vega. And on top of that, what are the tail risks? What are the events that can actually get you into big trouble? So people use value at risk. Then capital. How much capital are you using? It becomes a veryimportant issue nowadays. And balance sheet. You have asset, you have liability. How do you leverage? How much leverage you have? Before the crisis, for example, lot of the banks leverage up 40 times. Vasily Kuznetsov: Arbitrage is really to find the relationships between prices, and try to profit from those relationship mispricing. He says the systematic trader builds computer models. Kuznets: Math is very useful in risk management, which I will give you some quiz -- questions -- to test your knowledge of the market. He adds that math plays a very important role to quantify how much exposure you have to the risks you have in your bank account or in the stock market. facing two choices, choice A and a choice B. Choice A being you have 80 chance to lose $500. You have 20% chance to win $500, right? That's choice A. Or choice B, you basically just lock in you have 100% chance of losing $280. Let me ask you, for whoever likes to choose choice A, please raise your hand. One, two, three, four. About six out of say, let's call it 50. So, that's really the common behavior, which mathematically may not make sense. your bank account balance is-- let's say you are a freshman student. Your choice will be very different from someone who has $100,000 in his bank account. And also, your risk tolerance, how much you can tolerate. So learn the math, learn the finance first, but keep those questions along the way when you are learning during this class. So suggested homework, optional. Go to the course website, read what we have put up for the financial glossary. So if you still have things you don't understand, compile your own list of financial concepts. we got maybe-- how about this? We still got about 15 minutes or 12 minutes left, so I'll pass it to Vasily, then maybe we can leave five minutes for some questions. VASILY STRELA: [INAUDIBLE] mentioned that, Apple trades, that now it's $494.4 Yeah, just a couple of [INAudIBLE]. Well, first of all, no offense to people who were [INA UDIBLE], but I just wanted to give an example. every time. So, if you want to differentiate this functions and get a derivative, then this derivative will be quite noisy. And so, instead of getting the true derivative, you might obtain something quite different from true derivative just because there is a confidence interval around any point. So obviously, there is somewhere balance, and the question was, is there an optimal shift size to get the derivative? And that's what-- uh oh, the slide got corrupted. There was an answer. optimal size, that would be your numerical derivative of this blue function. While if you use an optimal shift size, which [INAUDIBLE] computed, it would be much smoother and much better. So, that's one of example, and that's what he did. And we actually are implementing it in our systems and plan to use it in practice. Another project was actually quite different. And it was about electronic trading and basically how to better predict prices of currencies and exchange rate. We put syllabus there, a short list of literature. We will be posting a lot of materials there. Probably most lectures will be published there. Jake's slides are there already. So, any questions? We like to get your emails so we can put you on the website for further announcements. But it's probably easier if you put your email on the sign up sheet, so that we can [INAUDIBLE]. VASILY STRELA: Yeah, but please visit and sign up here, because there will be announcements to the class.