Adam Martin: How do you go from something you're interested in learning about an organism to actually identifying genes and mechanisms that are important for that? Martin: The two heroes of today's lecture will be the roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans, and the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. He also highlights a couple important vertebrate-model organisms-- the zebrafish and the mouse. Martin: Most of them are fairly small, and they're easy to house large numbers of them in a lab. induce mutations. So we're looking for mutations. And these mutations could be spontaneous mutations, meaning you didn't do anything to induce it, but they just appear as a variant in the population. In the way we can induce mutations is by using some type of mutagen. For example, you could have some sort of chemical mutagen that increases the error rate in DNA replication. Or you could use radiation to induce DNA damage, and that essentially accelerates the frequency of mutations that occur in the genome of an organism. Miles Martin: In model organisms, we can find these types of mutations. "Wingless" mutant defined a gene that has a homologous gene in humans. "Notch" gene defines an entire signaling pathway, which is important in stem-cell biology and is also over activated in cancer. Miles: In order to look for incorrect body parts, you need to get more than one fly with the same mutation to get a normal fly with a different mutation, so you can get multiple F2 flies. Drosophila larvae has a segmental pattern that alternate between smooth cuticle and hairy cuticle. Because there's a lot of hairlike projections here, it reminded the researchers of a hedgehog. The hedgehog gene was the founding member of an entire signaling pathway, known as the "hedgehog pathway," that plays important roles in human development and also, human cancer. There are now a number of drugs that are being developed to target the hedgehog pathway, and one was approved back in 2012 for use in treating basal-cell carcinoma. Robert Horvitz's lab identified a pathway of genes that were involved in cell death. They identified a mutation that affected cell death that specifically blocked this engulfment process. They then mutagenized these ced-1 mutants. And what you see in this worm are these bubble-like structures that are cells that are dead but haven't been engulfed. So these dead cells, because they're not engulfed, are visible in the adult worm. And so they identified a mutant, and thus, a gene that causes "3," which is basically a double mutant. Adam Martin: circadian rhythm is a behavior. We are awake during certain parts of the day and are asleep at night. If you're hidden from the light-dark cycle, you continue this cycle for some amount of time. Martin: There's something intrinsic in our system such that we want to exist on this 24-hour wake-sleep cycle. He says the Nobel Prize-winning researchers identified a gene called "period" that is associated with familial advanced-phase syndrome, which is a sleep disorder.