NORVIN RICHARDS: Today is phonetics, which means that today we begin making funny sounds at each other. Let's see. I'm trying to remember if there's anything that I ought to announce. You remember, maybe, that problem set 1, which confusingly is your second problem set, is due on Thursday. Normally, it would be due on Tuesday. But because I am technologically challenged, it's due Thursday. I just figured out how to get the projector to project over there instead of in the middle. Linguists have a system for writing sounds down so that we'll all know what kind of sound we're talking about. The symbols of the International Phonetic Alphabet resemble letters of the English alphabet. The symbol for the sound of the beginning of "face" is an f, and the symbol of the start of "vase" is a v. We'll talk about other kinds of articulation that English doesn't use, but I think that one just doesn't exist. We have started here with symbols that should all look familiar, but as we go along, we will be seeing weirder and weier symbols. another new symbol. That's the symbol for the sound of the beginning of a "ship," and another new symbol that's the sound in the middle of "azure," the "zh" sound. Both of those are postalveolar sounds. A little further back, there are what are called palatal sounds. These are either even further behind the alveolar ridge, back where the roof of your mouth gets as high as it's going to get. And the one palatal sound that we have in English is the "y" sound at the start of "year" The IPA symbol for that sound is a "j" In the velar sound, the body of your tongue is up against what's called the velum, which is the soft tissue at the back of your mouth. English doesn't make a huge amount of use of the glottal stop, but it's what shows up at the beginnings of words like "uh-uh," that catch that you're getting in your throat. There are places in English where things that we write as "glottal stops" are actually, in fact, sounds. in mind? STUDENT: No. NORVIN RICHARDS: Oh, OK. We'll get to "r," eventually. People investigate this kind of thing in all kinds of ways. These days, people do a lot of MRIs. There are charts of all of the sounds that we're going to talk about plus many more together with MRIs of the insides of people's mouths making these sounds so that you can see the anatomy. You won't just have to think about it.  phonologist: "cat" and "dog" end in sounds that differ in voicing. "z" is voiced and that "s" is voiceless. "v" is more-- there's more air, I guess, than "f" or "v," but it's not the same. If you whisper "safe," and "save," you have the feeling that you can hear the difference between them. "F" is slower, I think my mouth is opening slower, so yes? So yes? Polish has words that end in "k" and words that ended in "g" underlyingly. Polish also has a rule that changes "g," to "k," at the ends of words. Voiced "b" becomes the voiceless version, which is "p," in Polish. "z" and "d" are voiced, and "t" is voiceless, but both are alveolar, so they're both different from "to" And it's a cross-linguistically quite common phenomenon. English has interdental fricatives and alveolar stops, "t" and "d" There are languages out there that have what are called dental stops. Part of your job, if you're learning Tagalog, for example, is to learn to make dental 't's instead of alveolars. There's all this work on what people do to compensate for various kinds of obstructions in the vocal tract. And on the website, there will be a link to charts that will have more official charts by the IPA. There are what are called retroflex sounds. These are sounds in which the tip of your tongue is on your palate. Uvulars are kind of like "k" except more so. Pharyngeals involve constriction near the pharyngeal wall. Arabic has these. The Berber languages have these. And for some reason, the dental stops are still red. Have to fix that? I don't know why. This chart is slightly larger. OK, keep asking me. English has a very large number of vowels and a not-very-good system for writing them. English spelling is so difficult that we can actually have competitions where you watch people spell. In many languages, the spelling bee would just never end because every word is pronounced exactly the way it's spelled. So here are two vowels. The vowel in "bead" and the vowel in “bad” Go ee-ah, eo-ah,. ee, ooh, ee. OK. English has five vowels, but Latin has 12, 14. English doesn't have words that end in "ih," "uh," or "eh," with the possible exception of "meh" Not all speakers of English distinguish schwa from wedge. "caught" and "cot" are different in dialects of English in which I speak a different dialect of which I do not speak a dialect of English. "Ooh" is a high back rounded tense vowel. "d" is sometimes represented with that wedge shape, it's pretty similar. this exercise next time. As we go along, I'm going to be asking you to read things in IPA. So I'll start putting IPA on the slides more and more. So start trying to familiarize yourself with it and get to where you're familiar with at least the symbols for sounds that we use in English. Do you want me to read the rest of them? I'll do some more IPA. OK, so what's the second one? STUDENT: "Sue says he's a bad egg."