HONG LIU: So if you want to compute, say, some scattering amplitude from alpha to beta-- so alpha's some initial state and beta's some final state. Say alpha consists of momentum p1 and PN-- or pm, and beta, say momentum p m plus 1 and pn. And then you can get this scattering amplitude just by taking your momentum-space correlation function, OK, for the n points. So this is the relation, and here I have stripped out the momentum conservation on both sides. I will explain a few things. OK, so remember this Gn, so let's go back to the definition of this Gn. So this is obtained by doing a Fourier transform. Say-- I think it would be minus sign. By doing the Fourier transforms, the coordinate-space correlation function can be written as the following. So-- yes? AUDIENCE: Right, so time-ordering of x1 to xn right here? HONG LIU: Yeah. It doesn't matter. It just has to act to the right. HONG LIU: To derive that theorem, the time-order matters. So we mentioned that if you have a diagram like this, say minus P1, minus P2, to P3, P4, and then the square root and amplitude are just given by minus i lambda, because you need to throw away all the external propagators. OK, you just need to-- you have to truncate all the External propagators, so that means you also throw away diagrams like this. So all these diagrams, you can ignore them, OK. HONG LIU: Z is the same for different processes, but it's different for different particles. Z is a constant for all of them, yeah. If it depended on momentum, then it would be kind of useless, right? So we will not go into details of the Z. And that is what is called the "Z" principle. It is the principle that all such things don't change the momentum. OK, the momentum don't changed. Yeah.things, they-- yeah, all these things, essentially, they just modify the-- give you the correction to the external propagator and include it in that constant Z. HONG LIU: This is the self-interact-- yeah, just when the-- when you have an interacting theory. When the particle propagates, it actually can interact with the virtual particle. And so that, this kind of interaction, will affect the property of the propagation. It can have the most effect by prefactor, but actually can change the mass, too. But for the-- oh, it can correct for the mass-- and also, that's the subject of the QFT2. The Dirac equation is one of the most beautiful equations in mathematical physics. It's actually describing electrons, so it's not only beautiful, but it's actually useful. The Dirac theory is a prime example of how people make great discoveries often for the wrong motivations. But the key is that if you are good enough, you will find something new and that something new will be useful. We'll talk about fermions in the next section of the lecture. We're going to talk about the Dirac equations and its covariance. Go to a different frame. OK, yeah, that's what we mean by-- just when you go to a Different Lorentz frame, the equation, the form of the equation looks the same. Just different observers in different laboratory, they see the same equation. So your first-order derivative, then, has to have the following form, alpha minus i-- yeah, so this is the gradient operator. And then this is a vector, have three components, and then have to contract with something. They're just some constant Hermitian matrices. And then, so then he reasoned that for this equation, if we want this equation to be Lorentz covariant, then at least it should have the relativistic plane wave as its solution. If it does not even have that type of solution, then you, yeah, of course cannot be covariant. OK, so the minimal requirement-- so before we really try to see how can we make this into a covariant equation, we say let's consider minimal requirement. solutions. And then the simplest way to do this is-- this is the first-order equation. And now imagine if we square this equation, and then this should reduce to the Klein-Gordon equation. If you can make that work, then this property will be satisfied, OK? So this can be satisfied if square of star, OK, satisfies reduced to Klein- Gordon equation. So now we want this equation to be given by minus partial x square psi plus m square psi. HONG LIU: We said the alpha and the beta, they must be Hermitian. So if we satisfy all these four conditions, and then we will guarantee that that equation star should have the plane-wave solution. And so now you just try to find matrices, satisfy those conditions. OK, you see that to satisfy them needs at least a 4-by-4 matrix, so n has to be 4. So for example, here is one solution. Say you take beta to be 1, so all matrices here should be understood as 2- by-2 matrices. So all together, it's 4-By-4, so 1 and minus 2. HONG LIU: The Dirac equation can be written in terms of gamma matrices. He explains how to write it in a more compact form. HONG LIu: It takes a little bit time to get used to it, OK, and I know some people develop psychological fears for fermions because you have to deal with those Gamma matrices, OK? For a long while, actually, I have this psychological fear myself. [LAUGHTER] When I look at fermion, I want to be away from it because I don't want to dealing with those gamma matrixes. the meaning of all these different solutions for alpha and beta or for gammas, OK? So as I mentioned, you can have infinite number of solutions. What's the meaning of them? So first, let's imagine when we look at this equation-- so as I said, this is a matrix equation. In this matrix equation, then you have this psi which is a four- component vector. So now if we make a basis change in this four-component vector, OK, so imagine, just say, consider making a basischange in psi. actually in the-- opposite regime, it's convenient for the ultrarelativistic regime. OK, so it depends on which regime, sometimes you use different gamma matrices. So now if you look at the Klein-Gordon equation, let's see how this is covariant. And this is a Lorentz scalar, so this is also equal to that. OK,. it's the same in any frame. Now we want to show that when we go to a new frame, partial prime square-- OK, this means in the prime coordinates. to show, OK, so now we want to show that the Dirac equation has the same property, OK. OK, that's much more nontrivial. Again, it's really ingenious, ingenious, yeah, but we see, actually, it works.OK, so we will do it next time. Next time, we will show you how to do the same thing in a different way. We will do that in a few minutes. We are going to take a break. We're going to have a drink.