Ahern: So the exams are not graded. The TAs have exams of their own and I have told the TAs that, fingers crossed, I would like to have exams back sometime on Friday. That may not be until afternoon, I don't know at this point. But the aim is to get things back by Friday. When exams are available, what I will do is I will send an email out to the class announcing that they're available and announcing where to pick them up. exam. Ahern: I have never had an exam where I had fewer questions. There were maybe 10 questions I got on the exam and that was for a class of this side, really unusual. "I find most students are honest. I've only had a handful of situations where in this class, where I've had dishonesty as an issue," Ahern says. "There's just too many eyes here and not enough of our eyes," he says of his class. "So that's why I videotape those" Ahern: How many amino acids can form zwitterion? None. That's not trick. There are no amino acids, everything, so think about it. Ahern: What did you have in mind for the last question? The one about the Kcat? Oh,Yeah, yeah, yeah. okay. So the question, and by the way, I will post the key outside my door after we give the exams back. I don't post those now because students get all anxious until they see their exam. Ahern: How can you have two apparent Kcats? and the answer is it depends on how you calculate the concentration of the enzyme. If you take Vmax and divide it by the total concentration of enzyme, you will see a reduced Kcat compared to the uninhibited enzyme. Why? Because much of that concentration of. enzyme is not active, it's inhibited. However, if you take the inhibited out of it and you take. Vmax to divide it, you'll see exactly the same Kcat as if you have an uninhibited. enzyme. where time is sometimes a factor, and so I was going to have 3 of the longer answer questions and I decided not to do that and I made them shorter. Next term, the format of the exam changes in 451. Most people like 451 better because the maximum number of points on a question I think is 3. If you're going to spend a fair amount of time on something, it should be worth more points. Anybody hate the exam? You can say it. As I said, I don't...okay, there you go. same manner that the enzyme is binding a substrate. And so the parallels of those with respect to concentration and so forth, that's really the reason you see those two curves being essentially the same. Everybody's all [Ahern makes groaning noises]. Alright, I hope everybody got how I start my lecture. Right? Student: No. Ahern: No!? Student: I said if you said something about starting the exam, we would give credit. Or starting the class, we'd give credit, yeah? S1 proteases are a class of enzymes that are called serine proteases. They all have serine, histidine, and aspartic acid as a catalytic triad at the active site. It's very easy to alter the genetic code for any of these proteases and change which amino acid is presence at any given place. When they do that, and they compare the activity, so this is the log of Kcat. The wild type enzyme has an activity up here. One 10 millionth as active when that serine is changed to an alanine. Ahern: There are other types of proteases that behave very much like S1, well like serine proteases. One of these classes is known as cysteine proteased. Ahern: This class of protease is essentially identical to that of theserine protease, at least for our level of understanding. He says the aspartyl proteases, at first glance, look somewhat different. But those similarities aren't all the way through like we see with the cystine prote enzymes, he says. of a sudden realizes, "Whoa! What's that?" He grabs it, you know. Wipes the dust off of it. Of course in the process polishes this thing. And out pops this magic genie. And he says, "oh master, thank you, I will grant you 3 wishes." and the guy says, 'oh, this is really great' he says,. "I guess I want a billion dollars "so that I can be a very rich man." and poof, a certificate appears in his hands and it says he has a billion. dollars in a Swiss bank account. Carbonic anhydrase can catalyze the conversion of a million molecules of substrate into product per second. Most enzymes have a fairly narrow pH range where they work that's ideal. At pH 9, the enzyme is far more active than it is at pH 7, indicating that a very, very important step is the removal of that proton. The rate of formation of the nucleophile is the critical step in the catalytic action of this enzyme like that of the proteases that you saw before. alkoxide ion. In the case of the restriction endonucleases, that shape change is more dramatic. What it does is it actually causes a bend to occur in the DNA. So we think of the DNA molecules of being straight and linear, but when the enzyme is bound to that proper site, the enzyme goes "oh, whoa!" and it bends. The DNA molecule is physically bent at that point. It's physically bent. Now that bending turns out to be critical for the catalytic action. like we saw with the peptide bond and everybody's happy. I will very briefly go over that next time and I will see you on Friday. Thank you for listening to our show on CNN.com. We will be back on Friday at 10 a.m. ET for a new episode of CNN Live in the U.S. and 2 p.M. ET in the UK. For more, visit CNN.co.uk/live and follow us on Twitter @cnnlive and @CNNLive.