Bolek Wyslouch: How do you convert a given physical system with all the forces, et cetera, into some sort of fixed form, fixed type of notation? Bolek: We will work on two, again, simple physical systems, one that consists of two pendula driven by forces of gravity, each of them. And we will discuss various interesting-- even though the system is very simple, just two masses, a spring, a little bit of gravity on top of that. me do everything. Let's write down everything in the matrix form, because it turns out that linear matrices are very useful for that. So let's introduce to them and show vector, which consists of x1 and x2. So we will be monitoring the change of this x2 as a function of time. We will introduce a force matrix k, which is equal to k plus mg over l minus k here. And then we need a third matrix, mass matrix, which simply says that masses are mass of first object is m. Use complex notation to find solutions to coupled oscillations. Complex notation is a mathematical answer, how to solve a mathematical equation. The physics answer is to find fixed frequency modes us such that the system, the complete system, oscillates at one frequency. The solution is written as two numbers, oscillatory term, with both x1 and x2 oscillating with the same frequency, and this is our postulated solution. It's a slightly different way of doing things, but we can assume this for now, right? to obtain the solutions to at least one normal mode, and we expect that there will be two normal modes, because we have two masses. So mathematically, the way to find out the oscillating frequency is you take a determinant of m minus 1 K minus i omega squared must be equal to 0. So we have a-- what this says is that if I set my frequency to g over l, then it will be able to set things up to set such that one frequency, one frequency forever. so it's stretch from both sides. And the whole system oscillates at the same frequency, and because of this additional force of spring, the frequency is actually higher, it's larger. It oscillates faster. All right, so that's the first step in understanding the system. We now know that there are two oscillations and two normal frequencies. The next step to finish our understanding of the system in a mathematical way, to describe it fully, I have to know what is the shape of oscillations. In principle, we know, now, at the end of the day, I still want to know how much 1 moves, how much 2 moves. So we have to put it all together. We have identified the frequency and the kind of, in the matrix notation, shape of the node. But of course, the final solution is a linear superposition of all possible normal modes. And then you calculate a shape of a normal mode. Is that clear? Any questions at this time? Right? The shape, 1 and 1, and 1 minus 1 is fixed, because these are the shape of normal modes, which corresponds to those frequencies. And the superposition of x1 plus x2 gives you the most general combination of possible motion. So if I write this down now in terms of position of number 1 and number 2, so I have a position of X1 as a function of time. In general, it will look like this. It will be some sort of constant alpha, cosine omega 1 t plus phi. The magenta is normal mode number 2. And blue and the red are the actual pendula. And the motion of blue and red is simply a linear sum of the two. And this is exactly what-- this is the computer simulation that shows you that one of them is going up, the other one down, et cetera. Now, is there a way to disable one of the normal modes? How would you disable a normal mode? Is there a quick way to set things up such that the second normal mode, BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: What you do, is you just change the initial conditions. So for example, one possibility is I move both of them at the same distance, and I just let them go like this such that the spring is irrelevant, right? How would I do it in my program? I don't know. So what I did is I just changed the initial condition. And you see, this is the type of motion where one of the modes has stopped, and the other one is going on. could put it with me some spaceship, and go to a place where the gravity is different, right? Why not? So what would happen? So if gravity changes, then basically what will happen is both this term and that term will change. So let's try to see what happens on the Moon. It's a little bit not completely clear what's going on, but you see, actually the motion is kind of a little strange. Look at the red one. The red one is stopping. Then it's going halfway out. It looks kind of messy, doesn't it? center mass of the system or just one of the two --? BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: This one, I think, this one is justOne of them. Actually, the one-- on the difference-- it normally doesn't matter. What matters this is the frequency and how these move to the other. So let me now talk about this thing, which is called beat phenomenon, because when you look at the motion of one of those objects, or the difference between them or whatever. BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: I don't have to go to Jupiter to modify it, because this one is just a little mass here, right? [TONE] Ah, cool. So now, this thing is probably-- I know it's a period, a fraction of a second,right? Yes? AUDIENCE: Should both of those sine and cosines have Ts in their arguments? BOLESlaws: Of course always. They are both time dependent, yeah. sort of early on, to instead of, so far, when we talked about pendula, we describe their motion in terms of motion of number 1. It turns out we can rewrite the equation into some sort of new variables, where, so-called normal coordinates, where you'll simultaneously describe both of them and then kind of mix them together to have a new formula. So you do change of variables. So instead of keeping track of x1 and x2 independently, you define something which I called u1, which is simply x1 plus x2. then you can say, ha, ha,. I can I can introduce normal variables and make things simpler. But at the end of the day for complicated systems that work is the same. But for simple systems like this one where there is a good symmetry, you can do it. Anyway, so I think we are done for today. And on Tuesday, we'll continue with forced oscillators. All right? Thank you. "I think we're done for day one. We'll continue on Tuesday," he said.