More than half of large US firms plan to use AI within the next year to automate tasks that were previously done by staff in a bid to cut costs boost profits and make their work more productive. The New York Times reports that generative AI could automate activities equivalent to 300 million full-time jobs around the world. open ai's chief executive that's Sam mman says governments will need to assume the bulk of responsibility in supporting workers AI labor market disruptions and the question will employees just end up training AI systems only to them be replaced by them. One quarter of employees saved a combined 50,000 hours. At.at what that's allowed you to do I mean as you said free up time allow those staff to do other things. I mean how does that work how do we square that Circle well I think like you know any other uh benefits of becoming more efficient or more productive it is now spending more time on higher value impact work in your job those are the core benefits that we've seen from our teams instead of spending you know 10% of your time looking for information. Cisco's chintan: There's a danger that we focus on all of this and on what it can deliver but frankly it needs people that understand it. Salesforce's Natalie: How do you make sure that AI is used to democratize access to jobs access to different experiences. The Vatican's call by the Vatican is really centered on the fact that we can't lose sight of human dignity as we develop systems that can actually create an inclusive future for all. The UK's new government's policy they're very thin on AI and that was a real moment for this new government to say we need to train everybody up in AI. were most at risk because of automation. People are realizing you have to throw out the door any ideas you had about who is really at risk and say every job is going to be changed. We just hope that the workers whose jobs are changing have a voice in saying how yeah it's turkeyy is not going to vote for Christmas are they if those are the ones that could find their jobs being replaced. There's uh there's so much in there and Stephanie just a final thought from you in all of this about briefly if you will. I think we also have to be realistic you're not just going to suddenly go get an engineering degree in two weeks right learn cyber security overnight um these are these are highly complex skills that require usually years of training so this will involve I think a sort of again look at the Danish model of the government and companies working together to sponsor re-education and retraining for workers. This is a total pivot of our economy uh Stephanie really good to have you with us again guing us through all of this and now Emma thank you so much.