The coherent state has a simple definition, simple but subtle. It's an eigenstate of the annihilation operator, and it has a complex eigenvalue alpha. The person who popularized those states was Glauber, and he got amply rewarded for that. We are now using the coherent states to look at any other quantum state of the electromagnetic field, any statistical operator which describes photons by forming the diagram matrix element of the statistical operator with alpha. And now we realize that coherent states are not as wonderful as I believe. look at a number state-- Well, you often know in quantum mechanics, number and phase are complimentary. If the number of photons is fixed, you know nothing about the phase. And indeed the quasi-probability of a numberState is a ring. It has no phase. It's completely random phase over the 2 pi circle. The energy is sharp of aNumberState, since the energy is e squared. But what you get is also something blurred on the order of unity. In quantum mechanics, the coherent state is a minimum uncertainty state. The product of delta x delta p is just-- is it h-bar or h- bar over two? One of the two. And therefore, you can never have a quantum state which is less fuzzy than the coherentState. If this area is determined by Heisenberg's uncertainty relation, what can be maybe deform the circle into an ellipse, and these are three states of light? That's what you're going to do in the second half of the class. have a product which is fully symmetric i in the ordering of x p, which is anti-normal or normal. The reason why I picked for the course Q of alpha is that it's a real probability, it's always positive. The other guys, P of alpha, can be positive or negative. And also, W of alpha can be negative or positive. But the fact is all three have their advantages and disadvantages. So they all have pluses and minuses. And as a result, it can be written like this. the coherent state is now not this Gaussian. It doesn't have thisGaussian distribution as a course of probability. The probability of the coherent state alpha has a delta function peak at alpha, which is sort of nice. And the number state is not a ring of a finite radius. You would naively expect the energy is sharp. The square root of the energy's electric field, shouldn't it be sharp? And indeed, it issharp. It's actually worse than aDelta function. W stands for Wigner distribution, which is something you actually find in most quantum mechanics textbooks. The Q and P distribution are more common in quantum optics. All the three distributions are the same. It's more sort of on the level of whether something is a delta function or has widths unity. So on the small scale, it matters. But if you map out something on a bigger scale, they are all related to each other. And for the rest off today and the next class, when I project onto the vertical axis to get the electric field, I'm not completely rigorous which of the three functions I've really chosen. Coherent states are minimum uncertainty states. Coherent states were maybe invented by simply saying, We have an harmonic oscillator data. We want to find the minimum. uncertainty states for which the uncertainty in x and p, when expressed in. natural units, is the same. The fluctuations of the intensity are usually expressed by the second order temporal coherence function, which is what we want to introduce now. It's simple. But I always feel that if you really appreciate the quantum mechanical character, you have to know the classic description first. In quantum mechanics, the expectation values would need averaging over time, not over ensembles of I of t. In classical physics, you can determine an ensemble average by taking an ergotic system and observing it at many, many times. The idea is that one system as time goes by will sample all possible states. So in other words, if you switch on a light bulb with a stable power supply, that the light emitted by the light bulb will go through all possible quantum states as time evolves. of tau is we measure the intensity now and a little bit later. But measuring the intensity really means absorbing photons. So what is more closely related to an experiment how you measure the correlation function is you want to look at the probability of absorbing 2 photons. This suggests that experiments where we look at two subsequent clicks of a photomultiplier where we determine the photon correlation, that this is measuring a correlation function, which, for quantum states of light, should be defined as the expectation value of a dagger. Professor: As long as we limit ourselves to a single mode of the electromagnetic field, things are independent of tau. He says if g2 of t Tau changes, it comes because you have several modes. But if you have one mode, there is no coherence time, he says. Professor: In your homework, you will show immediately that the g2 function is related to number fluctuations. It's related to an average and an n-squared average, and it's independent of time. Vladan Vuletan: Coherent states, as I've just shown you, are very classical. They've always a g2 function of 1. And attenuation is not changing it. So a coherent state with an expectation value of 1 photon is not a single photon. But of course, there are ways how you can get single photons. And this is, well, you start with single atoms. Namely, if you have a single atom in the excited state, it can emit only one photon. So that's a way how we can create non-classical states of light. The Hanbury Brown Twiss experiment was the first experiment which really looked at g2 functions correlations. It was the beginning of quantum optics and modern experiments with light. The classical limit is always a limit of high intensity, so at any given time, you have a ton of photons. If you put a light bulb into a cavity or couple the light from a light bulbs into a fiber, the light becomes spatially a single mode. That's the only way how you can distinguish a lightbulb from a laser beam. The only property which distinguishes a laser from the thermal light source-- we're not taking advantage of it. You cannot create an intense enough single mode light source unless you use stimulated emission into a single mode. There are LEDs or semiconductor devices, which provide photons with interesting statistical properties. The correlation function for, for example, an LED light-- that's not really a thermal source. It's not described by a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. It would be closer to something for a laser, even though there is no cavity.