This is part 2 of a guide to clinical reasoning or how to create an accurate differential diagnosis from a patient's presentation. In the first part I reviewed a practical five-step bedside approach to clinical Reasoning. In this part I will demonstrate how to use this approach with an actual patient case at the student level. I present this patient to you the same way in turn might present the patient to his or her attending on rounds or to their colleagues during a morning report or teaching conference as I present the case I'll keep a running list of the key features of the presentation. The patient is a 75 year old woman presenting with epigastric pain for four hours. The pain is relatively well localized to the midline in the region between her ankus and xiphoid process. There did not seem to be any particular trigger and the duration from initial onset to its maximal intensity of 8 out of 10 was about 45 minutes. The patient has refused to attempt to eat or drink anything since the pains onset because she is concerned that it will concert a vomit which she has not yet done. The patient is a 75 year old woman with abdominal pain for four hours it is epigastric well localized progressed over 45 minutes is constant with no exacerbating or alleviating factors and associated with nausea from the rest of her history. She has hypertension diabetes moderate alcohol use smoking and is drinking water from a newly drilled well on exam she is MA in moderate distress she has a borderline temperature tachycardia and tachypnea. The next step is creating the problem representation using precise medical terminology of the most highly relevant aspects of the patient's history exam and diagnostic tests. There is PUD in the absence of an ulcer perforation there is not a very reliable means of distinguishing PUD from gastritis on clinical grounds. She simply sounds just a little bit too sick for this diagnosis then there is food poisoning and gastroenteritis. Wiles certainly can become contaminated with enteric bacteria but for this to happen with a brand new well it would imply that they literally drilled it into a patch of pre-inoculated earth. Her cardiovascular risk factors put her at risk of this. A pulmonary embolism can cause abdominal pain but as with acs would not be expected to cause abdominal tenderness. The patient has no major risk factors for RPE and has no shortness of breath. There are no causes of four hours of epigastric pain in which we would expect the troponin or CK to be abnormal even in the event of RPE. It's possible to present with a PE with just pain this case is just not what a PE looks like either in its classic presentation or even atypical variations. that the patient had an acute MI it really is too soon for these enzymes to become elevated and so therefore they probably should not be key features. The guaiac negative stool was critical in establishing the problem representation in step three. The history of the newly drilled well depending on where you are in your training is the most interesting. The combination of acute abdominal pain nausea and a possible contamination of well water is all consistent with heavy-metal poisoning specifically arsenic and lead this brings up an important point. element does not fit into the framework yet still seems to be a key feature the framework must be incomplete in this case I would add another category of diagnosis to our four existing categories of epigastric right upper quadrant left upper quadant and chest that fifth category is acute abdominal pain secondary to systemic toxic metabolic problems. The four major members of this group are heavy-metal poisoning a rare genetic disorder called acute intermittent porphyria another virgin etic disorder called familial Mediterranean fever and finally angioedema for any of these to be the final diagnosis this patient would need to have an atypical presentation of a rare disease.