David KAISER: Today we're going to be talking about the kind of invention or the hybridization of a whole new subfield within physics that now is often called particle cosmology. It studies the smallest units of matter, the fundamental forces and elementary constituents of matter. It asks about what role they might have in shaping, really, the fate of the entire universe. The field is doing pretty well these days by other measures. Its annual budget just within the United States is on the order of $1 billion a year. This is a $1 billion area of study with devoted colleagues all over the world, not just here in the United States. There are on average two new physics papers, two new preprints posted to the central preprint server archive.org every hour of every day just in this subfield. And I find that all the more astonishing since this field literally didn't even exist 45 years ago. So how did this come to be? There's a very compelling story and the story that we will take some time to look at today. Einstein was inspired by some of Mach's writings on this. Mach himself didn't call it Mach's principle. But it was attributed to Mach by Albert Einstein as early as 1918. So from the early days of the study of general relativity, it was often framed as a question. Do we have to think about the distribution of matter throughout the whole universe in order to make sense for why this block slides down this inclined plane at a certain rate? Local inertial effects, are they somehow tied to cosmological distributions? In the 1950s and '60s, a number of high-energy theorists were trying to put together these highly symmetric models to account for things like the nuclear forces. These nuclear forces are somehow mediated by particles exchanging certain kinds of force-carrying particles. There were other instances of that, cousin models, that were getting a lot of attention throughout the 1960s for the other main nuclear force, for what's called the weak force rather than the strong force. That is to say the force that causes things like radioactive decay. self-evidently of short range, unlike gravitation or electromagnetism, which, in principle, can extend arbitrarily long distances. The nuclear forces really exert themselves across nuclear dimensions, very tiny fraction of the size even of a single atom, let alone macroscopic scales. The question of mass turns out to have been on many specialists minds in the 1950s and '60s, but as embedded in quite different-sounding conversations. So let's look a bit more at some of the proposed models of the nuclear force. The Brans-Dicke theory of gravity was published in 1961 by Carl Brans and Robert Dicke. It was an attempt to modify Einstein's theory of general relativity in response to this challenge of Mach's principle. The idea was that instead of having a single constant unit strength of gravity, Newton's so-called constant actually could vary because it was actually a dynamical field. And this was basically to control how much their version would depart from the ordinary version of relativity. In 1979, two separate theorists working independently of each other suggested that the two fields might be literally the same, not just comparable or considering side by side. Alex asks, was it an accident that both parties chose phi? Not really, I see something come up in the chat. And so what's changed over time? That's what we'll pick up on in the next part of the show. Back to the page you came from. Click here for the next episode of The Physics Show. It was not a rule but a pretty widespread convention by that point that a field that had no spin-- so a scalar field-- would often be labeled by the Greek letter phi. The Greek letter psi was often reserved by this point for spin 1/2 particles. So the notation isn't super surprising that it was so similar. But the rest of it that is a new hypothetical state of matter, it pervades all of nature, everything else interacts with it, that's what gives rise to mass. more than just the letter that they chose. There was a lot of what we might have considered similarities. And yet, the two sets of ideas really were treated so separately. By the end of the '70s, things did not look very good for Brans-Dicke gravity experimentally. In fact, Einstein's theory was not highly favored, and that's why everyone else started paying attention on the gravity side of the field. So we might wonder, well, was it changes in data? Did experiments force a new evaluation? evidence, a big fat goose egg nothing in favor of the Higgs-Boson until July of 2012, or if you're extra generous, maybe December of 2011, the first hints experimentally. So it wasn't a new experiment. The main story that's mostly given is actually hearkens to changes in ideas and, in particular, on the particle physics or particle theory side. And these are brilliant and beautiful ideas. These ideas are well worth appreciating. I just don't think of the whole story. asymptotic freedom. And actually, it's the reason why our friend and colleague here at MIT, Frank Wilczek, received the Nobel Prize. So this was work introduced by Frank and his then advisor David Gross, and independently by a different very young grad student at the time, David Politzer. And what they found was that the strength of the strong nuclear force, that QCD force that we talked about quite a bit at the end of last class session, that the force actually decreases with the energy scale. The effects that Frank Wilczek, David Gross, and David Politzer were talking about would be noticeable exponentially higher energies, right? Well beyond anything that can be achieved even today, let alone in the 1970s. So it's suggested that if one could ever get to really super crazy high energies, you might see some very qualitatively different behavior among nuclear particles-- really cool, a very interesting set of ideas. The present-day experiments at the Large Hadron Collider are here. idea from asymptotic freedom. The force strengths look like they might converge. It's not just that these two get stronger with high energy, and this one gets weaker. The idea was that maybe all of these highly symmetry mediated forces that we see as very different at these low energies-- they have very different behaviors and characteristic strengths-- maybe they're all signs of a single force. That would unite these three forces of nature into a single one modulated by a single strength, a single effective charge. That was called GUTs. In the late '60s and early '70s, physicists saw a really dramatic change in the kind of infrastructure for the discipline. The US budget for that subfield fell in half in just four years. The field that had, so to speak, the most to lose or lose during this reversal of fortune was high-energy particle physics. We can ask a bit more that's very coarse-grained, but we can dig in more and look at subfield by subfield. the discipline, including explicitly more focus on gravitation and cosmology. So that means that more and more departments, including very elite trend-setting departments across the country, start rushing to offer new graduate courses in general relativity. Questions on that field, really for the first time in the U.S., start showing up regularly on the general exams for physicists across all fields, all specialties, not just those who wanted to study relativity. And you see a market response as well. You see a flood of new graduate-level textbooks on general relativity on Gravitation and Cosmology-- twice as many published in the 1970s versus the 1960s. vast majority of those came really in the later '70s, in the wake of these pedagogical reforms. So remember that big report comes out in 1972. You start seeing curricular changes as early as '73, '74. By '75, '76, '77, you start seeing, in some sense, the market respond with many textbooks being really rushed into print. Some of these textbooks were basically mimeographed lecture notes. And now there's very, very fancy books published in a more typical way. for more than half of my life, to his great chagrin. He's won a number of awards, gold prizes and that big award-winning fella. But the award that I take most pleasure in is the fact that he won Boston's Messiest Office. So yes, we'll work on that. Let's see. Fisher says, on the chart of interactions with the field strengths, are those groups? Yes. Fisher, thank you. That's right. So I was avoiding the nomenclature, but you're quite right. a continuous unitary symmetry, which is like saying you could rotate the electron field by any continuum amount, and the equations remain unchanged. The photon only has to mop up a relatively simple symmetry, the U1 gauge symmetry. Whereas SU2 was what I was pointing to when I was referring to the weak nuclear force. That's a more complicated symmetry structure. And that's the symmetry group that these force-carrying particles-- the W and the Z particles-- are invented to enforce. Tony Zee and John Wheeler came up with the idea of a field phi pervading all of nature, all of space, with which other matter interacts. The idea was that this local strength of gravity, Newton's constant, would get anchored to a very small value when phi gets stuck at a relatively large value. They suggested maybe it's because it's arising from some broken symmetry, much like the Higgs-Goldstone mechanism, the field is dynamical, but it's getting stuck. Lee Smolin was the other person who independently introduced that broken-symmetric theory in 1979-- same year as Tony Zee. He was actually, from the start, combining the two fields, both in the courses he took and eventually with his advising team for his thesis and for his dissertation itself. So unlike this accident of trading apartments in Paris and reading a few preprints, more and more members of Lee Smolin's generation were going through a training like his, partly by design, in the wake of the National Academies report. does exactly the kinds of things that Smolin and Zee had been doing, trying to unify the Brans-Dicke and Higgs field. And in turn, these new folks, especially people like Mike Turner and Rocky Kolb, went on to become real institution builders in their own right. Not only had they been trained to think carefully at this new interface, they helped really accelerate the trend. So it goes from who even thought of it to who wouldn't even try that? What counts as natural can shift in a pretty short time scale. the hall from Alan's. And by a quirk of the old building 6, we had the same key. A single key would open the whole hallway. Couldn't get rid of it now. And one time, my parents were visiting. And I basically broke into Alan's office. They couldn't believe me when I described what it was like to try to work with this person. So I actually broke into his office to show them the safety violation, fire code violation, horror show that was the den of entropy. So that's a true story. soon, everyone. Soon, everyone will be able to play together again. Soon. Everyone will be playing together.soon. Everyone. Will be. Playing together again soon.soon,everyone. Everyone, playing together againsoon.soon,. everyone. soon, everyone, will be. playing together once again. soon.everyone. will be Playing Together again.soon! everyone. will. be.playing together soon. soon! Everyone. will play together soon! everyone will.be. playing again soon! soon.