HONG LIU: We are going to talk about chiral fermions. We will look at the specific representation of gamma matrices. When the S is block diagonal, that means, when I write psi-- so, psi-- have four components. That means that the upper two component and the lower two components-- they don't transform to each other, OK? They only transform within themselves. And so there are two ways to reduce it, and one is called the Majorana fermion. HONG LIU: You don't need four components to be able to transform under Lorentz transformation. At least two components can already transform. So this tells you, in a sense, that the LorentZ covariance only requires two component spinors. So we have to do a little bit of work to do much work if you actually find the right trick to do this for any choice of gamma matrices. So you can check yourself that the gamma 5 is actually Hermitian. You need i for this to be true, OK? You can also take the product of all the gamma matrix together and then with a factor of i, OK?" Without the chiral symmetries, there's no pion. Symmetry is only present in the classical level but not in the quantum level. And, again, that plays a very important role in particle physics, actually. It's also important in many condensed matter systems, like liquid helium, et cetera. Will not go into detail. The pions-- they essentially come from the Chiral symmeetries. And actually understanding how the pions come from them was a Nobel Prize to Nambu. HONG LIU: If tilde is just some other constant, then you multiply gamma 5. So, here, we can rewrite a little bit differently. We can consider rewrite this alpha L and alpha R in terms of the following. Let's consider the two transformation-- one transformation, psi L, and psi R transform the same. And the other transformation is that they transform oppositely. They transform in the opposite phase, OK? So I write the alpha-- and this writing is like that. HONG LIU: In physics, actually, the massless case actually gives you very much richer structure, normally, than the massive particle. Mathematically, it's because the representation of the Lorentz group is very different from the massive case. In Euclidean space, you continue gamma 0 to gamma 4. And then you reserve gamma 4 for that. Then the gamma 5 is the next one you take.this? Yes. Other questions? Yes, I'm happy to answer. HONG LIU: In the Dirac spinor, which we have talked about so far, is four components. In the chiral spinor we talked about, you have two complex components. The next one I'm going to talk about is the Majorana, in which case, I would argue, we have 4 times 1 real component. And, now, let's talk about the last case-- this case, which is-- you have four real components, OK? So what do you do? Again, we follow the similar strategy to see whether it's possible to have fourreal components. But, in principle, you don't have to choose them to be unitary. OK, so, now, let's double check. So let's check that star star-- so we show that, here, in this representation, this is compatible with Lorentz transformation, OK? So we still need to check star, star is compatible. So it means that the psi prime star should be equal to the same as B psi prime. So that means this iscompatible with LoreNTz transformation. B when you act on sigma mu B minus 1. So that gives you minus sigmaMu, nu, star, OK? So this is obvious because sigmamu, nu has i there. And, otherwise, the B takes each gamma matrices there into star. So we have used this trick many times. Yeah, and then so we get a very nice relation that, under Lorentz transformation, again, is generated by this B, related to this B matrix. So B, in this case, can only be gamma 2. we have-- so this real scalar theory-- we can see that before. So this theory has a discrete symmetry because this is invariant under phi. It goes to minus phi, OK? And so this is-- if you do it twice, you go back to itself. And there are also spacetime discrete symmetries. So you can have so-called time reversal, which corresponding to your t. Then you revert all the spatial direction. So comment that you can ask why we actually reverse all three directions. How about if I just reverse one direction or reverse two directions? you take that phase to be pi-- say, exponential i pi-- and then you take to be minus phi. And so, in that case, this is part of the continuous symmetry. But, here, there's, nevertheless, another discrete symmetry. Can you see what is the other independent discrete symmetry here? Yes? Good. You can exchange phi to phi star, OK? It's a complex conjugation. And this is often called charge conjugated.