Chef Todd Moore shares with you the seven basic skills that I think everyone should have to cook food consistently in the kitchen and be proud of the results. If you already have all seven of these skills and cooking techniques great you can work for me on the other hand if you only have one or two of these Skills that's still fantastic why because I know you'll want to add other skills and learn to cook basic methods know the methods behind all written recipes then you'll be making your cooking a winner every single time. like to cut things up you'll be using fresh vegetables uh anyway uh second in my chef test to anticipate when oil is about to smoke now the skill here is understanding the convective cooking process. When the chef notices the oil starting to change from being perfectly smooth to beginning a convection process then adds the protein product to the pan just before there's visible smoke this is where you get the splattering reaction in the pan. If you give me a chicken breast with a beautiful brown plate appeal that shows your ability to control heat so that the item develops color but doesn't lose moisture or burn you fail this test. one that's lost moisture one that's burned one that shows the lack of involvement in the preliminary steps of the sauté process Chef test number four here's the answer thicken a liquid to make a sauce. A chef that can show me that they pass they take a cup of milk they turn it into a thickened sauce that's shiny that's velvety that has no lumps. Without an understanding of how starches thicken it's difficult to make consistently great sauces this is a skill of someone that knows how to cook. every single time because understanding these methods will allow you to make sense out of any recipe or not even use a recipe. Your increased understanding of how different cooking techniques work not what to cook but how the techniques work and then you'll be creating the things that you want you want them to be. Make sure you get a seed at my webinar [Music] and then come back again and again to try and create the things you want to create. You'll be able to create them again andagain and again.