RAFAEL JARAMILLO: Let's talk about intermediate phases and line compounds. He recalls intermediate phase in a three-phase system. He says the solution model becomes very narrowly shaped, like a pin. All possible common tangents are going to converge at the same point, he says. "I no longer need a solution model. I only need one point," Jaramillo says. 'I can't help myself. I got to draw the mouse-face plot' Magnesium nickel system has a number of different phases. At high temperature, this Laves phase develops some width. But when you drop down to low temperature, both of these intermediate phases appear as line compounds. These are very distinct structures, and they're only occurring at very distinct compositions. That's a hallmark of an intermediate phase. That is a line compound. Let's talk about the size of these vertical segments. And it's often written as delta form. So what is the compound formation energy? It is the free energy change for formation of 1 mole. of compound from the elements in their reference states. So, for example, I might have 2 moles of magnesium in. its alpha phase plus alpha-- let's say HTP-- plus a mole of nickel in its alpha FCC. phase. And these can react to form magnesium 2 nickel. And there's a normalization that you need to apply in order to use formation free energies in free-energy composition diagrams. For example, we need normalization to use delta formation free energy on a free energy composition plot. algebraically-simple point, but it's a conceptual point that it's easy to mess up. So you have to apply that normalization if you need to draw such plots. All right, I want to give you some examples of line compounds in nature and in technology. And then we'll come back to discuss the thermodynamics a little more. Before I move on to some examples, are there questions about this algebra, this arithmetic, the concept of formation energy, the mouse-face plot, anything, anything of that nature? There's an infinity of examples of line compounds. Silicon tends to be a pretty useful additive for copper-based alloys. Doping semiconductors is why we're able to talk to each other over there. Without doping, there is no semiconductor devices, and no electronics revolution. So the fact that you can dope some metals into silicon is as important as the solubility limits can be in the parts per billion. It's a very famous line compound, so on the last P set, you're going to do some problems. gallium arsenide. Where silicon isn't fast enough are the transmitters and receivers of your phones, gigahertz RF networks. Another place you're going to find it is anywhere you need light. And so gallium arsenicide and alloys, thereof-- which we don't show here-- are the basis for all optoelectronics and photonic technology. So right now, we're Zooming. But likely, some part of the data between me and you is carried by fiber optic. Silicon carbide is a refractory-- some people will say it's a ceramic. Some people say no because it doesn't contain oxygen. It's of enormous industrial importance. It also is an emerging semiconductor material for high-power electronics. In 50 years from now, if the idea of a power substation is a thing of the past, it will be due to silicon carbide and similar high- power electronics that are being developed today. And this last one, this is the titanium-sulfur system. This is a neat system because, first of all, it has everything in it. third of the Nobel Prize work that was recognized recently in 2019 with the chemistry Nobel Prize was for work on titanium-sulfide-based cathode. It's a layered material, so you can shove a lot of lithium in it. So these are-- for example, systems that have line compounds and other things. Do we have any questions on reading these, interpreting these, using these? AUDIENCE: Yeah, I have a quick question. So on the bottom left one and the top right one, do they both contain three line compounds? doesn't have to be that way. Here's a case of a line and an element that actually does have a pretty wide, solid solution, great range. At low temperature-- actually, similarly to gallium arsenide at low temperature, it's going to be a really boring free-energy composition diagram. Let's draw what that looks like. So would anyone like to take a stab at how I would draw a free- energy composition diagram for the silicon-carbon system at low temperatures? the free-energy composition diagram. OK, then we move back to the board. I'll just make a couple of conceptual points and then we'll finish up. Comparing solutions at equilibrium to line compounds at equilibrium. Let's imagine an alpha phase and a liquid phase at equilibrium, and I'm going to draw just a representative phase diagram just to have something in mind. Here's alpha. It is liquid. Here is temperature. And I'mgoing to imagine now some equilibrium, alpha liquid equilibrium. I drew one tie line there, alpha Liquid equilibrium. 1/7 of the Gibbs free energy of the IV-III phase. And these phase factions are determined by lever law. This is really the point. When you have line compounds in coexistence in equilibrium, there are no internal composition variables. Whereas when you have solution phases in equilibrium,. the internal compositions are variable. And that's what's led to everything we've been enjoying over the last month and a half. And now we have these cases where the compositions are not there [INAUDIBLE] anymore. Z is determined by charge balance. Oxygen is always O2 minus in compounds. Metals have various oxidation states. Some metals have more than one oxidation state. Z is not a variable. That z is an integer or a rational fraction, and it's fixed-- SiO2, magnesium oxide, Al2O3, so forth. When we return on Wednesday, we're going to talk about the thermodynamics of this reaction. We'll use this property of being line compounds, and we'll use a bunch of other things.