Jake Xia: This is the second time we are having this class. The purpose of this course is really to give you a sampling menu to see how mathematics is applied in modern finance. We will be doing a bit more polling along the way, mainly to get feedback of how you feel about the class. And so hopefully, this will give you enough information to decide this is a field you would like to pursue in your future career. The class will be held every Tuesday and Thursday afternoon from 2:30 to 4:00. On his first day at Morgan Stanley he asked a question about volatility. His desk quant look at him, said-- this is supposed to be options trading desk, so he look at me puzzled. So instead of answering my question, he handed over a training manual for new employees and new analysts. He opened the training manual and looked it through. He actually found his answer. At Morgan Stanley this is not called vega, it's called kappa. So now, I remember to call it kappa, which is actually a Greek letter. I did that in the last 20 years. So the point I'm trying to tell you is, before you dive into any details of mathematics or any concept in finance in this class, just bear in mind, this is a field developed in. the last mostly 30 years, or even shorter. And what you really need to ask questions is-- it's not really is it right or wrong in mathematics, is it wrong in physics? So, how the concepts are established and defined and verified. After 1933 Glass-Steagall legislation, there were two main types of banks. Commercial bank is supposedly, you're taking deposits and lend out the money. Investment bank supposed to focus on the capital markets, raising capital, trading, and asset management. But obviously, after 1999, the Glass- Steagall was repealed. There's no longer that. Some people blame that, and probably for a very good reason, for the cause of 2008 financial crisis. But I want to tell you how currently investment banks are organized. Risk management, nowadays, becomes pretty widespread responsibility. It's not just the corporate treasury's responsibility. Even if you are not a finance guy, you work in a corporate, you just do you import, export, or building a factory, you have to know, actually, what the exposure is. Let's talk about market making. If it's a simple transparent product, everybody pretty much knows where the price is. But if it's not transparent, so what do you do? So, if instead of asking you where Apple is, probably you're going to tell me $495 today. that liquidity, and then takes the risk. They manage the book by balancing those Greeks, which I mentioned earlier. Gamma is really the change of the portfolio. Take the derivative to the delta, or to the underlying spot. Delta is the first order. So gamma, now you have curvature or convexity coming in. And theta is really-- nothing changes in the market. Nothing changes in your position. How your trading book is carrying or bleeding away money. And on top of that, what are the tail risks? What are the events that can actually get you into big trouble? So people use value at risk. There are many examples mathematical relationship which gives you the arbitrage opportunity. Fundamental analysis, you're really trying to understand what's going on in the world. And there are special situations. Some companies are going through particular difficulties, assets are priced very cheaply. So, math is very useful in risk management, which I will give you more-- which is very much a very interesting and challenging area. It's easy to observe a stock in the market, but when it comes to more complex products, they just take one step forward on the complexity, which is the option. Risk management is not a purely mathematical question, but yet, math plays a very important role to quantify how much exposure you have. Trading is really all about how do you risk manage, have the discipline, and how to manage your losses. A lot of people with math background, or in general, people are looking for the so-called holy grail trading strategies. The robotrader, a robotic trader, is a dream. It has its place or its use, but it's a fast evolving market. You have to constantly either upgrade your research and adjust your strategies. If your bank account balance is $800, your choice will be very different from someone has $100,000 in his bank account. Market cycles are typically very long, but people tend to have short memories. How do you really build models? Is the market really efficient? What part is efficient? How do we really apply those theories in our day-to-day risk management or trading activities? So learn the math, learn the finance first, but keep those questions along the way when you are learning. VasILY STRELA: [INAUDIBLE] mentioned that, Apple trades, that now it's $494.4 Yeah, just a couple of [inaUDIBLE]. Well, first of all, no offense to people who were [INAudIBLE], but I just wanted to give an example of [INA UDIBLE]. AUDIENCE: [inaudIBLE]. VASILY STREELA: --because he was working in our group, and it just will give you a little bit of an idea what we will be talking about. what we had, we had the noisy observation of broker data and it was coming out at different non-uniform times. So, we decided to use Kalman filter and to study how it can predict. And that's one of the nice graphs [INAUDIBLE] produced, which again, we will use this strategy and the Kalman filters which he constructed in our e-trading platform in Moscow. Just to remind, the website is fully functional. We will be posting a lot of materials there. Probably most lectures will be published there.