MIT OpenCourseWare is a free, online education platform. MIT OpenCourse Ware courses are free to download and use. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com. The weekly News Quiz pits students against each other to test their knowledge of events in the news. The winner will receive a free copy of MIT Open CourseWare for their next class. Back to the page you came from. Click here to return to the newsquiz page. The Rolex Center is such an iconic building that it also serve a kind of a prestige function, to put the institution on the map in terms of it's a statement. We have a student center here at MIT. People go there to do their banking, their eating, their meeting, and so forth. So we could spend a lot of time on these, but really crisply refining and thinking about the concept is very, very important. So let me very quickly go through the refrigerator case study to show how do we transition from concept to design. When you think about a refrigerator, it's really about preserving food or reducing the spoilage rate of the food. So beside chilling or keeping the food cold, we could irradiate the food or dry it. The key idea is start thinking in this abstract way, and all of a sudden all of these other possibilities become possible. EPFL's Olivier De WECK: Food is pretty essential for humans, this is one of the areas where humans have been very creative. There's a lot of ways to do this. The NASA approach is basically described in the system engineering handbook in the SE engine as step 3 called logical decomposition. So the idea that we need to partition the system and then derive lower-level technical requirements. And then do functional and performance analysis to see whether you have enough detail. And if yes, then you can select that as a baseline, if not, you might have to go back to the red box, which means that architecture didn't work. We have to look for a different decomposition or different architecture. of thinking, these seven principles have been extracted. And then you can say, well, which of these do I feel really resonate with me? All right. Let's move to some of the structured processes for creativity. So the first one is probably the simplest and the one that's used the most. This is known as a morphological matrix. The idea there is that you try to define what are the key features, factors, or decisions that you have to make when you define a concept or an architecture. set. So now be unchained, and within the constraints that are set by the competition, come up with different concepts. And in the homework, what I ask you to do in A3 is try out at least two different techniques, a structured one and an unstructured one and then compare the results. And this will be due in two weeks, and you will have to do it in two hours. And so, in the next two weeks you will be doing your homework.