In automotive design Dynamics plays a very important part because it's not rigid body Dynamics it's a bunch of rigid bodies with springs the Springs are called starts with an S suspens suspensions right and there's a trade-off between how comfortable the ride is and how tightly the car handles. In Dynamics there two sides to it one is how will its various degrees of freedom behave over time if you you know stretch it and let it go and it goes twang you know boing right and you want to figure out how it goes in time that that's analysis. I'm referring to something with no Dimensions but with a finite Mass you know that someone asked me the other day and I just want to be sure to say this. Let's say that you have a particle Point Mass heading that way some direction and let's define its velocity we'll call it a v p okay so I have um two questions both of which you probably know the answers to the first is what is the angular momentum of that particle just from your memory go ahead say it aha. This is a silly term but these are the two conditions yeah Q is fixed right now it just so happens that we often take angular momenta momenta about things like this point of this door about this point so AQ is z everything's good right or you know we're parallel so it vanishes but you know often it's not parallel so you need to be careful that's the point I want to make okay this term will crop up later uh and we'll we we'll it's a pesky term so way account for it or we get rid of it yep. that stuff let's let's examine it from a uh from a basic you know intuition point of view from what we studied so far first of all when is linear momentum conserved forget this in general linear momentum is conserved when what condition occurs no external Force right so let's study this guy this particle as it moves around does it feel an external Force let's do a free body diagram on this particle um o Point p as the particle moves around kind of intuitively which direction is it accelerating in kind of cental right. would have to do one of two things I would have had to either calculate this term or calculate or make you know make my frame attach it to the truck. I've just done it in a very precise way okay so in the end there's no surprise the whole point is to show you they could be surprises but be careful any questions about this all right snap quiz in the next 3 minutes I want you to calculate for me the final velocity literally 3 minutes because I have toDo the dumbbell problem. of the frame what I have now is two particle masses basically a dumbbell and they're attached rigidly by a massless bar massless and I scoot them across and it's rotating it's hurling through through you know across this rink. I'm going to try and identify understand the behavior in fact I'll make it even more complicated by attaching two rockets get it Rockets right to this thing. The Rockets are designed such that they always Point North all right so they always point in in the horizontal Direction in the on the Whiteboard. We're going to do some free body diagrams then we'll figure out the accelerations of both particles and we'll write f is equal to Ma and we have differential equations we'll make sure we have as many equations as we have unknowns. We'll do that but we'll do it without using any moment of inertia Concepts okay so let's write it out so we know that uh let's calculate so the what's the first thing we need to do we'regoing to write f  for both particles.