The coherent state has a simple definition, simple but subtle. It's an eigenstate of the annihilation operator, and it has a complex eigenvalue alpha. The person who popularized those states was Glauber, and he got amply rewarded for that. We are now using the coherent states to look at any other quantum state of the electromagnetic field, any statistical operator which describes photons by forming the diagram matrix element of the statistical operator with alpha. And now we realize that coherent states are not as wonderful as I believe. which is less fuzzy than the coherent state. So this fuzziness here is the intrinsic uncertainty of quantum physics. But then we will immediately start with non-classical states. And that is, well, if this area is determined by Heisenberg's uncertainty relation, what can be maybe deform the circle into an ellipse, and these are three states of light. That's what you're going to do in the second half of the class. But before I do that, I want to be a little bit more accurate about quasi-probabilities. Vladan Vuletan: Coherent states, as I've just shown you, are very classical. They've always a g2 function of 1. And attenuation is not changing it. So a coherent state with an expectation value of 1 photon is not a single photon. But of course, there are ways how you can get single photons. And this is, well, you start with single atoms. Namely, if you have a single atom in the excited state, it can emit only one photon. So that's a way how we can create non-classical states of light. The Hanbury Brown Twiss experiment was the first experiment which really looked at g2 functions correlations. It was the beginning of quantum optics and modern experiments with light. The classical limit is always a limit of high intensity, so at any given time, you have a ton of photons. If you put a light bulb into a cavity or couple the light from a light bulbs into a fiber, the light becomes spatially a single mode. That's the only way how you can distinguish a lightbulb from a laser beam. The way we can distinguish from a thermal state and a coherent state is through the g2. Colin says there are actually more different light sources that just the laser and the thermal light source. There are LEDs or semiconductor devices, which provide photons with interesting statistical properties. OK. We have to stop. Colin. I'll see you on Wednesday. Back to the page you came from."Could we do most of experiments if we just had thermal sources that were very single mode, so to speak?"