Inflationary cosmology is a relatively new subfield that's known as cosmic inflation. It's a framework for trying to understand the evolution of our universe over a huge expanse of time. It uses tools at the interface, not just of Einstein's general theory of relativity, but also ideas about particle physics and high energy phenomena. The asterisks are to remind you there's a set of strictly optional lecture notes on the Canvas site which go into a little bit more detail of some of these parts from the lecture. Astronomers have been trying to explain the structure of the universe for 100 years. One of the tools, the conceptual ingredients, is some theory of gravity. This is the geometry of a warping spacetime, where you quantify things like gradients of space and time. And this is what he had to learn from his friend Marcel Grossmann to learn about the structure and behavior of space time and the universe as governed by Einstein's general theory of relativity. It's a reminder of the need to take this deceptively simple form and apply it to our everyday lives. Astronomers like Edwin Hubble in Southern California were able to collect information about the distribution of distant galaxies. Hubble found this remarkable trend that the further away from us a given galaxy was, the faster it tended to be moving away. Lemaitre was one of the first to start thinking about playing that filmstrip backwards to say if things are moving further apart from each other on average today, and if the universe in general is expanding today, then was it, in fact, smaller at earlier times? In the late 1940s, a trio of physicists began trying to fill in this picture, this primeval fireball picture. They realized that if the universe was very hot and dense at early times, then the conditions in which these elementary particles would find themselves should be quite different than what we find commonly around ourselves today. At early times in cosmic history, the universe should've been opaque. You literally wouldn't have been able to see anything because the mean free path of any given photon would be very, very short. 20 years later, two radial physicists working at Bell Labs, Robert Wilson and Arno Penzias, were using a new horn antenna sensitive to radial microwave and radial band frequencies. This should've been among the most precise instruments available on the planet for that band of the spectrum. And they couldn't get rid of a residual hum. This residual hum in your receiver consistent with an energy of about three degrees above zero, three degrees Kelvin, was really the leftover photons, that remnant hot radiation from the Big Bang. The idea was the whole universe is filled in the early times with very high energy particles that are at early, early times too high energy to form stable, electrically neutral atoms. And so from every part of space, from every single direction in the sky, those photons began to move freely at this single moment in time. And it's like sitting in a bathtub full of these photons. And they're just losing their energy as the overall size of space continues to grow. So the photons aren't coming from that direction of sky the way we think of with point-like sources. There's a galaxy there, a quasar, a particular bright star in our neighborhood. In the '20s and '30s, Edwin Hubble measured a much quicker average rate of expansion than what we have mostly settled on today. The picture was enough to get a small number of people to pay attention to Georges Lemaitre's otherwise quite obscure mathematical solutions. And it was only when paired with observations most famously from Hubble-- Hubble actually had a number of assistants, and other groups began contributing as well. So this is a, I think, safe to say, remarkably successful set of ideas that eventually becomes called the Big Bang model. These convenient coordinates. Then you have to be a little more clever to adopt your clock to make things, again, actually really simple. This is actually called conformal time. That might remind you of our beloved friends, the 19th century Cambridge Wranglers. At least my beloved friends. We looked briefly at the Wrangler stuff at these conformal mappings. We're really doing a Wrangler-ish thing here, very similar idea, to adopt coordinates for the time, for the rate at which we think clocks should tick. According to Einstein's equations, the shape of space could either have a positive geometry where it closes back on itself like the surface of a sphere, an open or negatively curved geometry, or a flat geometry. What controls which geometry you have is this ratio of the actual amount of stuff per volume, the actual density of matter and energy per volume. Robert Dicke introduced this conundrum in 1969, so soon after the discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation when people began to take the Big Bang model more and more seriously. Alan Guth was studying high energy physics and therefore not gravitational cosmology. He liked Tony Zee, accidentally heard some talks about some of his early work in gravitation. He was not originally asking questions about the cosmos, but he was haphazardly encountering some of those questions. If there were a time during which the matter that's filling the universe could be temporarily stuck in a metastable state in which it had some non-zero potential energy, that could have implications for the global shape of space and not just for the behavior of elementary particles. we thought there was an origin to all of time, this Big Bang surface, at tau equals 0. And if you add up the time between tau and when those photons begin to travel freely, there was only a fixed horizon distance. It was much smaller than the smoothness scale that we could measure empirically. Well, if inflation happened, there should've been a very brief period before what had previously been called the Big Bang. So now the horizon distance is larger because there was more time that we hadn't yet taken into account. why the universe is so messy is actually because Alan's been generating the mess in his own office, and it's expanded to cosmic scales. So if you want to study that part of today's lecture, it's probably the most important lesson, you'll ever take away. And I'll be glad to stay a bit longer if people have questions. Again, I'm sorry for running late. Feel free to drop off if you need. Any questions on that? The photos in Alan's office are on Canvas.