HONG LIU: Last time, we talked about this IR-UV connection between the bulk and the boundary. Now let's talk about some further aspects of the duality. HONG LIu: Once you realize there's such relation, since the two sides are completely different objects, so the game is that you really have to do lots of guess work. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu. HONG LIU: There is a conformal symmetry of a d dimensional series SO d, 2. And on this side, there's precisely the same group, which is isometry of Ads5. In N equals 4 super Yang-Mills theory, we discussed last time there are six scalar fields. You can rotate them each other. And this can be considered as coming from the D3 brane. So essentially, you have eight supercharge of the [INAUDIBLE]. So this all together is 32 real superchargers. expanding 1 over N squared. So as we said before, we often do dimensional reduction on S5. Then G5 divided by R cubed, again only related to N given by pi divided by 2N squared. These relations are often useful in the future. So now let's look at [INAUDIBLE] limits of this relation. So classical gravity limit is the same as QFT, Quantum Field Theory in curved space time. But your matter field can fluctuate, h bar equal to 1. a general correspondence between some conformal field theory and some AdS gravity theory. HONG LIU: Yang-Mills theory lives on Minkowski space. And then you say you can imagine that this is the boundary, this relation is related to the bulk and the boundary. And this is a postulate based on that fact. AUDIENCE: So if it's a sort of postulate that's just thinking about it, it's not required that the theory live on the boundary of AdS. HONG LIU: Given this mapping, any operator is due to a bulk field. So for local operator on the field theory side, we can immediately ask questions related to operators on this side. And ask the story about the field on the gravity side, and ask what's happened. We can start developing the relations. So here, I will try to deduce the answer to this question by starting from this relation. Let me actually call it capital Phi. So we've talked about before GS string coupling can be considered as the expectation value of the dilaton field.