Professor Amy Hungerford: Today it is my great privilege and pleasure to introduce Andrew Goldstone, a TF in this course. Andrew is a fourth-year student in the Ph.D. program in English, and he is writing a dissertation on the autonomy of the work of art in modernism. On the syllabus it says that I would be presenting a lecture on censorship in this slot, but that's been suppressed. Next week I'd like you to finish the novel and then read his essay, "On a Novel Entitled Lolita" T.S. Eliot's "Gerontion" is a spoof of Nabokov's "The Old Man and the Gull" Eliot says poems should be autotelic, that means they should be an end unto themselves. Eliot in some ways comes very close to the kind of ideas about art that Nabokovsky holds. The idea that art is its own law, that it responds to no other purpose than art's sake, is important to Nabokovan. The novel has as its only purpose to afford aesthetic bliss, he says, and this goes along with sexual convention. imitate any style; at the same time, a scrupulous attention to the banality of everyday life and all its detail; yet, the constant use of a superimposed structure. In Ulysses, famously, Joyce puts the narrative of the Odyssey on top of a day in Dublin, or in Joyce's earlier novel, A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, a linear narrative in which a young boy grows up is structured as a series of structurally paralleled chapters. Fourthly, Joyce loves puns. So does Nabokov. Nabokov's novel is a kind of parody of real randomness. The artificial has taken the place of the real in the novel. Nothing is initially known to make sense; everything has to be figured out and reinvented. In America, Nabokov says he had to invent this book afterword to America. That he didn't know it already existed is a terrible state of discontinuity with the world. But it has a payoff, which is kind of a payoff in it. Nabokov says the American landscape is already a work of art, already part of a European memory. "Inutile loveliness" is kind of the key word of Nabokov's technique, and he says the novel has as its only purpose to provide aesthetic bliss. So, a European artist actually appears again there, with Claude Lorrain, but kind of made strange: given that knight's move, given a new twist. So--instead of familiar, incorporated into this profoundly strange, vast landscape that gets Humbert's most appealing rhetoric. violent knight's moves, like skipping past the mother's death. Somehow this is skipped past, that--the sobs in the night. There's a kind of lost paradise of European culture which he can't get back, even with this spectacular effort in English. So, that suggests that it's not all to the good; it hasn't been saved by taking up these knight's move techniques; there's still a record of damage. And you should be skeptical of it, but then you should also ask yourself whether you can really do completely without it.