Professor: Can you explain the physical significance of the crystal momentum? Professor: The information about the momentum can be encoded in these spatial variation of the phase of the wave function. Professor: A central property from the Schrodinger equation is at the time variation d dt of p is equal to the expectation value of minus d the potential of x d x. The momentum expectation value is time independent, so it can be written in the form of e cubed, equal to e to the minus i upon h bar p l. the imaginary part of SI complex conjugate derivative, with respect to x, which is the current, in the x direction of SI. And we need this to be imaginary, or we will get no current. So we need the wave function to be real. So if q were zero we would get zero. And the current depends on both the part defined mod 2 pi over l, and the integer, which tells you how many factors of 2pi over l did you have to subtract off to get into that fundamental domain. we just give up on quantum mechanics and say it totally failed? And so this is a totally reasonable question, and I want to emphasize something important to you. That model led to a prediction, which is that if you put a capacitor plate across a perfect crystal, then you would get no current flowing across. And that is manifestly what happens with copper. But the experimentalist comes back to you and says look dude. That is a ridiculous model because the copper isn't in fact perfect. So how do you test the model? Well there are two ways to test-- to deal with the situation. situation, it depends on the system. And exactly how it depends is something that is an active area of research. So we know that these block oscillations are true. We see them in all sorts of different systems that are analogous. But it's one that turns out to be surprisingly difficult to tease apart. So don't throw away the model. Observe that you've modeled the wrong system. If you find a system that fits your-- that is-- that shares the assumptions of your model, that's when you ask did it work. down here in the ground state, and looking back at that band, we know that the band for that ground state looks like this. So, here it is. There's our electron. It's sitting in the lowest energy eigenstate. Is it moving? Well, it's in a stationary state. Is the expectation value of the position changing in time? No. It has some meaningful, well defined time variation of its position expectation value. In order to induce the current, I must put the electron into a higher energy state and in a particular superposition of higher energy states. In order for light to scatter off a crystal, you must have electrons in superposition states so that they can have a dipole and absorb and radiate that energy. In order for that to happen, the light has to excite an electron across the gap. Light along wavelength will not have enough energy toexcite an electrons across this gap into the next band to allow there to be a current, which could oppose the electric field. So we have these two materials which one has the larger band gap? Diamond, because it's transparent. In three dimensions, the gaps are not the same. That they do not remain constant. There's one that changes, one that doesn't. And then this guy has five. One, two, three, four, five. The story changes in a dramatic way. The deformation is where you have a sphere and you stick out your arm. So it's no longer symmetric top. So here we can have states crossing. And there's no nodes here in three dimensions. Because there's nothing preventing states from different-- in different multiplates from having the same energy. When we filled those first two bands, well, there is the first-- so the first band is now filled. And back here , we had an insulator because we had filled bands separated by gap. The gap between the filled band and the next available band. This is actually called a band insulator. Because there are other ways of being an insulators. And this is why Matt wasfing at me. So the answer is that there isn't one answer to that. But what we need is the non-zero band. The probability of finding the particle at point A is given by chi a squared. And similarly, the probability that we find the second particle at b is this thing norm squared. But we also studied the symmetric configuration, which was equal to 1 over root phi, root 2. This should be a correct description of many experiments, this should be totally awesome. But it's deeply disconcerting, because I could've taken these particles, put them in this entangled state, and sent one particle off to a distant planet. And my sister measures this second particle and determines what state it's in. Einstein created a thought experiment which we're going to study in detail next week called the EPR experiment. He left Germany in 1932 December, about three weeks before Hitler took power. And he did so with decisiveness and dispatch and a head of almost all of his. German-Jewish physicist colleagues and those German physicists for whom the Hitler regime was unacceptable. The three of them talk about it. They write the paper and they put it out. And I want to share with you, actually, a really lovely description of the way the problem was represented in a way by a book that I recommend to all of you. Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen argued that the EPR paradox suggested that quantum mechanics was incomplete. They said that if you can perform a measurement, you know that quantity absolutely. But you can't do the-- so on the one hand, quantum mechanics says you can’t know physical reality to this level of precision. And on the other hand, the fact that you can do that measurement violates the relativistic picture of reality. But the question is whether or not the framework of quantum mechanics is somehow unsatisfactory in any formal sense.