RAFAEL JARAMILLO: Let's talk about intermediate phases and line compounds. He recalls intermediate phase in a three-phase system. He draws a free-energy composition diagram in such a case. Jaramillo: All possible common tangents are going to converge at the same point. He says this type of structure is a Laves compound, which is also known as Laves Laves, or Laves' compound. It's a broad structure, he says, and it can be used to develop new materials. agencies around the world have developed in the last century. There are certain silicon-based bronzes that have been developed for that application. Silicon's not an intermediate phase, but it is a line compound. The solid silicon phase appears to have no equilibrium solubility of copper. Doping semiconductors is why we're able to talk to each other over Zoom. The fact that you can dope some metals into silicon is as important as it gets. It's not just an academic point. Without doping, there is no semiconductor devices. The transmitters and receivers of all modern telecommunication devices, including your phones, are based on what's called III-V semiconductors, such as gallium arsenide. Silicon carbide is a refractory-- some people will say it's a ceramic. Some people say no because it doesn't contain oxygen. It's used for grinding, so it's of enormous industrial importance. It also is an emerging semiconductor material for high-power electronics. In 50 years from now, if the idea of a power substation is a thing of the past, it will be due to silicon carbide. we have these composition variables. We're familiar with that. The equilibrium condition, the equilibrium condition dG equals 0 satisfied by common tangents. Now let's imagine two line compounds. B3A2 and B4A3. How did I come up with that? Well, I sketched an imaginary phase diagram, and then I had to follow through on my sketch. And the point is not the complicated thing. It's really, I have some two-phase region down here at low temperature. RAFAEL JARAMILLO: I want to introduce this and get this in your minds. Let's imagine reacting metal M with 1 mole of oxygen to form an oxide. So zM plus O2 gas reacting to form MzO2. What's z? How do I determine z? Anybody? Does anyone know some oxides? Name for me a common oxide that you know. And these oxides are line compounds. That z is not a variable. We're going to use this property of being line compounds in Wednesday's lecture.