Professor: We're describing interaction between the electromagnetic field and atoms. Professor: I want to show you what are the tools to treat those infinity source divergences in a consistent and a systematic way. "I can reproduce this result by going to infinite order in perturbation theory," he says. "Who of you have actually seen those kind of diagrammatic tricks and summation? A few, OK. So it's maybe nice to see it again. But for those who haven't seen it, welcome to the magic of diagrams" at the end of the class on Monday, I told you, well, let's simplify things. Let's get rid of those temporal integrations and multiple integrals by simply doing a Fourier transform. And so therefore, we introduced the Fourier. transform, or the Laplace transform, of the time evolution operator. And this iterative equation where we get the nth order by plugging the n minus first order on the right hand side, this turns now into a simpler algebraic. iterative equations for the Fouriers transform. Z is the energy. And it is the initial energy. If it's a ground state and a resonant photon, we have a problem. The other parts are simple. They don't have any divergences. They are not resonant and such. So what we want to do is now, in some way, give special treatment, factor out the problematic terms. And for the easy part, which has no divergence, we can make any kind of approximation we want. But the resonant part, this needs special attention. light scattering. I just go now and apply to an excited atomic state. So the state we are interested in is the atomic state b and no photons. And the property of the atomic. state is obtained when we know the function Gb of Z. And this is the matrix element between state B0B0 and the time. evolution operator. So we are calculating, of course, the Fourier transform of the time evolution of the state b by the. Fourier. transform through the resolvent G. The real part is this matrix element squared, but double sum. But what we use is the principle part of it, which is well defined in the theory of complex functions. So the imaginary part gets us Fermi's golden rule. And the real part has actually-- remember when we discussed the AC Stark shift. And such AC Stark shifts which appear as self energies, as energy shifts created by the state, this is nothing else than the famous Lamb shift. But remember, we worked so hard with diagrams to make sure that the triangle-- first the square, and then the triangle. we calculate here-- has no resonant structure at the energy Eb. So therefore, we can neglect the energy dependence of that and simply replace the argument E by the energy we are interested in, namely energies close to Eb. This replace, neglect E and set, or replace the dependence by E, by taking the value at Eb. And we obtained, as promised, the imaginary part, which we can approximate by Fermi's golden rule. If we now Fourier transform back and obtain the time evolution of this state, it no longer evolves with theenergy Eb. It has a shifted energy by this self energy. And this is called the radiative shift. But in addition, because of the imaginarypart, it has now an exponential decay.