This is part 2 of a guide to clinical reasoning or how to create an accurate differential diagnosis from a patient's presentation. In the first part I reviewed a practical five-step bedside approach to Clinical reasoning. In this part I will demonstrate how to use this approach with an actual patient case at the student level. I present this patient to you the same way in turn might present the patient to his or her attending on rounds or to their colleagues during a morning report or teaching conference as I present the case I'll keep a running list of the key features of the presentation so they will seem like I am doing step 1 acquired data. The epigastrium would obviously be the most critical anatomic region to include organs that physically lie directly underneath it. Pancreas and small bowel diseases of the stomach which caused acute abdominal pain are many but most commonly are gastritis and peptic ulcer disease in the pancreas. The major structures are of course the liver and gallbladder along with other components of the extra hepatic biliary system. The spleen can cause pain with either a splenic infarct or asplenic abscess. Each diagnosis listed one at a time and review each individual key feature to decide if it impacted the probability of the diagnosis and what that impact was. Here is our framework once again and here are our key features how does one start this process the brute force method would simply be to take each diagnosis listed and review it one by one. Now that we have a framework we move on to the final and hardest step applying the key features to that framework so here is our Framework once again. Here are our Key features. that will increase the likelihood of. establishing the correct diagnosis sooner in outpatient hospital course you. That will. increase the chance of establishing the right diagnosis sooner. that will increase. the likelihood that you will be seen by a doctor sooner in hospital. that you. will be more likely to be admitted to hospital for treatment. that. will increase your likelihood of being seen by doctors sooner in the hospital. and that. you will have a better chance of being treated. of being diagnosed with a condition that is more serious.