Learn how the solar cell device converts sunlight, the input energy, to some usable output energy, which is in the form of electricity, typically, from a solar panel. Learn how to minimize the amount of light reflected or not absorbed into maximizing amount of life that's actually absorbed. Learn about the duality of light, or how to think about light as a particle, or alternatively, as a quantified particle. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on MIT OpenCourseWare. Invisible light is interacting with a very specific type of electron inside of our system. When we start looking at the wavelength dependence of absorption inside of a material, you can have, for example, in the visible range, a decreasing depth of penetration of the light with increasing energy. With x-rays, it's the exact opposite. It's because you're dealing with different types of electrons and the material. And we use that information to calculate engineering relevant parameters such as reflectance of light off of a surface. If I add a coating, for instance, to a window that increases the reflectivity, then the amount of light that is able to escape from the inside to my eyes decreases. With normal incident light, there is a beautiful symmetry involved. So just the same way that I'm losing the ability to see inside, the folks inside are also losing the able to see out. So it's important to think about these processes, both in terms of their reflectance as a percentage and the magnitudes of the light involved. very simple yet very powerful formulation that describes not only the interaction of light with the solar cell material but also light through the atmosphere, light the water, many other forms of optical absorption. And for that, I'd like to call Joe up for a quick demo that will allow us to actually plot out Beer-Lambert's Law. What we're going to be doing is taking many sheets of material. This is just some polyethylene material, a little bit discolored. And we'll be inserting these panes of plastic in the middle. And as we increase the thickness of the plastic, applying good pressure in between to minimize the reflectance. another factor of 2. Why not? There's kind of this sense that it should be exponential. What don't we add some more filter in front, and we'll see what exactly this comes out to be. OK, so we notice that we have some exponential character to be decay of the intensity of the transmitted light through a medium. And the amount that's absorbed is following another trend, which is just 1 minus that. So it's the amount of light that'sabsorbed is following a curve looks something like that. by some sort of scattering intensity within the medium-- and this sigma here can refer to a variety of processes. If we increase the total thickness, we're going to decrease the total amount of light coming through via that exponential function. The alpha, obviously, is going to be very different for our atmosphere than it was for these little polyethylene sheets. Because the nature of the scattering and absorption processes are very different. for the atmosphere than for here, the density of the material and so forth. We're going to look at two different materials, silicon and gallium arsenide. We'll calculate the thickness necessary to absorb 90% of the incoming light at 550 nanometers. Most of these solar cells that you see of crystalline silicon are on the order of 100 microns, a little thicker. But for technological reasons, which we'll get to, you need about that thickness to absorb a lot of light. And I'll pass around some of the materials right here so you can get a sense of how thick they are. 10% of the light that didn't make it, that's going to get reflected back. So if you absorb 90% of. the light on the first pass, you'll absorb 99% on two bounces, right? Or in one bounce, rather, and two trips, two optical path links through the material. So methods to improve optical absorption- generally, these are called light trapping. We also call them light management as a more general term that includes reflection and absorption inside of the. material. Most often, depending on the angle, you have what is called total internal reflection. The record efficiency solar cell that was announced this past year in gallium arsenide was achieved because of good light management. To engineer front and back surface reflectances, you really have to carefully select your refractive indices and your materials if you put on either side. If we go to a refractive index material of minus 1.3, will we change the reflectivity at all? It depends, but the answers here are shown, for this particular system. The absorber is the material, our photovoltaic material, the ones absorbing the sunlight and ultimately going to be generating the charge. So we want to ensure good light trapping inside it. There are fancier ways of light management as well that don't involve light trapping necessarily but light manipulation or even semiconductor manipulation. If we can eliminate the longer wavelength stuff out here, which is heat, performance of most solar cell suffers when they get hot. And so if we manage to do spectral up converting or reflect that long wavelength light away from our device, we can improve performance. surface of a material, let's say right here, then you can cause each node, each point within your material, to lag by an increasing amount, so that your wave front now bends. And that will cause the light, essentially, if you trace through the points of maximum intensity, say the pink, you'll see that the light is bent. And so it's really exciting. There's stuff coming up every day on light trapping and light management. Mostly it's for photonic devices. But they can be transferred over into solar cells as well.