Professor Donald Kagan: We are living in the early years of a polis sometime in the eighth century B.C. The date that's sort of typical for the general phenomenon of colonization coming out of the mother cities of Greece is 750 roughly. But in fact, the earliest date according to Greek tradition, if my memory is correct, was something like 773 where the Greeks date the foundation of what they thought was the earliest colony they ever established -- a place that they called Pithaecusa. Greeks were terrified of the sea for very good reason. The most widely cited reason is simply the desire to acquire farmland. The desire for commerce would have been also important. The Greeks would have had to be damn fools to have settled there without that being in their minds, although some of the places where they settled leave us puzzled, and have the ancients puzzled, too. It doesn't exist, Istanbul. Winston Churchill never conceded that it was Istanbul till the day he died. gotten the permission from your city to go forward, and you go to the Delphic Oracle. Next thing, you got to go home and you have to write up what amounts to a charter of foundation for the city. Recruiting is tremendously important because you need to have a certain number of settlers to make the settlement viable. So however many that is, that is what you try to recruit and you recruit typically at a time when it's easy to get people together so you can tell them the story. Syracuse is an independent polis, autonomous, self-governing, whatever regime it wants. It is not a subject of anybody, not Corinth or anybody else. The most typical, the usual, everything else is an exception is that there are friendly relations between the mother city and the apoikia. Corinth sent out a lot of colonies, which is why we know something about their arrangements. The first battle of the Peloponnesian War was a battle between Corinth and Syracuse. Kagan: The question is who gave permission for a colony to go in the mother city. The best guess and that's the only thing we have. These would have been aristocratic republics at this stage of the game. Corinth always needs that kind of stuff, so we sell you our wheat, you sell us your pottery, you selling good wine that we can't grow yet and maybe never will be able to grow in our neighborhood, so on and so forth. Everybody--all of this is voluntary on both sides of every agreement. coast of Asia Minor on the west, and even around on the bottom and to some degree on the north, and on the islands in the Aegean. So, there has been a Greek--what's the word I want? There is an expansion of the Greek world already by the tenth century, and these folks are now settled down. I might point out that the way the Greeks did their immigration into Asia Minor actually had a pattern so that you can go from north to south and you will find some consistency. as powerful as it used to be, far from it. It has been conquered by now by other peoples. In the sixth century, I think it's around--imagine around 550 or something like that, the Greeks settle a single colony in the Delta of the Nile of Egypt at a place called Naucratis. Going west, would you believe, when you get into what is now Libya, there was a very important Greek colony of Cyrene and that whole region was called Cyrenaica and it was a Greek. You can see Greek and Roman temples there to prove it. is seen to be a tremendously valuable safety valve to the Americans, first as colonists, and then as independent people. Americans didn't have the kind of terrible class warfare and the terrible warfare within cities that the Europeans had experienced throughout most of their history. I mean, fundamentally, Kansas is a colony in a certain Greek sense, all of these places are. So, that's part of the story of why America had the very lucky early history that it had. And that is the proper introduction to the next topic, which I'll discuss next year. No not--it seems like a year, but it's next Tuesday actually.