JACK HARE: Let's do a little recap on electron cyclotron emission. We expect to have multiple different peaks, even from a single particle. These peaks are going to be occurring at frequencies. And we can say this is m equals 1, m equals 2,. m equals 3. And they're evenly spaced. And so, we have these peaks here. But if we neglect that, the frequency depends only on the magnetic field. So, if you see some emission at some certain frequency, then you know that it's been emitted by a region of plasma which has this magnetic fields. what we want to do is measure very small temperature fluctuations. We want to measure temperature fluctuations within the plasma that are maybe on the order of 1% of the baseline temperature. And that 1% is actually extremely hard to measure. And this is because the noise is just too high on these systems. But there are some clever tricks that we play where we use correlations. And I'll talk now about what exactly these correlations are and how they provide us with information that allows us to get a signal out. The idea here is that there was some region over which, in the transverse direction perpendicular to your collection volume, you have a very narrow scale. You can actually collect from a very small region on the order of 100 microns. And if it collimated that beam, that would mean there'd be a focus point at some distance f away-- if this lens has a focal length f, then it will diverge afterwards. So, because of reciprocity, that means that, as opposed to launching rays this way and seeing where they focus, we have rays coming from this. The technique is incredibly powerful because it's enabled people to measure, again, delta on the order of 1%. Someone called it nominative determinism, and they've done it on 1%. And it's used in a variety of applications, but this is an example of what these angle brackets are doing. There are actually lots of different ways of doing this, but there are a few different ways to do correlations, and I'm not going to go into them, but I will give you a citation at the moment. Bremsstrahlung is a term used to describe a type of radiation in a nuclear reactor. It involves electrons being deflected and breaking and emitting photons. There are lots of different ways of doing this, and Hutchinson lists a few of them. What's remarkable about all of these approaches is they all give the same answer with a very slightly different coefficient. But, in some sense, although it's important to get the exact coefficient, it doesn't matter exactly which one of these techniques you use. from the point of view of this course, it makes no difference. Yeah, I think it's kind of remarkable that it doesn't make any difference. So, again, if you want the full treatment, go have a look in Hutchinson. And there's also a long treatment in Jackson of this same problem. I'm just going to quote some results. I kind of already spoiled it now. It's here. For the Maxwellian average, because we can have all sorts of different distribution functions, but our plasma tends towards a Maxwellian. The bremsstrahlung is the irreducible minimum amount of emission from your plasma. Cyclotron emission is a very specific frequency. This is everywhere inside your plasma at all frequencies, like a black body kind of spectrum here. We're going to talk about lots of other effects which produce emissivity which is higher than the bremstrahLung. And that is all you need to do Problem Set 3. Any questions about this? Yeah. And then there will be differences in speed of propagation and things like that. Jack Hare: I don't know if people are using it as a diagnostic. I've not heard of someone using it. But synchrotron light is used as a source of X-rays for diagnosing many other things. So it's interesting in its own right. But I'm not interested in [INAUDIBLE] This is a diagnostics course. JACK HARE: Any questions online while we pause? We're going to do free-bound radiation or recombination radiation. where we have a range of different discrete energy levels that the electrons can occupy. These energy levels are labeled by the principal quantum number n. And the energies of these levels are given by this unit, Ry, which is the Rydberg z squared of our ion over n squared. Up here, infinity, this is ionization. If your electron gets this much energy, it becomes free again. And so, what we're going to see in our spectrum is that this is only allowed if the electron energy fulfills this equation. JACK HARE: We'll go into some ways of actually making some use out of all this stuff in a moment. One use of this is a diagnostic called bolometry. It cares not at all about the detailed spectrum of what the emission is. It just wants to know how much power is being radiated by the plasma. And so, we can say, OK, well, that part of the plasma is clearly radiating too much. What can we do about it? That's what bolometry is trying to measure. have a thick block some distance in front of it so it can't see the plasma. It's the heat transport kappa grad T that gives us the time constant for thermal conduction through the substrate from the absorber to the resistor. The larger tau is the slower our measurement of the radiated power is going to be. And if tau gets very large, because we've got a very thick substrate here, or it doesn't have very good heat transport, then we're going to have a very poor time resolution.