Bolek Wyslouch: How do you convert a given physical system with all the forces, et cetera, into some sort of fixed form, fixed type of notation? We will discuss various interesting-- even though the system is very simple, just two masses, a spring, a little bit of gravity on top of that. The way they behave could be extremely complex, but it can be understood in terms of very simple systematic way of looking things through normal modes and normal frequencies. into a set of equations. So we have a mass, m, hanging from some sort of fixed support, another mass here, same mass for simplicity. We connect them with a string, and we know everything about this system. The spring is initially at its rest position such that when the two pendula are hanging vertically, the spring is relaxed. But if you move it away from verticality, theSpring either compresses or stretches. We assume that this is an ideal system, highly idealized. The magenta is normal mode number 2. And blue and the red are the actual pendula. And the motion of blue and red is simply a linear sum of the two. And this is exactly what-- this is the computer simulation that shows you that one of them is going up, the other one down, et cetera. This is for the certain combination of initial conditions. I could go change initial conditions in my program and have a different behavior. But whatever happens, I would be able to-- it will always be a combination of thetwo motions. BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: I could put it with me some spaceship, and go to a place where the gravity is different, right? Why not? So what would happen? So if gravity changes, then basically what will happen is both this term and that term will change. So let's try to see what happens on the Moon. It's a little bit not completely clear what's going on, but you see, actually the motion is kind of strange. It looks kind of messy, doesn't it? equations. Let's look at these equations here. This is mass 1 and mass 2. So I can rewrite those solutions a little bit different. And what you get is x1-- x1 of t is equal to minus x0 sine of omega 1 plus omega 2 divided by 2 times sine omega 1 minus omega 2 divide by t. So again, we did zero physics here. We just rewrote the simple trigonometric equations. But what you see is something interesting here. There is-- we have those two frequencies which are playing a role. like this. OK? So there are in fact two-- when you look at this picture, you can see two frequencies. One which is clear the oscillation of the-- high-frequency oscillation. But there's also this kind of overarching frequency of much smaller frequency, and this is what corresponds to a difference of two things. So we see this here. We see it on the pendula. But now what we are going to do is we're going to try to hear it, right? So this is a demonstration which maybe it works, maybe not. BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: You can force mathematically, force the normal modes from sort of early on, to instead of, so far, when we talked about pendula, we describe their motion in terms of motion of number 1. It turns out we can rewrite the equation into some sort of new variables, where, so-called normal coordinates, where you'll simultaneously describe both of them and then kind of mix them together to have a new formula. All you need to do is break this one, modify its frequency.