John Stuart Mill is the principle expositor of neoclassical utilitarianism. The rights-utility synthesis signals that we're looking for an attempt to put together both a commitment to utilitarian efficiency that's grounded in science on the one hand, and respect for individual rights that's grounding in the workmanship ideal on the other hand. At the same time, more or less, there were very important developments in moral philosophy that I just want to alert you to. The doctrine that I'm mentioning here is the doctrine that would come to be called emotivism.  neoclassical economists didn't want to do that because they were actually concerned with quite another problem. The problem they wanted to solve was to understand the behavior of markets. They wanted to be able to more precisely to predict what prices were going to be in markets. So moving from cardinal to ordinal utility is going to turn out to have huge ideological consequences, which I'm going to unpack for you towards the end of today's lecture. These indifference curves cannot cross. Can anybody tell us why? Why can't they cross? Wait for the mic. same utility even though they're different indifference curves. Prof: You're on the right track, but what's the problem with their crossing? Student: Because you say I-2 has utility of two, I-3.5 has Utility of two-point-five, but at that point where they intersect they both have to have the same utility. If we're saying that we're indifferent among all the things on this curve we can't have it cross because then we're say here, right, two- point-five is preferred to two. John Rawls: The trouble with utilitarianism is that it doesn't take seriously differences among persons. He says classical utilitarianism says, "Well, if taking all of your utility increases overall net utility then we should do that, because we don't care who has the greatest number of the greatest happiness" John Rawls' argument is half-right, he says, because the truth is that's the classical utilitarianists' doctrine. John Rawl's Theory of Justice: The Case for Justice, the Case for Liberty, and Other Essays, is published by Oxford University Press, priced £16.99. which the radical fangs of classical utilitarianism have been ripped out and it is now a doctrine that is very friendly to whatever status quo happens to be generated in a market system. So it ceases to be this radically redistributive doctrine, and in the process imports into utilitarianism a very robust, some would say, hyper-robust doctrine of individual rights. We'll see how that played out in political theory when we come to look at John Stuart Mills' harm principle next Monday.