In this lecture, we're going to talk about how neurons function and how researchers are able to control that function in order to modify behavior. And this is going to involve also sort of understanding how certain antidepressants, like Prozac, work. And then we'll end by talking about how researchers did this experiment to wake up the mouse. And it all starts with something that I told you about at the beginning of the semester, which is that the plasma membrane separates distinct compartments the outside of the cell from the cytoplasm. of signal known as an action potential. In order to have an electrical signal propagate, we need some sort of electrical property that the cell has that enables this. In a resting state, the cell's resting potential is negative 70 millivolts. If the cell is not getting stimulated by something like a neurotransmitter, the resting potential will be negative 70 million. Stephen suggested opening the sodium ion channels, which would depolarize the cell and make this situation less positive. And so if you open these channels, positive ions are going to flow out. A nerve cell fires an action potential and how it propagates along the entire cell length. In the case of the sciatic nerve, this has to happen across an entire meter, OK? That's a very long distance to propagate this change in electrical signal, at least for a cell. And so we're going to talk about the mechanism. And I'm going to start at the beginning, when this action potential initiates. This is a voltage gated sodium channel. And you can see, it's closed because of this red rod that's a positively charged alpha helix. you to test the function of the neuron in the behavior of an organism. So, in this case, this mouse, the light is shined into its brain, and they're testing a specific type of neuron that is involved in arousal of the mouse. And it's going to wake up right now. There it goes. It woke up. You see now its muscle activity is going, OK? So you can test thefunction of specific nerve cells using this approach, and it's because you have a light-sensitive sodium channel.