Ahern: I have never had an exam where I had fewer questions. There were maybe 10 questions I got on the exam and that was for a class of this side. I find most students are honest. I've only had a handful of situations where in this class, where I've had dishonesty as an issue. The only students I've ever had with serious dishonesty issues actually were in smaller classes interestingly enough. But it has happened here and I do have taped evidence when it does happen. So that's why I do it. Ahern: I hope everybody got how I start my lecture. I don't live consciously, I just blurt it out. Thank you for your feedback. That's not a lot of feedback, but I do appreciate feedback and I'm always happy to listen to what you have to say about exam formats. And I do take suggestions. The suggestion about having other possible choices is one, as I said, I've done and I won't rule out. But other thoughts or feedback, I'm open to 'em, very much appreciate that. Ahern: Using genetic techniques today, it's very easy to alter the genetic code for any of these proteases and change which amino acid is presence at any given place. Researchers have changed, for example, a serine residue of 221, which is the serine, gives it its name, to an alanine. Or changing the histidine position 64 to anAlanine or changing aspartic acid at position 32 to analine. And when they do that, and they compare the activity, so this is the log of Kcat. So Kcat of course is a good measure of velocity and the wild type enzyme has an activity up here. Ahern: There are other types of proteases that behave very much like S1, well like serine proteases. One of these classes is known as cysteine proteased. Ahern: This class of protease is essentially identical to that of theserine protease, at least for our level of understanding. He says the aspartyl proteases, at first glance, look somewhat different. But those similarities aren't all the way through like we see with the cystine prote enzymes, he says. One of these is an enzyme we've been talking about some already, that's the carbonic anhydrase. Carbonic anHydrase can catalyze the conversion of a million molecules of substrate into product per second, per enzyme. The basic mechanisms are the same. We created a nucleophile, the nucleophile attacks the carbonyl group, the peptide bond breaks, and the pieces go their way. This business of creating nucleophiles is not unique to proteases. There are other enzymes that use nucleophile and generation of nucleophile in their catalytic mechanisms. Most enzymes have a fairly narrow pH range where they work that's ideal. Most of our body tissues are at a pH of 7 to 7.4. At pH 9, this enzyme is far more active than it is at pH 7, indicating that a very, very important step is the removal of that proton. The faster the nucleophile can form, the faster the enzyme is going to be. If the enzyme structure is stable at pH 10, the enzyme will be better at 10 than at 7. Because it's easier to make that nucleophile at 10.