Prof: You know why I am dressed up? When I do this course and when I do the first half of the French course I do a lecture on the bourgeoisie, the middle classes. Middle class was a form of self-identity that was constructed in the way being a worker was constructed, or being a noble. When you look at me dressed like this, please try to think, knowing me a little bit as you do, why it was that it meant a lot to dress like this in the nineteenth century. In the nineteenth century one of the things that happens with the French Revolution and with Napoleon is that the middle-class values seem to be something to be emulated. In using and indeed insisting on the term "middle classes," what I'm suggesting is the enormous complexity of the middle class. There wasn't just one middle class, yet the middle classes shared some cultural values and symbols in common and when challenged by ordinary people could snap back in an extremely cohesive class-based manner. The word "bourgeois" has really more cultural connotations, maybe, than objective or social categorization. The French Revolution, and here's an important point, I guess, opened the way by removing legal blocks in very many places to the career open to talents. The bourgeoisie did anything but that. Work was part of how they believed to get ahead, and getting ahead is what they wanted to do. Of course, it was always in the nineteenth century sort of classic to poke fun at bourgeois culture, and in some cases the lack of it. But there's been an awful lot of good work done on the middle classes. class lived without passion, and were philistines, and that sort of thing. The middle class formed voluntary associations, and many of these were for extremely charitable purposes, particularly in Britain. The Society for the Protection of Cruelty to Animals, these sorts of organizations really are one of the classic examples of bourgeois voluntary associations doing good things. They also get together to hang out with each other and sort of try to gauge who has more money than the other, and they get together for social reasons in the coffeehouses of England. In France after the Paris Commune of 1871 they start building churches in the working class districts perched on the edge of cities. Religion for the middle classes has a greater role in their lives than in working class cities. The old Hanseatic port cities of German, the German free cities that would become part of unified Germany in 1871--northern German cities in general, like Bremen, and Lübeck, and Hamburg above all. Barcelona is a really natural economy based on important economic relations between its hinterland and the world. times, as you know, in the French Revolution--;the French revolutions, and in the revolutions of 1848. These folks are here, too. This is your basic petty bourgeoisie. People are always dumping all over them needlessly. If you've ever read the great French novelist--;he was paid by the word, but Balzac is really the novelist of the bourgeoisie. When he describes Paris and the seventeen to nineteen percent of the population who are increasingly living in the western part of Paris, he describes it as a jungle. The notion of childhood, childhood didn't exist for ordinary people. Nobles did not send their children to public schools or even to private schools. The idea of a children's room, of having your own room or a room shared with a sibling, was something that was just inconceivable for the majority of Europeans. The middle class wants to be seen rather like the Dutch in the seventeenth century. They wait in line to go to theatres. This is all Daumauau, the piece that you're obliged to swallow after dinner. In the last one minute thirty-five seconds that remains to me, the bourgeoisie, the middle classes, want the right to bear arms. They want to be in the national guard. The national guard might hypothetically be there in case there was an invasion of France or Germany by, I don't know, some distant place, the Fins or something most unlikely. But the main reason they wanted to join the national Guard was to be able to vote. You had to be defined as a property-owning citizen to have the rightto vote. these bourgeois panicked and start going into a house full of very ordinary people and simply shooting them all. The light lines disappear with Daumier. He did another one of these after a massacre in 1848 in Rouen and it's been lost. We don't have it. The rue Transnonain, where this happened in the center of Paris, simply disappeared. It didn't quite disappear from the collective memory of people thinking about Parisian things. In conclusion, the middle classes extremely vary. They share much. They have a common material culture. They want to vote.