David Kaiser: particle cosmology is a new subfield within physics. He says it studies the smallest units of matter, the fundamental forces and elementary constituents of matter. Kaiser: The field is doing pretty well these days by other measures. Its annual budget just within the U.S. is on the order of $1 billion a year, roughly, he says. It is really a booming, booming subject of study, Kaiser says. The field literally didn't even exist 45 years ago, he adds. Evidence for the Higgs-Boson wasn't found until July of 2012, or maybe December of 2011, the first hints experimentally-- well past the period we're talking about. The main story that's mostly given-- I alluded to this in the very beginning of today's class-- is actually hearkens to changes in ideas. Two of these sets of ideas, in particular, are usually pointed to-- and they came in rapid fire in 1973 and 1974. The first of them is called asymptotic freedom. That suggests the behavior of quarks and gluons might be really different at very high energies. a continuous unitary symmetry, which is like saying you could rotate the electron field by any continuum amount, and the equations remain unchanged. The photon only has to mop up a relatively simple symmetry, the U1 gauge symmetry. SU2 was what I was pointing to when I was referring to the weak nuclear force. That's a discrete symmetry structure. SU3, that refers to three different color charges of quantum chromodynamics. And so therefore, the gluons have still a different set of properties, so that's right. soon, everyone. Soon, everyone will be able to play together again. Soon. Everyone will be playing together.soon. Everyone. Will be. Playing together again soon.soon,everyone. Everyone, playing together againsoon.soon,. everyone. soon, everyone, will be. playing together once again. soon.everyone. will be Playing Together again.soon! everyone. will. be.playing together soon. soon! Everyone. will play together soon! everyone will.be. playing again soon! soon.