JACK HARE: Let's do a little recap on electron cyclotron emission. We expect to have multiple different peaks, even from a single particle. These peaks are going to be occurring at frequencies. These tend to be in an optically thick regime. We can go back and we can use these measurements to identify three specific points inside our plasma that we've been using as part of this example. But, in general, you can get it all through the way through the plasma. temperature as a function of frequency. Then we can say, well, that frequency corresponds to a certain magnetic field. And then we can says that magnetic field corresponds to an spatial coordinate. This is a technique which will give us, by looking at the spectrum for lowish frequencies, the first or maybe the second harmonics of this cyclotron emission. We can work out what the temperature is as afunction of space. So this is why this is a powerful and popular diagnostic in MTF. want to understand in plasmas so that we can build an economically viable fusion reactor. Now, the fact that the noise is too high does seem like a big limitation. But there are some clever tricks that we play where we use correlations. And I'll talk now about what exactly these correlations are and how they provide us with information that allows us to get a signal out despite the overwhelming [INAUDIBLE]. So our setup here is borrowed from ASDEX Upgrade. And, in effect, I referred to Alex Creely's PhD thesis, which you can find online if you want more information. Many oscillations. And so, it will average out to 1 or something like that. So it's some DC offset that we can subtract off after. So all this is doing here is mixing the signal down so it gets to a regime that we could effectively digitize. Yeah, another question. Anyone know how micro splitters work? Looking at you? STUDENT: RF. JACK HARE: The answer I got is that you can actually collect from a very small region on the order of 100 microns. was RF, which I don't think is much more satisfying than my answer. So, yeah, there are circuits which will split microwaves. What they were actually doing with this system is all of these were very tunable. And so, if they wanted to look at turbulence in the edge or turbulence near the center, they could actually tune all their bandpass filters to do that. But this is getting way beyond what I was hoping to talk about on this. So let's get on to correlation ECE see what that does. situation where, at some point, your eddy has moved across, and these two are no longer correlated because the next two are correlated. So it-- yeah. I think we're reaching the limits of my knowledge. Now we're going to go to bremsstrahlung. Some people these days just call this breaking radiation, which is just the translation from the German, and that's a perfectly reasonable term to use. There are lots of different ways of doing this, and Hutchinson lists a few of them. at synchrotron, yes. So cyclotron is when the particles are spiraling around the magnetic field. Synchrotrons are used as a source of X-rays for diagnosing many other things. So it's interesting in its own right, but I don't know whether people use it as a diagnostic. It depends mostly on the magnetic fields and the radius in a tokamak. But maybe there's a really clever diagnostic you can do, like fast particles or something like that. We're going to switch to a slightly quantum model of the atom. We have a range of different discrete energy levels that the electrons can occupy. These energy levels are labeled by the principal quantum number n. And, up here, infinity, this is ionization. If your electron gets this much energy, it becomes free again. And the energies of these levels are given by this unit, Ry, which is the Rydberg z squared of our ion over n squared. And that equation is going to be the photon that is emitted. difference between those. neutron damage leads us to use much thicker substrates, which gives us a longer time response and so, therefore, a worse bolometer. So, ironically, the bolometers that will be used on [INAUDIBLE] are significantly worse than the bolometer used on existing devices. And I'm sure that [? Spark ?] will have exactly the same problem. Almost everyone in the world uses this design of bolometer that they pioneered on ASDEX Upgrade in the '80s. No one has come up with a better system yet.