well welcome back everybody to uh the last lecture 162. this is kind of a a special lecture um i did get some requests for more information about distributed storage and quantum computing and so i think we're going to do that. i want to make sure that we talk through the chord algorithm since that's a i think relatively simple thing to understand and is uh very cool and applied pretty much everywhere so if you remember one of the things we talked about last week was basically this cap theorem which was really a conjecture that eric brewer put forth back in the early 2000s. The cord algorithm has been turned into storage systems of many sorts including those used by amazon et cetera okay facebook. The chord algorithm lets you get by with only knowing essentially a logarithmic number of nodes in the total system and you can still do this well. We're going to associate each one of those storage nodes is going to get a unique id. We'll talk you through that in the next slide and then i'm going to show you how the chord algorithm is used to divide our space up. Security is basically computing in the presence of an adversary so i'm assuming several of you have all taken 161. Security is basically using those mechanisms to prevent misuse of resources so for instance virtual memory is a mechanism that can be used for protection. One of the questions that's important is do you know where your data came from that's a provenance question. Data integrity is making sure that the data read only by authorized users so that's an important thing. Non-repudiation is a surprisingly important thing that people don't often talk about. unforgeable all right good so let me say a little bit about using quantum mechanics to compute. It's basically using weird but kind of useful properties of quantum mechanics two of them quantization and superposition. If you're willing to allow things to not be always a one or always a zero what you can do is you can just start doing quantum computing. There are many other algorithms out there now these days these days they've been slowly working on them but these are some pretty good ones that might be interesting.