Lectures focus on advanced applications, where we have covered a good amount of the material in the ideas behind those applications. We will not quiz you on these application lectures, on the final exam, or anything like that. It's more meant to give you more perspective rather than extra study materials for the final. Today's state-of-the-art in Go is that there are computer players better than the best human players. For a game like Tic-Tac-Toe, you will find out that you can force a draw, and that means fully solving the game. But for a gamelike Go, this is actually pretty hard to do, and it's even much harder than chess. Researchers have developed a way to teach helicopters to fly autonomously. The system is based on a hidden Markov model. It can be used to learn new skills, such as how to fly a helicopter in a certain way. The researchers hope to use the system to teach Go players to play the game without knowing any prior knowledge of the game or how to do certain maneuvers in a particular way. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from.. The team has developed a system that can teach a helicopter to fly in a specific way, using a hidden model. is a separate linear feedback controller for each time slice. If there is no wind, you can actually just run the linear feedback control. It will be fine. But if there's some wind gusts that could throw you off, you want to use the value functions and the two second look ahead against those value functions to do the controls. Training a unified policy across the entire space might work. It might take some work, exactly, figuring out how to do it. It could be interesting to revisit that now and see what the current understanding of how to train these networks. In 2015, there was the Doppler Robotics Challenge, which was held in Pomona, just east of Los Angeles. The robot had to, essentially, drive a car or walk, but driving the car was recommended. It turned it's very complex to get a robot to do that. The thing is modeling these situations proved even harder than modeling helicopters, because your sensing needs to understand whether or not you're already making contact, and making contact or not. You can be very close, but not have contact. It's a very subtle thing. Stanley: In 2005, Google started a project on self-driving cars with many people from the winning teams. That project, that came out a few years later. And here is a video from 2013, the Google Self-driving Car Project. Stanley: This is an autonomous driver here of the Google car in 2013, so very impressive. This is only getting better. It's only getting before heavily used for heavily used scenes, thanks to deep neural networks. So what does it tell us? Well, the devil is really in the details. so many decisions. If they're gigantic, use a lot of power. That's a problem. Let's see what we can do to build smaller networks to make decisions. What else did we not cover yet? Personal robotics. I want to spend a little more than two minutes on that, so let's keep that for Thursday. that's it for today. Bye. [SIDE CONVERSATIONS] [Side CONversation] [sideconversation.com: Do you know more about this topic? Email us at jennifer.smith@cnn.com].