MIT OpenCourseWare is a free, online education platform. MIT OpenCourse Ware is available in English and French. The weekly Newsquiz tests students' knowledge of MIT courses. This week's quiz includes questions about the i3, Mr. Sticky, and the smart car. The winner will receive a prize for their best knowledge of an MIT course in English or French. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from.. The quiz: Do you have a concept you want to share? If so, please share it with us. defined could almost apply to a Tramway as well. If this was like a streetcar, don't you think it would apply to that as well? So I think the fact that it's a personal vehicle, I think it's important. So the key in this is, describe the concept using few words precisely, but to set it apart from neighboring concepts. What about Rolex Center? It's a single-layer building with multiple straw used as a library for people to meet and study. The refrigerator effectively becomes a food spoilage rate reduction device. The key idea is to start thinking in an abstract way and all of a sudden all these other possibilities become possible. To then actually deliver that value you need to design the product, the product system, and understand the operand, the thing that is being operated on or transformed by the primary value delivery process. In order to chill, we need a chiller, and there are different types of chillers, so it's not enough to pick a particular concept. You have to eventually pick a specific function. or an architecture. So the key decisions are the rows. There are factors in the rows, and then for each row you think about what are the number of possible alternatives for doing this. And then you enumerate all possible combinations. And the big challenge with this, of course, is if you have many factors, you could generate many infeasible architectures. Not all these combinations are actually feasible. So that's architecture enumeration, and there's different ways of doing this at different layers of abstraction. A3 assignment A3 asks students to come up with new ways of brainstorming. Students must use mind maps, morphological matrices, and architecture enumeration. The assignment is due in two weeks and will be graded on a scale of 1-10. The final assignment will be given to students at the end of the month and the results will be published in the next few days. For more information on the assignment, visit the assignment website. It is open to students from all over the world and can be downloaded from the assignment site.