This is actually the second time we are having this class. We had it last year in a smaller version. That was for six units of a credit, and we had it once a week. And so we got some good response last year. So, with the support of the math department, we decided to expand this class to be 12 units of credit. And we have every Tuesday and Thursday afternoon from 2:30 to 4:00, as you know, in this classroom. And the purpose of this course is really to give you a sampling menu to see how mathematics is applied in modern finance. Jake Xia: I'm not going to tell you the story of Pi or "Life of Pi" That's not a financial story. The rest of the story, alpha, beta, delta, gamma, theta, which you will learn from Peter and Choongbum and Vasily's classes. So I'm going to talk about vega. But how many of you actually know what a vega is? OK, lot of people know. But anyway, so that's my first day at Morgan Stanley. Financial products is really just one form of trading. There are many other ways of trading aside from exchanges. The different regions have different exchanges and markets, as well. And the structure of the products it become more tailor-made for either investors or borrowers. So coming back to the market, one large type of player is really the only way to get back into the financial market. Essentially, Glass-Steagall, after 1933, is really what made the financial industry what it is today. It's really about someone has money, someone doesn't. Professor Jake Xia: Trading is really all about how do you risk manage, have the discipline, and how to manage your losses. When you go to the market, you buy a stock. When the stock goes up, makes bit of money, the natural tendency is to let's take profit. But when the stock loses money, what's your natural tendency? Professor Jake XIA: I think natural tendency, lot of people will keep it. But if you think the fundamental story is very sound, you should think about as if you don't have a position. Learn the math, learn the finance first, but keep those questions along the way when you are learning during this class. Go to the course website, read what we have put up for the financial glossary. If you still have things you don't understand, compile your own list of financial concepts, which you can search on the web or even ask us. So, that's really-- and read other materials on the course work. We got maybe-- how about this? We still got about 15 minutes or 12 minutes left, so I'll pass it to Vasily, then maybe we can leave five minutes for some questions. We put syllabus there, a short list of literature. We will be posting a lot of materials there. Probably most lectures will be published there. Jake's slides are there already. So, any questions? We like to get your emails so we can put you on the website for further announcements. But it's probably easier if you put your email on the sign up sheet, so that we can [INAUDIBLE]. VASILY STRELA: Yeah, but please visit and sign up here, because there will be announcements to the class.