David KAISER: Today, we're going to pick up where we were on the most recent classes. We'll look at the coalescence of what came to be called the Big Bang model. And then we'll see how cosmic inflation emerged from that particular moment to try to address some of the shortcomings while retaining some the successes. And the asterisks are to remind you there's a set of strictly optional lecture notes on the Canvas site which go into a little bit more detail of some of these parts from the lecture. Astronomers like Edwin Hubble in Southern California were able to collect information about the distribution of distant galaxies. Hubble found this remarkable trend that the further away from us a given galaxy was, the faster it tended to be moving away. Lemaitre was one of the first to start thinking about playing that filmstrip backwards to say if things are moving further apart from each other on average today, and if the universe in general is expanding today, then was it, in fact, smaller at earlier times? At early times in cosmic history, the universe should've been opaque. You literally wouldn't have been able to see anything because the mean free path of any given photon would be very, very short. At that moment, the average energy per photon or per elementary particle would fall so that you could actually begin to form stable atoms of hydrogen. After that time, when the temperature has fallen below about 10,000 Kelvin, photons are now free to travel large distances. They lose energy as the universe continues to expand. stuff per volume, the actual density of matter and energy per volume. If omega is larger than 1, you have more stuff for volume. You expect it's open or hyperbolic geometry. So far so good. Then Dicke plugged this quantity into Einstein's own equations. A universe should generically become more and more different from flat over time. And that seems like this very strange or unexplained fine tuning. If the universe has been stretching for 14 billion years, what set it to be so arbitrarily close to flat is an unstable equilibrium point? why the universe is so messy is actually because Alan's been generating the mess in his own office, and it's expanded to cosmic scales. So if you want to study that part of today's lecture, it's probably the most important lesson, you'll ever take away. And I'll be glad to stay a bit longer if people have questions. Again, I'm sorry for running late. Feel free to drop off if you need. Any questions on that? The photos in Alan's office are on Canvas.