Professor: Can you explain the physical significance of the crystal momentum? Professor: The information about the momentum can be encoded in these spatial variation of the phase of the wave function. Professor: A central property from the Schrodinger equation is at the time variation d dt of p is equal to the expectation value of minus d the potential of x d x. The momentum expectation value is time independent, so it can be written in the form of e cubed, equal to e to the minus i upon h bar p l. Professor: When you have a perfect lattice, there is actually no current flowing in response to an applied electromagnetic field. Professor: You can build a system that has exactly a periodic potential. He says you can do it with lattices not of atoms, but lattices of dielectric. Professor: Optical fibers can be used to control the phase of the light that's shining through a glass fibers, and you can shine your light in a way that's reasonably well localized, and that's a lot of fun. single electron, and let's put it in the system. What will happen? Well if we put it into the system, what state will this single electron fall into? Yeah one event. But which state? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] PROFESSOR: Yeah, if you kick the system around, you let it relax a little bit. It's going to fall down to the ground state. You have to couple to something else like hydrogen has to be coupled with an electromagnetic field to decay. Theory of semiconductors is based on the atomic orbital structure of the individual atom, the crystal structure, and the resulting band structure. Professor: You will almost always find overlapping bands in three dimensions in sufficiently high energy. The temperature controls an energy scale for a real material. The probability of an electron being excited thermally goes as e to the delta e over kt. At very low temperatures, if the gap isn't 0, then the denominator is large compared to the number of the gap. and metallic without actually being shiny and metallic. And it's not a pigment, so it doesn't absorb light and decay over time. It's like the best thing you could ever do if you wanted to be a shiny, fluttery, flying thing. So there's an incredible amount of physics in this story of the band gaps. And consider this an introduction to the topic. OK. So that's it for band gaps, and I want to move on to the remainder, the last topic of our course. Which is entanglement and quantum computation.