Ahern: I have never had an exam where I had fewer questions. There were maybe 10 questions I got on the exam and that was for a class of this side, really unusual. I find most students are honest. I've only had a handful of situations where in this class, where I've had dishonesty as an issue. The only students I've ever had with serious dishonesty issues actually were in smaller classes interestingly enough. But it has happened here and I do have taped evidence when it does happen. Ahern: How many zwitterions, how many amino acids can form zwittersion? None. They all can. That's not trick. You guys should know that, right? Is the answer "None" a trick? I'm sorry, I don't think so, folks. There are no amino acids, everything, so think about it. Ahern: What did you have in mind for the last question? The one about the Kcat. How can you have two apparent Kcats? It depends on how you calculate the concentration of the enzyme. where time is sometimes a factor, and so I was going to have 3 of the longer answer questions and I decided not to do that and I made them shorter. There's trade offs in all these as I've told other classes. Next term, the format of the exam changes in 451. Most people like 451 better because the maximum number of points on a question I think is 3. If you're going to spend a fair amount of time on something, it should be worth more points. Anybody hate the exam? You can say it. "I hate telling joke about sex or the other, but... Carbonic anhydrase" is a pretty amazing enzyme. It can catalyze the conversion of a million molecules of substrate into product per second, per enzyme. Most of our body tissues are at a pH of 7 to 7.4. We look at Blood, for example, is about 7.3 to 7,4. "I want every woman to love me" and poof, he turns into a box of chocolates. Ahern: The rate of formation of the nucleophile is the critical step in the catalytic action of this enzyme. At pH 9, the enzyme is still holding its shape enough that it's actually able to continue catalysis. When we get above that, we're going to see the ending drop off precipitously. Ahern: There is a lot of interest in manipulating enzymes to increase their activity and increase their efficiency. In the case of carbonic anhydrase, what's actually limiting them is actually defusing them.