AI is replacing human tasks faster than you might think according to a CNN business article more than half of large US firms plan to use AI within the next year. The New York Times reports that generative AI could automate activities equivalent to 300 million full-time jobs around the world. open ai's chief executive that's Sam mman says governments will need to assume the bulk of responsibility in supporting workers AI labor market disruptions and the question will employees just end up training AI systems only to them be replaced by them. last decade you know over a trillion customer insights are built on our platform every single week and now here we are in the generative AI Revolution um when it comes to the employee experience some of the AI deployments are things like uh you know a lot of our employees were spending time looking at disperate systems to find knowledge articles access to benefits who to speak to on the first day how to onboard and ramp. Now with AI applications that we've deployed they don't have to go to multiple systems anymore. One quarter of employees saved a combined 50,000 hours. At.at what that's allowed you to do I mean as you said free up time allow those staff to do other things. I mean how does that work how do we square that Circle well I think like you know any other uh benefits of becoming more efficient or more productive it is now spending more time on higher value impact work in your job those are the core benefits that we've seen from our teams instead of spending you know 10% of your time looking for information. Cisco CEO: We have to train the Next Generation in both these Advanced AI skills but also some of the fundamental essential digital skills that we need. We've got to do both uh to help Society yeah and so that's a sort of skills Gap isn't it and Stephanie I wonder whether firms are ready because I'm looking at numbers here 97% say they are.get us that extra day off or a 3-day 4 day working week that we might all want um chintan talk to me about skills as well. of companies say that yes they know they need to do this but I think what 14% say they're actually ready to do it that's quite the Gap yeah. Who is we talking about overhauling the education curriculum from what age 5 to 18 and then into the universities who's funding that and who has the skills to even do it yeah yeah and that is a big question and Stephanie you're always our guide on this program aren't you through all things Ai and I know you've got questions uh for our panel we've got two big players here um what do you want. Natalie: How do we make it so that AI is valuable for everybody and not just the usual people who profit from technology. Chintan: At Salesforce we receive over 2 million applications every single year here at Salesforce and we want to make sure that we're not leaving any talent unhidden and AI is helping us optimize that so I do see the advancements of democratizing uh access to AI through those efforts as well but it's something we think about all of the time related to trust.  AI decoded looks at the impact of AI in the world workplace. The tech may be able to speed up and automate all sorts of monotonous or repetitive roles but there's also now a concern that Tech like intelligent chatbots could replace roles that have traditionally relied on a more human touch things like customer service or call center helplines. We're going to speak to one reporter who's been researching the threat posed to workers and how some are now fighting back around the world and across the UK. some workers are feeling the effects of that already and they're starting to ask who is going to protect us you know what entities are stepping in to take responsibility for retraining or providing opportunities for workers whose jobs might be entirely eliminated by AI technology. I think that would be incredibly demoralizing for anybody who's asked to do that so I think employers really are going to have to think about the messaging but also the after plan so once you've trained up an AI to do your supposedly Bol tasks what are employers offering are the higher value more creative more interesting. Emma asked if we would actually see an increase in Union membership for private sector workers in the United States. She said a lot of workers want to feel that their voices are part of the process in deciding how AI is going to be used. She argued that actually the people making all the decisions about the AI are not the ones who will be affected by that change it's workers further down the food chain that will find their job disappears before the ones sat in in the boardroom. EM: The role that I'm seeing unions play is just reminding employers that they should be bringing workers to the table to help make and shape decisions. frustrated because she felt that she was being asked to train her replacement whenever she used an AI tool because the AI was watching her do her job. What she was asking asking from her Union was just the ability to be at the table making decisions about AI along with company Executives and Emma this made me think of the difference between what it's like to work in the United States where Union representation is so low and often in opposition with management to models we see in places like France or even Germany. I almost feel like the model for unions needs to be updated for the 21st century too how do you see that playing out? were most at risk because of automation. People are realizing you have to throw out the door any ideas you had about who is really at risk and say every job is going to be changed. We just hope that the workers whose jobs are changing have a voice in saying how yeah it's turkeyy is not going to vote for Christmas are they if those are the ones that could find their jobs being replaced. There's uh there's so much in there and Stephanie just a final thought from you in all of this about briefly if you will. I think we also have to be realistic you're not just going to suddenly go get an engineering degree in two weeks right learn cyber security overnight um these are these are highly complex skills that require usually years of training so this will involve I think a sort of again look at the Danish model of the government and companies working together to sponsor re-education and retraining for workers. This is a total pivot of our economy uh Stephanie really good to have you with us again guing us through all of this and now Emma thank you so much.