in this video we're going to discuss what externalities are in economics so an externality is when you do something that affects the well-being or the good of another person or a company but you're neither harmed or rewarded for what you did to that person. The externalities can be positive they can be negative a negative externability is whenyou've harmed someone you've done something to somehow impose a cost on someone or some some company or something and you haven't reimbursed that person you haven’t paid them any money or or done anything to compensate forwhat you did. at 3: a.m. and you said okay you know what I'll deal with this but I need you to give me an extra 50 bucks a month toward my rent and then you work out an agreement that's different but we're assuming here they haven't done anything to reimburse you they're not paying you. Now a positive externality is where you are doing something that doesn't harm someone it actually benefits that other person you're doing something good that just as a side test like it's as a tangent it's actually helping some other person or people and so but those people aren't turning around and compensating you for it right. your lawn and you mow your lawn and stuff but you don't really spend a l a lot of time making your house look pretty now if your neighbor is trying to sell their house they have a for sale sign up they might appreciate if you went out and really did a great job maintaining your home they would really just love that because then when people come to see their house which is for sale that would increase the value of their home right if the neighboring properties like yours look really really nice then that would help them sell their home. where you have a negative externality like pollution or something like that it would be overs supplied relative to what is socially efficient or optimal. Where you have an over-supply of something like pollution, for example, you would have it over supplied in a way that would be socially efficient and optimal. For example, if you have pollution, it would have to be over supplied to avoid it becoming a problem. This would be a way to reduce the amount of pollution or other negative externalities in the environment.