The Peloponnesian War was fought in 431 BC. After the war, Spartan power had grown to an unprecedented degree. For the first time there were lots of Spartans, who had lots of money. The Spartans had choices that they could take. They could either stay in the Pelop onnesus, or they could contest it in their power to control the entire Greek world in the east. Or they could have some control of the Aegean and the Hellespont. Lysander was at the height of his power and influence, and I guess it's fair to say, he reached heights that no mortal ever had reached in the Greek world. He placed a Spartan garrison, or at least a Peloponnesian garrison in that city led by a Spartan commander called a harmost. This newly founded Spartan Empire was different from the Athenian Empire in a variety of ways. On the one hand, this new empire under Lysander had no purpose and it was not voluntary in any shape, manner or form. Law of Epitadeus allowed people to buy influence and power in Sparta. Money, of course, allowed for corruption. There was jealousy and resentment and fear at Sparta that something bad was going to happen to the Spartan way of life. Pausanias and his tradionalists bided their time for the opportunity to put a spike into this development. There were other things that were flowing from what I've already described that were threatening the traditional character of Spartan life. I'd like to shift the scene to Athens, which had been the empire that the Greeks had ever seen. the great rhetorician and sophist Gorgias and he was also in the circle of Socrates, along with Plato and Xenophon and various other bright young men of the upper classes in Athens. Also, he was a poet, an orator himself, a philosopher and so on and some of his fragments remain for us to look at. But one thing that he was by 404 was a bitter enemy of the democracy. He had been exiled or had voluntarily taken exile, in order to get away from the democracy, and was determined now that there should be no democracy in Greece. kind of idiotic idea that a democracy would come up with so that democracy itself was seen to be inherently wicked. Lest you think there's something special about that, that's such a characteristic of the human race. So, that was the basic widespread view of what was natural in the Greek world. Now, you add to that that they've just lost this terrible war and you could point to what seemed to you to be both a wickedness and foolishness. How in the world could anybody think democracy was a good thing after that? had to do with the rightness or the wrongness of wisdom of the foolishness of the kinds of arrangements that you had. Critias, in any case, was determined that Athens in the future would not be a democracy. In fact, it looks like he was very much taken with the virtues of Sparta, because Sparta had won the war. So, it's easy to say the characteristics that the Spartan state had must be good ones, because they can do the most critical thing that a state can do, win in competition with the other. The Thirty ruled between September of 404 and May of 403, just a matter of months as it turned out. They established a council of 500--well, that's the same number as the Athenian council, but it was quite different. It was made up of extreme oligarchs; they were given judicial powers. Men who were identified as sycophants, and the Greek use of that term, was widely unpopular. They were very unpopular and the Thirty began with an act that was not only unpopular, but also limited to a certain portion of the population. The Thirty limited citizenship, active participation in the government of any kind to only 3,000 Athenians out of what would have been at least 21,000 and probably more. Only these had citizen rights. The rest of the Athenians did not. Theramenes didn't like that. This was far too narrow and far too troubling for the future for Theramene. And so that's why Krentz suggests that this is not an accident; that it's a conscious effort to model the future Athenian state upon the great successful, admirable, Spartan state. people to death just because they were rich, so that they could take their money away and this of course increased the amount of resistance on unhappiness. A small, I want to emphasize small, very small group of Athenians fled the city and went into exile to neighboring cities. The cities that were most receptive to these anti-Thirty, anti-oligarchical,Anti-Spartan people were Corinth, Megara, and Thebes. They are both angry at the Spartans and I think fearful that the Sparta that is arising now will be a menace to their autonomy. and Attica, a placed called Phyle, and built a fort there to which they hoped other discontented Athenians would flee and join them in the resistance. To my mind, it is helpful to think about France in June of 1940 after the Germans had defeated France and occupied part of it and left the other part unoccupied, but absolutely beholden to the Nazi Regime. It was a terrifying prospect to tackle this regime, which looked like it was unbeatable. Remember, they had been put in place by the Spartans. The Spartans ruled the world. What could anybody expect to change that situation? as much as they could in collaborating with the Germans just to make their--the fate of the Frenchman less hard and to help France in the future in that way. That's the way it was with most Athenians; most Frenchman and most Athenian didn't do either of those things. They kept their heads down and tried to live their lives as best they could. I think what you need to understand is happening and this all puts what Thrasybulus and Anytus, and their friends did in a very special kind of a light. went to fight. Others, like Lysias the orator, used his money to hire mercenary soldiers to fight for the Thrasybulus democrats as well. Well, the first test came in the month of January. There were these seventy guys or so up in the fortress on Phyle. By now the Thirty were worried enough about this nascent army to send an army of their own, much bigger, to try to get them. And really the British--the English fleet didn't do anywhere near as much damage to the Spanish fleet as did the winds. More and more Athenians were becoming hostile to the regime that they had fallen under. When the forces of the Thirty came after Thrasybulus, they just couldn't get there; they were fought off and they had to retreat. As they retreated the seventy came down after them and chased them, and killed them as they fled. They were forced to flee to Eleusis on the northwestern frontier of Attica, and the democrats were in position to take control of the city again. settlement. A moderate group of ten would be chosen in Athens and Pausanias and a commission sent from Sparta to sit with these Athenians and worked out a reconciliation for the future. There would be an amnesty for anybody, no matter what, except for the Thirty themselves. Even the town of Eleusis which they had seized for their own protection as things were going badly, they were allowed to stay there after the settlement. That newly restored democracy behaved with remarkable moderation. A Roman historian of the first century B.C. wrote the following about Thrasybulus: "If excellence were to be weighed by itself, apart from luck, I believe I would rank this man first of all" A few years before 180 A.D., Pausanias the great travel writer of antiquity, wrote his guide to the famous and historic places of ancient Greece. "His is the first grave and after it comes that of Pericles," he says, "in every way the greatest of all famous Athenians"