Professor: Can you explain the physical significance of the crystal momentum? Professor: Let me answer that in a slightly backward way. Let's step back and think about the momentum, and ask what the momentum is. Professor: If you have a wave function, sine of x, such that, the expectation value of the wave function is x, then the momentum of that function is 1/x. The momentum is the same as the speed of light, which is the speed at which light travels through the air. in the state SI of x in the stateSI is equal to x naught, and the expectation value of p in theState SI is p naught. Then if you want to change the momentum, increase momentum by h bar k, the way to do that is to take SI and build a new wave function, SI tilda. And then the expectationvalue of x is the same. So, the information about the momentum can be encoded in these spatial variation of the phase of the wave function. The momentum is the thing that commutes with p or with x by i h bar. Another way of talking about the momentum is that it governs the spatial variation of the phase of the wave function. The crystal momentum is defined from beginning, from the following property. If we have a potential v of x, which is. invariant under shifting, by one lattice spacing, by some l, v of X, then this tells us that the energy. operator is invariant if we shift by l. The eigenfunction, or the eigenvalue of our wave function, under translations by l, is a quantity that can be determined simultaneously with knowing the energy. If you have q, which is 0, and you increase it to pi over l, that value is effectively the same as the value minuspi over l. But that's really strange because that means that q itself, it's not strictly conserved. It's conserved mod 2 pi overl. When you have momentum conservation, momentum is strictly Conserved if there's no force. And even if there is a force, it is increasing control by the force as you turn on the force. just constantly increases. For the crystal momentum, that's not the case. You turn on a force, it increases according to the conservation law. But it's not increasing constantly. It's periodically defined. So it increases then it ends up at a smaller value. It increases and ends up in a phase. So developing an intuition for the crystal. momentum, I think, is best done by just playing with examples. And you'll do that more in the course on solids, which I encourage you all to take. Because it's really beautiful stuff. glossing over in the entire story here. So, is u of x a real function? Well, so when we started out asking what are the eigenfunctions of the transit by l operator, all we showed was that, and I'm going to do this on a separate board just to make it clearer. Tell me if this turns off, because it kept bumping. OK. So we've determined is that if we take q l is equal to alpha, then Phi sub q if eigenvalue is written in the form e to the i q x u sub q of x, where this is periodic. In describing a particle, we should use Cartesian coordinates, or should we use Spherical coordinates? Well it can't possibly matter. And so you'd better make sure in any description of your system that changing your coordinates doesn't change your results. And here, that's exactly what's going on. And that's the difference. The difference is that when you fold them up, you're imposing this periodicity and you're labeling the eigenfunctions by q and the overall number of k phases that you're subtracting off. the imaginary part, h bar over 2 m i. Well, hbar over m times the imaginary part of SI complex conjugate derivative, with respect to x, which is the current, in the x direction of SI. And we need this to be imaginary, or we will get no current. You show this in a problem set, if you have a pure, real wave function, for example. A single real exponential, that's decaying, as on the wrong side of a barrier. we want the imaginary parts, that's going to be e to the I over m. And then we're left with u squared of x. So this is the current, but we have to do it-- we had take advantage in order for this to be sort of clean, we had to take advantage of u being real. Everybody cool with that? Now there's one last twist on this, which is that if I have k-- if I've got q. If I have q, and I want, I can always write it as some q naught plus n pi over l. function not by single number q, but by q naught and an integer n. n is an additional integer, and what it's telling you is how many times did you have to shift back to get into that fundamental zone between pi and minus pi. So the current depends on both the part defined mod 2 pi over l, and the integer, which tells you how many factors of 2 Pi over l did you subtract off to get to that fundamental domain. So to specify a state, I don't just have to specify q NAUGHT, I also have to specifying N. upon m u squared of x. So we get a contribution from the crystal momentum and from which we're in. OK? So sort of an elaborate story to answer the phase question. Yeah? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] PROFESSOR: Good. So here we had SI-- so SI-- I'm sorry. I should have done this for Phi. But I meant this wave function, right. This is Phi, this is Phi q. So from here we're going to get the imaginary part. function of q, not q naught, but so here's pi over l. Here's 2pi over l, Here's 3 pi overL. And I need to do this carefully, because it's incredibly difficult to get the straight. OK. So for every value of q there's an allowed energy. But it's different than it would have been for the free particle. And then we do the same thing for the next state. And it looks like this. And now imagine what happens when we take this, and we it over one two. to plot u with respect to k instead, would that just be a parabola dotted line? If so, why do we not have really-- PROFESSOR: If we just wanted-- sorry. Say it again? AUDIENCE: E as a function of k instead of q. PROFessor: Oh. But k is not a well-- so what is k? K is just defined as h bar squared, k squared upon 2 m is equal to e. So this doesn't tell you anything. this diagram is telling you is which e's are allowed. If you put on a capacitor, played across your perfect lattice, you don't get any current. So the particle, the charged particle in your lattice just oscillates back and forth in a block oscillation, running up the band, and down the band. The question is could you explain again how imperfections and a lattice leads to actual conduction? The first question is given that that's obviously not what happens in real materials, why don't you explain it? we just give up on quantum mechanics and say it totally failed? And so this is a totally reasonable question, and I want to emphasize something important to you. That model led to a prediction, which is that if you put a capacitor plate across a perfect crystal, then you would get no current flowing across, you would just see that the electron wave packets oscillate. And that is manifestly what happens with copper. But the experimentalist comes back to you and says look dude. That is a ridiculous model because the copper isn't in fact perfect, it's messy. the theory side, because I'm a theorist and you should not let me in a lab. But I collaborate with experimentalists, so they're nice people. They're very good physicists. So here's something you can do. You can build a system that has exactly a periodic potential. It turns out it's very difficult to do this with quantum systems. But what you canDo it with lattices not of atoms, but lattices of dielectric. That equation can be put in exactly the same form as the Schrodinger equation for the time evolution of a wave function. To handle an electric field, you need the potential to be constantly varying. Instead of making it just perfectly periodic, let's make the index ramp just a little bit. In this experiment, so as the wave packet moves along, what's discovered is that the position-- if I draw the x as a function of t, so now the role of t is being played by the distance it's moved along the wave guide. It exhibits beautiful block oscillations. And this has been proved in a very small number of real honest quantum mechanical systems. this part of the field right now is we know that it's true, but we want to see it. We want to feel it, so various people around the world are working on making a truly beautiful demonstration of this bit of physics. But, the basic question is how robust is this. And the answer is it's not robust at all. But which you can tell because everything in the real world has enough impurity that it conducts. Or as an insulator. Yeah. And that's actually, it depends on the lattice. situation, it depends on the system. And exactly how it depends is something that is an active area of research. So don't throw away the model. Observe that you've modeled the wrong system. If you find a system that fits your-- that is-- that shares the assumptions of your model, that's when you ask did it work. And it worked like a champ. OK. So now let's talk about real materials. This is going to close up our discussion bands and solids. But that's OK. There are lots of questions and they were good questions. This is an extremely brief. But I want to ask you the following question. What happens in the following three systems? So first, imagine we take why don't we take a system with built out of single wells, which have some set of energy eigenstates, and then we build the periodic array out of them. What do we expect to see when we build a lattice? We expect that this is going to-- that these states are going to spread out into bands a funny way Yeah and let's just talk about the 1 d potential. single electron, and let's put it in the system. What will happen? Well if we put it into the system, what state will this single electron fall into? Yeah one event. But which state? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] PROFESSOR: Yeah, if you kick the system around, you let it relax a little bit. It's going to fall down to the ground state. You have to couple to something else like hydrogen has to be coupled with an electromagnetic field to decay. atom is hydrogen, just for-- this doesn't actually happen, but just imagine-- in particular what it means is it has the ion, the nucleus is charge plus 1. And so in order for the system to be neutral, I must have one electron for every well. So if I put in the n electrons I need to neutralize a system, where do those n electrons go? Yeah, they fill up the first band. And if we let the system relax with lowest energy configuration, every state in this lowest band will be filled. This system is in an energy eigenstate. In particular, it's in a completely antisymmetrized configuration, because they're identical fermions. If we want to induce a current, what do we have to do? Yeah. We have put them in a superposition. But where's the next allowed energy eigenestate? Next band. So it's on the next band. It's in the next energy eigestate. The next allowed Energy Eigenstate is in the second band. macroscopic amount of energy. Well, it's not macroscopic. it's large. It's not infinitesimally small. That means that there's a minimum amount of. energy that that incident light must have in order to excite the. electron in the first place. Crystals are transparent unless you look at sufficiently high frequencies. If you looked at low frequencies, your crystal should be transparent. Well that's really interesting. In particular, we immediately learn something cool about two different materials. Consider diamond and copper. These are both crystals.  spin in one dimension is little-- I'm lying about spin. Electrons spin up, and electrons spin down, will generically have different energies. In 3D, this isn't such a big deal, because those splittings are tiny. But in 1D they can't. So I mean, that's also not exactly true, but it depends on exactly the details of the system, is what I wanted to get to. Curse you. But do you really want me to get in spin? Man. the story changes in a dramatic way. There the gaps are not the same. That they do not remain constant. And then we turned on an interaction which was the energy costs, the energy penalty for having angle momentum in z direction. Which added an l z term to the energy. And what you found is that as a function of the coefficient, which I think we called epsilon, of that perturbation of the energies of the energy was equal to l squared over 2 i plusepsilon. LZ: States from different multiplates, with different values of l, had energies that could cross as a function of the strength of the deformation of your system. LZ: There's no nodes here in three dimensions. There's one that changes, one that doesn't. And then this guy has five. One, two, three, four, five. And what we found here is that these guys could cross. And this split into, so this is the [INAUDIBLE] l equals 1. So l equals zero. we add in a lattice we get bands again. The structure's a little more intricate because it depends on the momentum. But these bands now can overlap. OK. Everybody see that? Because there's nothing preventing states from different-- in different multiplates from having the same energy in three dimensions. There's no nodes here that tells you have to keep the ordering constant. Now we turn on the multiple particle potential, and they can interact, they can overlap, and that's what happens. is the length of the energy of the last electron that you put in. How much energy do you have to give the system, do you. have to add the system to excite the electrons into excited states, in. particular into superpositions so that the electrons can move? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] PROFESSOR: Yeah. Preposterously small amount. An amount that goes like one over the number of particles. So in the continuum limit, it's zero. There's an arbitrarily nearby energy. called a band insulator. Because there are other ways of being an insulators. So what determined the exact band structure in for a 1D periodic potential? Two properties. One was l, the periodicity. And that came in the q l and k l. And the second is the detailed shape of the potential. Now in three dimensions, the things that are going to determine the potential are not just the distance between atoms, but you have a three dimensional lattice. And so when you solve the problem for the energy eigenvalues is a function of now the three different components of the crystal momentum, you'll get a different set of equations. the atomic orbital structure of the individual atom, the crystal structure, and the resulting band structure. You will almost always find overlapping bands in three dimensions in sufficiently high energy. What we need is one of two things. We need either the band gap coincidentally is ridiculously small, or we need a free particle, which is a conductor. But that's sort of stupid. But a better answer would be, well, can you have a system where there are bands in one dimension? And this is why Matt was barfing at me. but you didn't have one electron per potential well? And yeah. You could orchestrate that in lots of ways. Now it involves orchestration. So it's not the generic system that we were talking about here. But you can't orchestrate it. So spin is a useful thing that gives you an extra handle. If you have twice as many states per well then you can have half a band filled. That's one way to do it. Then it becomes dependent on details of the system, which is what I didn't want to get into. The temperature controls an energy scale for a real material. If you have a hot piece of copper, then the lattice is wiggling around. And every once in a while, an ion can hit one of the electrons and excite it, give it some momentum. And so there's an available reservoir of energy for exciting individual electrons. So when I say small, that doesn't mean anything. I need to tell you small compared to what.what that means. OK. Delta e is very small. Now delta e has dimensions. It has units. excited above the gap. The probability goes as e to the minus delta e over kt. At very low temperatures, if the gap isn't 0, then this is 0. It doesn't happen. But at large temperatures, the denominator here is large. If the temperature is large compared to the width of the gap, than this is a thermal fluctuation. And as a result, you constantly have electrons being excited up, cruising around, falling back down. And they can ask-- and both when asked, although not quite in this language, how likely are you to get an electron up here? small number. And e to the minus of a small number is close to 1. So at high temperature, you're very likely to excite electrons up here. This is called a semiconductor. And there are notes on the Stellar web page that discuss in a little more detail what I just went through and show you how you build a transistor out of a semiconducting. OK. So that finishes us up for the band gap systems for periodic potentials. And that's pretty good for 15 minutes of work. It's not bad. Photonic crystals are periodic arrays of dielectrics. They have bands of allowed energy and gaps of disallowed energies where no waves propagate through. The structure of a photonic crystal on the surface of a butterfly wing makes it shiny and blue. It looks like it's a crystal reflecting in a specific frequency. At some sharp blue. And the reason is, it is exactly this form. If you look at it under a microscope, you see little rays of protein which have different dielectric than air. and metallic without actually being shiny and metallic. And it's not a pigment, so it doesn't absorb light and decay over time. It's like the best thing you could ever do if you wanted to be a shiny, fluttery, flying thing. OK. So that's it for band gaps. And I want to move on to the remainder, the last topic of our course. Which is going to be entanglement and quantum computation. And here I need to give you one quick observation. The probability of finding the particle at point A is given by chi a squared. This is normalized, so when we integrate against it, we get 1. And similarly, the probability that we find the second particle at b is this thing norm squared. And it's independent of what a is. But we also studied the symmetric configuration, which was equal to 1 over root phi, root 2. And this tells us something totally awesome. We either find it at chi of a or chi. So there's a factor of one half. Quantum physicist David Wheeler: Measurement of one particle tells you something about the second particle. Wheeler: I could've taken these particles, put them in this entangled state, and sent one particle off to a distant planet. And my sister measures this second particle and determines what state it's in and is immediately determined what state the first particle is in over in this distant planet Zorg, right? So that's deeply disconcerting, he says, to those of us who have studied quantum mechanics up to this point. yet another moment of serious discomfort. How can something here dramatically change the state, the configuration, the initial configuration, of a particle arbitrarily far away? Isn't that deeply concerning? And if you think about relativity, this should be all the more deeply disconcerting. So there was a person that roughly this time, a little earlier, who was troubled by this problem. And his name was Einstein. And so one of the things that's kind of amazing is that he created a thought experiment which we're going to study in detail next week. who have taken courses in [INAUDIBLE]-- and I'm sure that's all of you because of the GIRs. So I'm very used to microphones, but not in this context. OK. Is this-- yeah, it's on. Can you hear me? All right. So there are lots of ways to slice the story of Einstein by the time he reaches the EPR experiment, which is Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen for the three people who actually wrote the paper. Hard to find. It's really sweet. Jeremy Bernstein, who is a physicist. A physicist and writer. He's in his eighties now. He lives in Aspen. He worked with CERN for a number of years. He wrote for the New Yorker. Bell had a friend named, I think, Bartelstein. Who had two quirks. An unusual color sense and a taste for mismatched socks. Bell used to say, if you saw one leg and that sock was pink, you knew to a certainty that the other sock was not pink. I think-- I'm trying to remember who this is originally attributed to. Same thing. If you have a coin and you cut it in half down the-- so you've got two coin shape disks. And you see the head that you know somebody-- somebody at some other casino is cheating by tossing in the half coin that only has a tail on it. So there are lots of ways to represent this. And many physicists being very witty indeed have come up with different metaphors for it. if you're sort of approaching it naively. What Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen argued was actually something a little bit-- in fact, the paper comes to an end on that note of queasiness. And they have definition for what reality is. And that is something whose-- if you can perform a measurement, you know that quantity absolutely. But you can't do the-- so on the one hand, quantum mechanics says you can’t know physical reality to this level of precision. they claimed was a paradox. And this paper was published. And it received a range of reactions from indifference by younger physicists who said, we don't care that it's weird. And most notably Niels Bohr found this paper really troubling. And he spent about six weeks, apparently, discussing this and trying to come up with a response to it. And what he responded was essentially that-- in some ways, it was in some way a paradox, as well as a good thing. Einstein had argued that the EPR paradox suggested that quantum mechanics was incomplete. Bohr essentially responded in effect that Einstein's description of quantum mechanical explanation was inadequate. The experiments were done, and I imagine are still being done, as sort of demonstrations. And they showed that Bohr's interpretation was correct and that yes, quantum mechanics produces results that are non-local just as Allan described to you. And that the world really is as strange as people first glimpsed in 1925, '26, and '27. stupid. He was Albert Einstein. But he was aesthetically incapable of pursuing this new physics in ways that were possible under the research possibilities of the time. And that is what I would leave you with. Physics is an aesthetic as well as an intellectual pursuit. So thank you all. [APPLAUSE] Back to Mail Online home. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @dailymailonline and @MailOnlineernews. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the Daily Mail home.