HONG LIU: So, first, we talk about chiral fermions. So, previously, we showed that the Dirac equation requires, actually, psi to have four components. And the answer turns out to be, no, you can reduce it, OK? And so there are two ways to reduce it. One is called the Majorana fermion. So we first talk about the chiralfermion and one way to do it. And then, we will look at the specific representation of gamma matrices. i 0, 0 sigma i-- again, the small sigmai is always the Pauli matrices. And then you can also work out the sigma Ij. Then you find the is given by minus 1/2, epsilon ijk, then sigma k. So do you see something? Yes? AUDIENCE: They're block diagonal. HONG LIU: Yes, they are. So if sigma is block diagonal, then that means this S is also block. So that means, if I write psi x into two component vector, HONG LIU: You don't need four components to be able to transform under Lorentz transformation. At least two components can already transform. So this tells you, in a sense, that the LorentZ covariance only requires two component spinors. So we have to do a little bit of work to do much work if you actually find the right trick to do this for any choice of gamma matrices. So you can check yourself that the gamma 5 is actually Hermitian. You need i for this to be true, OK? You can also take the product of all the gamma matrix together and then with a factor of i, OK?" HONG LIU: gamma 5 squared, squared to 1, is Hermitian, which means its eigenvalues are all real. He says if gamma 5 commutes with sigma mu, nu, then gamma 5 will commute with Sigma S. So gamma 5 acting on psi then just equal to psi L, and the gamma 5 psi R is equal to minus psi R, he says. HONG LIu: So you can easily see, by definition, that gamma 5 acts on psi L and psi R. HONG LIU: I will use that language when I talk about Majorana spinor. OK, so let's go back to this chiral representation and write the Dirac equation into it. And then you find that the cross term vanish. You can write it as psi dagger partial sub 0, plus i sigma i, partial i, psi L. And, indeed, the gamma 5-- gamma 5 in the other representation are related to this one just by a similar transformation, too. Without the chiral symmetries, there's no pion. Symmetry is only present in the classical level but not in the quantum level. And, again, that plays a very important role in particle physics, actually. It's also important in many condensed matter systems, like liquid helium, et cetera. Will not go into detail. The pions-- they essentially come from the Chiral symmeetries. And actually understanding how the pions come from them was a Nobel Prize to Nambu. HONG LIU: If tilde is just some other constant, then you multiply gamma 5. So, here, we can rewrite a little bit differently. We can consider rewrite this alpha L and alpha R in terms of the following. Let's consider the two transformation-- one transformation, psi L, and psi R transform the same. And the other transformation is that they transform oppositely. They transform in the opposite phase, OK? So I write the alpha-- and this writing is like that. HONG LIU: In physics, actually, the massless case actually gives you very much richer structure, normally, than the massive particle. Mathematically, it's because the representation of the Lorentz group is very different from the massive case. In Euclidean space, you continue gamma 0 to gamma 4. And then you reserve gamma 4 for that. Then the gamma 5 is the next one you take.this? Yes. Other questions? Yes, I'm happy to answer. HONG LIU: In the Dirac spinor, which we have talked about so far, is four components. In the chiral spinor we talked about, you have two complex components. The next one I'm going to talk about is the Majorana, in which case, I would argue, we have 4 times 1 real component. And, now, let's talk about the last case-- this case, which is-- you have four real components, OK? So what do you do? Again, we follow the similar strategy to see whether it's possible to have fourreal components. HONG LIU: The Majorana spinor was discovered by Majorana in 1937. Majorana is, like, half electron. Heuristically half electron, it has very stable topological properties, which a single electron does not have. He says if you can engineer in your condensed matter systems, Majoranaspinor then became a Holy Grail. HONG LIu: People say they have engineered Majorana Spinor in the lab, which I think has never been fully confirmed. complex conjugate of this equation because gamma mu m is real. So that means that, since gammamu m equal to gamma Mu m star, but if we take complex conjugates of that equation, means that the C star gamma mu, C minus 1 star is equal to C gamma mu. So, now, we see that B-- this actually makes sense. This is actually the matrix we take gamma mu to gamma mu star. So B is the matrix to take star, OK? Good. Any questions on this? But, in principle, you don't have to choose them to be unitary. OK, so, now, let's double check. So let's check that star star-- so we show that, here, in this representation, this is compatible with Lorentz transformation, OK? So we still need to check star, star is compatible. So it means that the psi prime star should be equal to the same as B psi prime. So that means this iscompatible with LoreNTz transformation. B when you act on sigma mu B minus 1. So that gives you minus sigmaMu, nu, star, OK? So this is obvious because sigmamu, nu has i there. So the minus sign comes from the i. And, otherwise, the B takes each gamma matrices there into star. And then that means that the S star, lambda, which is given by exponential 1/2 omega mu, nu. Now this is equal to-- yeah, you can just plug this in. we get a very nice relation that, under Lorentz transformation, is generated by this B, related to this B matrix. When you have the psi prime equal to that, let's just take the star of this equation, OK? So psi prime star just equal to S star, Lambda psi star, equal to B S. B minus 1 and B S-- B psi. So that means that the psi star should be equal to gamma 2 psi. That's the Majorana condition here. psi, and there should be another one, right? So is that one? HONG LIU: I don't quite understand your question. Say it again-- what? AUDIENCE: OK, [INAUDIBLE]. HONGLIU:OK, OK. Other questions? Good. OK, good. So let's now go to the next topic. We only have a few minutes, so we can only just make some general comments. So so far, mostly, we have been talking about continuous symmetries. But there are also discrete symmetry, OK? we have-- so this real scalar theory-- we can see that before. So this theory has a discrete symmetry because this is invariant under phi. It goes to minus phi, OK? And so this is-- if you do it twice, you go back to itself. And there are also spacetime discrete symmetries. So you can have so-called time reversal, which corresponding to your t. Then you revert all the spatial direction. So comment that you can ask why we actually reverse all three directions. How about if I just reverse one direction or reverse two directions? you take that phase to be pi-- say, exponential i pi-- and then you take to be minus phi. And so, in that case, this is part of the continuous symmetry. But, here, there's, nevertheless, another discrete symmetry. Can you see what is the other independent discrete symmetry here? Yes? Good. You can exchange phi to phi star, OK? It's a complex conjugation. And this is often called charge conjugated.