Protein three-dimensional structure is an important part of proteomics. Structure has implications for the binding of small molecules such as drugs. We will in short order get to the scary pumpkin-like molecule. We'll connect it to last week's through the vehicle of focusing on motifs that are involved in protein interactions with the two nucleic acid macromolecules. We're going to be covering, just as we introduced RNA omics with RNA structure, we'll spend this entire class talking about protein three-Degree Structure. of the proteins and the three dimensional structure of the nucleic acid and these symmetry elements would align. Now in order to introduce these symmetry element and the possibility of having codes that you can at least program, even if they may have been tinkered about during an evolution, the question is to what extent can we get our hands on these kind of protein and nucleic Acid motifs that interact. In order to get at this issue of where there is a code-- and I just take this as one of the ways of dealing with the incredible complexity of proteins is to give this a theme. all kept within the helix with a repeat of 3.6 residues per turn. In the beta sheet, they tend to have a longer, straighter chains where there are unpaired hydrogen bonds. The arrows typically point from the n terminus to the c terminus just as in nucleic acids is from five prime to three prime. OK, now how can we use these basic motifs? These are the smallest meaningful units of protein three dimensional structure. How can we used these to recognize other macromolecules, other proteins and nucleic acid? We have these motifs that we could find, weight matrices for them by aligning lots of sequences. Now instead of aligning sequences, let's see what we can do by mutating both the protein part and the nucleic acid part. This is a way. of getting a really good empirical data set, which in principle, you can combine it with similar functions on the flanking ones, and you can dial up sequence of a protein interaction, at least with this class of proteins. you can get the binding at a lower concentration, which means a stronger binding. How you relate that to the binding constant we had in the previous slide is the subject of this slide number eight. Now we call this the apparent equilibrium association constant because these experiments, just like many binding in living cells is not at equilibrium. It's a dynamic process in the cell and in vitro. So that one over the association constant is directly related to the fraction of DNA molecules with protein bound, which is directly proportional to the signal intensity and fluorescence. groove of the DNA. And the reason the textbook is wrong, first of all, it emphasizes the non-helical part of the zinc finger. You can barely see the helix with the background there. And also the way it loops through the DNA, if you look at this carefully in your textbook, this is actually the [? Mount ?] book, it actually interdigitates with a phosphodiester bond, basically going through the base pairs, which is not at all what happens. of the protein maintaining almost perpendicular to the DNA axis. But again, so on the left is the three tandem repeats, and on the right is a dyad axis. These are the two major symmetry classes, and it's amazing how many nucleic acid protein interactions fall into one of these two classes. Can we extend this to RNA? This is a much more complicated situation with RNA because you don't have these long perfect double helices anymore. You have these very short RNA helices that I found. showed in the last couple of classes. This is transfer RNA, one of our favorite molecules here, with the anticodon at the bottom of each of the pink structures. And the amino acid acceptor three prime end of that 70-some nucleotide-- 70 to 80 nucleotide nucleic acid. So the pinks are all the tRNAs, and there are at least 20 different types of amino acid and has 20 types of transfer RNAs and 20 type of proteins that add amino acid onto the three prime ends of the transfer RNA. If you wanted to create a new code, as these authors have, you'd have to find homology among the proteins or graph domains of recognition between each one. You can arrange to make a new amino acid by carving the pocket the amino acid recognizes and grafting on the appropriate nucleotides. OK, you've had some programming experience that hopefully will prepare you for the real world of interacting with input and output from various devices. The topic today is proteins, and this really is the main contact between the exquisite regulatory mechanisms. that you can basically program the almost digital nucleic acid world inside the cell but via clearly analog inputs and outputs. We also-- I've listed some of the scariest proteins that I could think of. And we're going to talk about three of them. One of them in the slide, which is the proteins that are actually involved in causing the symptoms that come from when you're worried about anthrax. And then we'll talk about HIV yet again, this time, polymerase mutants that cause drug resistance. not inside the cell. But the whole complex gets internalized. Still, topologically, it's as if it were outside the cell when it's inside this little vesicle. So you can see that when we're talking about protein three-dimensional structure, whether we're predicting it or solving it, protein is not a static object. Here, it associates with one factor. It associates seven of itself. It interacts with lethal factor. You need to think of these as dynamic systems with many different states. minus 9th seconds. That's atomic motion. Transcription that we talked about, all of the regulatory mechanisms of transcription last time, the rate of the constant for that process is around 50 nucleotides per second. Not entirely coincidentally, that's about the rate at which it is translated into protein. That could be used as a timer in a circuit of these longer time frames, like cell cycle, circadian rhythm, very long time frames in ecological systems with bamboo and various pests. then development and aging, which can be on the order of hundreds of years, at least for humans, turtles, and whales. So what we think proteins are good for depends on the accuracy. And the accuracy depend on the method. At the very bottom right, we have a very appealing approach, which is de novo, a priori, or ab initio prediction of secondary-- of protein three-dimensional structure from the sequence alone. But unfortunately, accuracy so far-- and we'll delve into this in more detail in a moment-- is on the orders of six angstroms of difference between the predicted structure and what it actually is. your accuracy, as you can get from NMR and X-ray crystallography, you now are in a position to study catalytic mechanism and design and improve ligands, such as drugs. This is really where we want to be. There may be a day where we can do this all from ab initio prediction or modeling at very great distances. But for now, modeling atVery short, say, 80% to 90% amino acid similarity, is important. Remember, there's a variety of different protein structures. And ways that you can discover the small molecules by a clever use of parts of it that you know bind. HIV is one of the most sequenced molecules on Earth. It's been sequenced many times because as a patient takes the drugs, their population of the AIDS virus changes. And that causes a drug resistance in the HIV, with unfortunate consequences for the patient. We can take-- now, making mutations in polymerases is not entirely of negative consequences. And I'm going to show you a really beautiful example where a DNA polymerase, you want to change it so that it can now handle what would normally be an inhibitor. space to the position on a phenylalanine or a tyrosine, position 762 of this polymerase. If you now put in a dideoxy inhibitor, you now have too much space in there, and you start trying to fill that space with other bulky molecules, like water. And basically, the binding constant, it becomes much less favorable binding when you're lacking both oxygens. So this presented an opportunity to engineer some polymerases which had a phenylicalanine there to become more accepting of the dideoxys. This has an 8,000-fold effect on the specificity of this polymerase. Now, that's how we program a particular atom to achieve an important goal. Point mutants are not the only way to generate conditional mutants. Many of them historically were. But there are ways that you can program, and conditional, meaning you can regulate under what conditions. It's the ultimate where we go in and if the protein is already present, we can change that particular nucleotide in situ in the correct place so it's properly regulated and everything. the protein is expressed or not or active or not with an entire domain, or with single nucleotide polymorphisms. Now, so this is one way. This is the nucleic acid way. Another way is by modulating the activity of the proteins from the outside with drugs or drug-like molecules and chemical kinetics. And under the subheadings for that, you can make these by combinatorial synthesis-- and we'll show an example of that. But combinatorially synthesis can be based on design principles, not just completely random. that we didn't discuss before. But in previous classes. But it's related to what we've been talking about. In the case of the zinc finger, we made an altered specificity. We made new zinc fingers with bind to completely new trinucleotides. With the DNA polymerase, by changing one amino acid, we could make it now accept almost four logs better an inhibitor is very useful. And here, many different-- many of these are enzymes, where you can not just knock out the enzyme, but actually make it recognize a new substrate. ApoE refers to its involvement in cholesterol metabolism and transport. ApoE3 is present in about 80%, and is far more common in human populations. The ancestral form of this, for example, found in chimpanzees at nearly 100%, is this arginine 112, instead of what's now common inhuman populations was cysteine 112. We now eat a lot more fatty things. We live long enough to get Alzheimer's. And so maybe this was something that was-- this bad allele was good in chimpanzees that have different diets or lifespans. strand, to fall back and interact. And you can see that one of the nearest amino acids to this arginine 112, which is the main difference between ApoE4 andApoE3. Arginine 61 is the same on the two alleles. But you think of this as one haplotype, and in chimpanzees the haplotype is now threonine 61. So it's like this compensating, complementary mutation, just like we had in the oxygens in the polymerase a couple of slides ago. think of these things in terms of proteins. You can have-- a disulfide is a very important thing to lose. They tend to be highly conserved. If you introduce a proline into what would normally be an alpha helix, this is something where knowledge of the three-dimensional structure would say, oh, that proline, this a priori, without any knowledge of conservation, could be a huge change. And then these multi-sequence profiles are a good way of looking at the conservation. That's a way of prioritizing single-nucleotide polymorphisms that might have impact on pharmacogenomics or disease. The idea of chemical diversity, in a way I hope nicely connects to where we've been with RNA arrays. RNA arrays, and the double-stranded RNA array that we used earlier in class today, can be generated in a commentorial sense. You can make an exhaustive set. Or you can make them as a mixture of solid phase particles and then separate the [INAUDIBLE] phase particles out in some manner. Solid phase comes up again and again in arrays. It's very obvious why you have a solid phase. You want to be able to address it by its positions in x and y on the array. purification of your products simply by washing rather than doing complicated purification procedures. And it allows you to, in the case of beads, there now-- you can think of it as an ultimate and flexible array. You can move the beads around and put them in new arrays, and identify them later. Anyway, so we're going to introduce the general way of making either-- complex chemicals, whether they're linear polymers like proteins or nucleic acids, or much more tighter and small molecules.  Synthetic way of getting short peptides, either by directly synthesizing the peptides or synthesizing nucleic acid that encodes that peptide. And you can think of these as drug-like molecules. These are naturally related-- they can be analogs of nucleic acids and proteins, not just straight ones. And we'll talk about opportunities for making these analogs. And the process is cyclic in the sense that each cycle, you return, and the polymer gets a little bit longer. You start with one monomer. on a solid phase, shown by these little hexagons on the far right side of the slide. And you add-- you remove the protecting group on the immobilized polymer, one protecting group. And then you bring in this reactive group, otherwise protected. And there's really one major product that you expect. You wash off all of the excess. You now have one longer. You deprotect. This DMT group is removed. There may be additional steps, such as oxidation, which will stabilize the new bond. I said there's an opportunity here for modifying the nucleotides or oligopeptides or other chemicals to make them so that they're related to, but not identical in every property, to normal constituents of your body or of a bacterial cell that you're aiming at. And why would you want to make derivatives? Why not make the exact thing? And examples are, in the previous slide, you can make modified bases. And in slide 29 here you can change the backbone itself. which you can make small molecule diversity which are less cyclic than processes we just talked about. These are more a set of ordered reactions that has a conceptual repeat, but in a sense, you can think of it as a linear program that you go from the beginning to the end. And that's to make these polyketides, which are shown on the right-hand side of the slide. A large class of pharmaceuticals, including most of the antibiotics, are made by a fairly small set of organisms, such as streptomyces in certain plants. Drug-like molecules are small, so they diffuse quickly and get to their site. Because they're small, they have less surface area to bind to their binding pocket. They have to be highly cross-linked in order to maintain the rigidity. And the third source of biological diversity is one you're probably more familiar with, which is the immune receptors, B and T cell receptors, the antibodies, and cell-mediated immunity. And these use recombination machinery to program various combinations of nucleic acid motifs. to a template-independent polymerase, [? thermotransferase, ?] which will extend a few nucleotides of completely random nucleic acid sequence. This is one of the examples in biology where you generate sequence de novo. The proteins themselves, these little arrow-shaped things with boxes in them along the top, labeled Module 1 through 6, those proteins are, of course, made on ribosomes. But then they act kind of like the solid phase synthesis. where the acyl carrier protein, ACP in the box, binds to the first monomer, and it starts transferring it from protein to protein along this multi-domain huge protein. And there's actually three proteins in a row here. And each of the steps are taken in order along the protein. But you can see each of these has a substrate specificity. And by changing the order of substrate specificities, you can build up a huge combinatorial collection here in microbial communities, and also in the laboratory. known protein might be, [INAUDIBLE],, which binds to DNA, and B42, which activates transcription of something for which you have a good visual assay, like [? URO3, ?] life and death. And so this is a so-called two-hybrid assay and variations on it. And you get this information about-- you can either collect a big data set of proteins that interact from a proteomic scale experiment, or from molecules that inhibit one or more of them. We have hundreds of proteins for which we have three-dimensional structures. From some of them, we have information on what ligands they bind. And typically, we want to select targets for binding drugs, or for solving the structures of proteins. And how can we do this? How can we decide which targets are high on our list to go for next? This is an example of a strategy where you use a little bit of prior knowledge, which can be empirical or it could be purely computational, about how to limit your library. would like to have-- you've got your target. You've gotyour genome sequence-- gene sequence for that target. How, then, do you get the three-dimensional structure that helps you design drugs or improve the drugs that you have? Well, one very attractive approach, given a protein sequence which might get from their deluge of genome sequences, the practical approach might be to start with this gene sequence. And try to predict the three dimensional structure of the protein and its ligand specificity. Once you have a regulated gene, getting the protein sequence is easy. Getting from the sequence to secondary structure is easy in the context of some of these other things. But still, the accuracy is only around 77% for secondary structure and about 25% for ab initio three-dimensional structure. We'll pick up this thread right after a break and carry on to actually how we get the three- dimensional structure, whether it's predictive or experimental, and the computational tasks there. Take a break.