GILBERT STRANG: The heat equation is the second of the three basic partial differential equations. He says the dependence on t is fast decay, and if K, as K gets larger, later terms in this sum, the decay is really fast. Strang: The term that decays most slowly, k equal 1, there'll be a B1, an e to the minus, pi squared t. The heat is flowing around in the bar, and where is it going? The bar is approaching freezing. ends are kept at freezing, and the inside of the bar, whatever heat is there at the beginning, is going to flow out the ends. So I'm freezing it at both ends. The temperature is escaping out of the center. So maybe I start with-- here is my bar from 0 to 1, and I'm keeping it frozen. F for frozen, f for frozen at that end. So u at 0 and x, I'll say it'd be 1. This way is x. have to find these numbers. And those numbers, of course, the numbers are always found by matching the initial conditions. T greater than 0 uses those Bks. And we're again faced with a Fourier series problem. And I'm finding the coefficients, so that this will match 1, the initial condition. And then, for t greater. than 0, solution u will be, as we said, the sum of these Bk's, which come from the initial. conditions, come from this-- Fourier coefficients. We have numbers, we have something depending on time and decaying rapidly. We're talking about a partial differential equation. So at time 1, if I drew a picture, suppose the heat is, the temperature starts out through the whole bar at 1. But with this kind of time decay, a little later in time, the Temperature's going to be something like that. It'll be way down at the ends, pretty low in the middle. So that's what solutions to the heat equation look like. And this is the step of finding the coefficients in our infinite series of solutions. differential equation. We have a whole function to match, so we need all of those. And Fourier series tells us how to do that matching, how to find these Bk's. So that's a separate and important question, Fourierseries. Thank you for your time. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. Back into the article you came From. The story behind the story: Click here to read the full transcript of this article. Back onto the page of the story you come from.