angular momentum is a set of operators that provide observables, things we can measure. They are important for systems in which you have central potentials. Potentials that depend just on the magnitude of the radial variable are relevant to cases where you have two bodies interacting through a potential that just depends on the distance between the particles. We found there was another object we could measure, which was the square of the total angular momentum. l squared is, by definition, lx times lx, plus ly times ly, plus lz times lz. This is this operator. And we showed that any component of angular momentum, be it lx, ly, or lz, commutes with l squared. Given that they commute, it's a general theorem that two operators that commute, you can find simultaneous eigenstates of those two operators. And therefore, we set up for the search of those wave functions that are simultaneous eigestates of one of the three components of angular Momentum. Everybody chooses lz and l squared, lz being proportional to angular momentum has an h bar m. for it. All these things were taken care of by l squared. The differential equation for l squared ended up being of this form. For the case of m equals 0 it simplifies very much so that it becomes an equation for what were eventually called Legenre polynomials. We looked at that differential equation with m equals0. We called it pl 0. So we don't write the zeros. Everybody writes pl for those polynmials. And looking at the differential equation one finds that they have divergences at theta equals 0. are the Legendre polynomials. Solve this equation for m equals 0. Are there any questions? Anything about the definitions or? Yes? AUDIENCE: Why do we care about simultaneous eigenstates? PROFESSOR: Well, the question is why do we want to figure out what are the properties of the states? In general, you will be led in any physical problem to look for the maximal set of commuting operators. The most number of operators that you could possibly measure. for every allowed energy, except for 0 energy, but two energy eigenstates. And you would be baffled. You'd say, why do I have two? There must be some difference between these two states. And in that case the answer was simple. It was the momentum. You have a particle with some momentum in one direction, or in the reverse direction. So in general, it's a most important question to try to enlarge the set of commuting observables. Leading finally to what is initially called a complete set of commutes. and an electron we can reduce this system to as if we had one particle in a central potential. So that will be also very important physically. And here there is a simple observation that one can make. Is that the differential equation for p l m depends on m squared. We expect to need values of m that are positive and negative. You have wave functions here, of this form. The complex conjugate ones should be thought as having m negative. So we expect positive andnegative m's to be allowed. definition solves the differential equation star. This takes a little work to check. It's probably something you can find the calculation in some books. But it's not all that important. The important thing to note here is the following. That this provides solutions. And there's no great honor in finding zero solution of this equation. These are no solutions. So this produces solutions for an, absolute value of m, less than l. And therefore m in between l and minus l. It is a theorem that there are no more solutions. No additional regular solutions. that don't diverge. So this is very important. It shows that there is one more constraint on your quantum numbers. This formula you may forget, but you should never forget this one. This one says that if you choose some l which corresponds to choosing the magnitude of the angular momentum, l is the eigenvalue. You will have several possibilities for m. There will be several states that have the same l, but m different. So for example you'll have l equal 0, in which case m must be equal to 0. The spherical harmonicas are going to be those wave functions. And they have a normalization, n l m, an exponention, and all that. So let me write, just for the record, what a y l m looks like with all the constants. The only one I really remember is that y 0 0 is a constant. It's 1 over 4 pi. That's simple enough. No dependents. Here is another one. y1 plus minus 1 is minus plus square root of 3 over 8 pi e to the plus minus i phi sine theta.