Professor Donald Kagan: We have been looking at the question of the rise of the polis. He says the concepts and the kind of characteristics I've been describing appear to spread all over the place. One of the ways in which we can date the pol is has to do with the Greek traditions about the establishment of colonies throughout the Mediterranean, he says. Kagan says the idea of the farmer hoplite citizen is a critical element in shaping a polis and for my money that's what the poli is about to start with. are a clue is because every time we see a colony, learn anything at all about it, it appears to exist in the form of a polis. That powerfully suggests that that was the typical characteristic style of life that had already been established for Greeks before they sent out the colonies. The earliest date according to Greek tradition, if my memory is correct, was something like 773 where the Greeks date the foundation of what they thought was the earliest colony they ever established. That's the very first place where there is a tradition of a Greek colony having been planted. the natural thing to do given the character of life, which was based upon farming, if you leave you lose your farm, and based upon the difficulty of transportation. In the Greek world we know--I think I quoted something from Hesiod that confirmed it. The Greeks were, even though they went to sea plenty, they were terrified of the sea for very good reason. Their ships, their boats were not very seaworthy; storms come up in the Mediterranean very suddenly and terribly. So then there's the whole idea--we've already given you some sense that the Greeks were ancestor worshippers. four, how do you provide for the extra two? Well, sometimes you divide up the land equally, but if that land continues to get smaller and smaller, it will not sustain an additional person, not to mention additional family. So that clearly is a problem and the notion that land hunger is a key explanation, I think, is supported by the fact that wherever we find a polis, whatever other characteristics it has, and they vary, some of them are located at wonderful places on the sea. place for trade. They would have had to be damn fools to have settled there without that being in their minds. Some of the places where they settled leave us puzzled, and have left the ancients puzzled. One of my favorite examples is the colony on the south shore of the Bosporus, which is called Chalcedon. It's right opposite Constantinople--that doesn't exist, Istanbul. Winston Churchill never, never conceded that it was Istanbul; he called it Constantinople till the day he died. In any group of people there is a small minority, I want to emphasize small, who just love to do risky things. They just love adventure; they're never happy if they're safe, and so off they go seeking adventure and seeking to make a fortune however they're going to do it. So, for these reasons and probably for hundred of years, they've been colonizing. And now that we do have something, namely, this wave of colonization, they join that as well. Colony is a Latin word ultimately for colonia and the Roman colonies were, first of all, garrisons that they planted in land they had conquered. The Greek word for this is, apoikia, and most literally it would mean a home away, an away home and that's what they're making. They are establishing for themselves a household, a home someplace away from where they started. They were the antecedents of the Serfs, which we will see later on in medieval history in Europe. Delphi is halfway up Mount Parnassus and it was thought by the Greeks to be the omphalos, the navel of the universe, the center in every way. There the god Apollo had established an oracle. Gases would escape through this gap in the earth and there were priests who worshipped Apollo there. They would place a young woman there who would sit as these gases came up and she would after a while begin to speak in tongues, which is to say she would rattle off a lot of language which nobody could understand. John Hale of the Yale Class of 1973 is now an archaeologist at the University of Louisville. He discovered evidence that totally confirmed the Greek story. They tell you precisely what the gases were, what the characteristics of those gases were. It squared beautifully with all details that we heard about the Delphic Oracle. So, here's just one more case where Yale helped to straighten out the world, but you notice it wasn't done by a Yale faculty member, we engage in confusing the world but our alumni do a much better job. Greeks and barbarians came to Delphi to consult the Delphic Oracle. Most of the things they asked were questions that really had a yes or no answer. The oracle probably gained its fame for being very good precisely at answering this question. These people knew more than anybody else about these things, and so consulting that oracle was a very act of rational thought, says John MacIntosh, professor of ancient history at the University of California, Los Angeles, and author of the book, "The Lost City of Syracuse" will decide whether it's a good idea for him or not. Recruiting is tremendously important because you need to have a certain number of settlers to make the settlement viable. So however many that is, that is what you try to recruit and you recruit typically at a time when it's easy to get people together so you can tell them the story. There are festivals held in each city just for its own citizens and my guess is that when you could do that, when you felt that you could recruit a full colony from your fellow citizens in Corinth, let us say, that's what you did. were not enough Corinthians who were ready to go with you on your expedition. So, you would try to take your message to one of the Pan-Hellenic festivals which were getting organized about this time. So now you have everything in place, you've recruited your settlement, you get on your ships and sail, in this case out to the west central Mediterranean. You find your way to Sicily, work your way into the harbor at Syracuse and things work out, and now we have this apoikia called Syracuse. The city of Corinth sent out a lot of colonies, which is why we know something about their arrangements. When Potidaea got into trouble with Athens, and found itself besieged, Corinth sent a real army to go in there and fight. At the other end of the spectrum it's again Corinth and they have a colony up in the northwest called Corcyra. The first relationship between them is a navel battle, and thereafter we hear of them quarrelling and fighting with each other just about at least once a century right on down. more time, that the overwhelming normal situation is the first one I described, friendly relations. These guys that have gone out, let us say to Syracuse, they are your people, they have relatives back home. They have friends back home, it is natural--oh by the way, they're accustomed to worship the gods in the same way that the Corinthians do. We do know, again, Thucydides is our source, that it was customary for colonies to send representatives back to the mother city for the religious observations that were common to them all. shop, but you can't get now, so you would want to buy what the Corinthians sell. Guess what? You've got great grain fields out there in Syracuse. Hard to believe today, but Sicily was one of the major granaries of the Mediterranean world at that time. Corinth always needs that kind of stuff, so we sell you our wheat, you sell us your pottery. You sell good wine that we can't grow yet and maybe never will be able to grow in our neighborhood. So you can see why it would be very natural for all sorts of ties to unite these colony and mother city. Kagan: Nobody was compelled to do anything. The British practicing mercantilism passed navigation acts, saying what ships could carry what and so on--nothing like that in the Greek world. Everybody--all of this is voluntary on both sides of every agreement. Okay, now where are these colonies? Let me give you a little run down. Before we get to that, I should say that the Greeks have already, before this period of the period, had colonies. In the back, yeah? Student: What extent was the primitive form of [inaudible]Professor Donald Kagan: Primitive form of what? By the tenth century B.C., we see Greek cities lining the coast of Asia Minor on the west, and even around on the bottom and to some degree on the north, and on the islands in the Aegean. So, there has been a Greek--what's the word I want? There is an expansion of the Greek world already by the 10th century. I might point out that the way the Greeks did their immigration into Asia Minor had a pattern so that you can go from north to south and you will find some consistency. The Black Sea is not a Greek lake, but there are Greek cities that are spotted along the coast. When the mythical mission of Jason and his Argonauts go sailing out to that territory, he is out there in Tarzan country. As far as the Greeks were concerned, it was just the wild out in that territory and remember he marries and brings home a wife, Media, and she, of course, is like no Greek woman who ever lived. She can perform magic and she can do monstrous things that you can't imagine a Greek woman doing. there, Palestine, there are no Greek cities there and that is because during the period we're talking about those regions were occupied by civilized powerful people. Nobody would even dream of trying to take them on and building cities that would challenge their control of that area. So that is not territory that you can build colonies; you've got powerful empires to deal with. There is one exception. In the sixth century, I think it's around--imagine around 550 or something like that, the Greeks settle a single colony in the Delta. Greece colonized most of the Mediterranean in the 7th century B.C. Greek cities are all over the place, including Nice, Marseille, and Creta. The Greeks are shut out of the Italian Riviera because of the Etruscans, who control their own area. When the Romans dominate most of Italy, they refer to the southern portion of that peninsula as Magna Graecia, great Greece because they're all Greeks down there. There were two important cities in the northern part of that island, Calkis and Eretria. what can we speculate is the meaning of that? What we find is that the states who are doing most of the colonizing are located where most ofThe trade was going on at this point in history. When I say manufacturing, you understand everything is done by hand, but you see things like shops that contain a number of slaves working for a master. In some cases, especially the later on you go, some shops that have quite a few slaves that worked to produce these things. Well, these places are the ones that have the trade, the industry, and also engage in colonization. is easy to see that where there is that kind of conflict and trouble, there would be people who would want to flee that and to go elsewhere. It might well be that the people who won those wars, internal wars, would have been glad to send them away rather than to have these discontented people and these folks who were their enemies hanging around town and making trouble. It is only speculation, but it seems to make sense and we know we don't hear of such troubles within Athens and Thebes, and Sparta. Greece's impact was greater in the west and the north than it was in the east and the south. The Greeks lived among people who were more civilized than they. They had very little to teach or to impose upon those people rather than vice versa. philosophy is going to be invented in Miletus probably in this sixth century B.C. Well, MileTus was on the main routes to all of the places where advanced knowledge could be found, Mesopotamia, Egypt. It is inconceivable the Greeks could have developed a civilization that they did without contact with these eastern civilizations. who have interests rather different from those of the most primitive polis you could imagine. Some scholars early on in the century, moved by Marxist theories, suggested that you had a capitalist class growing up, there's just no evidence of that; it's just wrong. My guess is that the earliest traders of any scope were probably noblemen who also had land and estates back home, but who had the opportunity, the know-how, the connections to make it possible to make a lot of living in trade. is going on. More and more farmers are becoming independent, self-sustaining, hoplite farmers of the kind that I've described. They're not going to feel the same way about it, there's going to be pressure from them for a better participation in the decisions that are made in the state. And also there will be some rich people, very rich people,. rich in a different way from the way people used to be rich; rich meant the best land. There will be people who will have wealth in the form of precious things and I would use the word money. come to mean weights of silver or gold. So now you have a change in fundamental economic things. Well, all of this is tied up with this colonial story I've been telling you. Finally, I think, it works in both directions at the same time in terms of the impact all of these changes have on the political situation. On the one hand the changes, that is (A) the rise of the hoplite class; (B) the development of lots of commerce and industry and wealth in a new kind. especially, some scholars have pointed out, I think persuasively, also for some considerable time provided an answer to that problem in the form of an escape valve. Americans didn't have the kind of terrible class warfare and the terrible warfare within cities that the Europeans had experienced throughout most of their history. Really unhappy and angry people could always go west, get new places. I mean, fundamentally, Kansas is a colony in a certain Greek sense, all of these places are. So, that's part of the story of why America had the very lucky early history that it had. that colonization provided something analogous to that for the Greek people. So now, here we are somewhere in the seventh century, most of these places I've been talking about have been settled, the currents that I have been describing are flowing and the kinds of problems they have give rise to what will be felt in most of the towns. That is the proper introduction to the next topic, which I'll discuss next year. No not--it seems like a year, but it's next Tuesday actually.