JACK HARE: Let's do a little recap on electron cyclotron emission, and then we will go on to a few other things. We didn't actually derive the emissivity of it, but we gave ourselves a hand-wavy reason why there may be multiple peaks here. And these peaks are going to be occurring at frequencies-- I'm going to switch into angular frequency units, omega m. And we can say this is m equals 1,. m equals 2, m equals 3. And they're evenly spaced. "We agreed that these peaks would, in general, be broadened in some asymmetric fashion. But the exact shape will depend on exactly how big these two terms are with respect to each other" "And we said the neat thing about this is that these frequencies depend only on the magnetic field. And so, if you see some emission at some certain frequency, then you know that it's been emitted by a region of plasma which has this magnetic field" "That was particularly useful when we considered a tokamak because, if we have some magnetic field that goes 1 upon R" different because the magnetic field is dropping off nice and monotonically throughout our device here. So we said that, for example, we might have three different regions, which we could label positions R1, R2, and R3. And each of these then have different magnetic fields, B1, B2 and B3. Each of these magnetic fields will then produce a spectra of lines at these different harmonics here. And at each ofThese points, if we measure the intensity, we then know straight away what the temperature is corresponding to the black body spectrum. temperature as a function of frequency. Then we can say, well, that frequency corresponds to a certain magnetic field. And then we can says that magnetic field corresponds to. a certain spatial coordinate. And so, this is a technique which will give us, by looking at the spectrum for lowish frequencies, the first or maybe the second harmonics of this cyclotron emission, we can work out what the temperature is as a. function of space. This is correlation ECE, often called CECE. what we want to do is measure very small temperature fluctuations. We want to measure temperature fluctuations within the plasma that are maybe on the order of 1% of the baseline temperature. If the mean temperature is just Te, and we have some fluctuation around 1%, this intensity will also fluctuate by about 1%. And that 1% is actually extremely hard to measure. And this is because the noise is just too high on these systems. There are lots of different contributions to the noise. But, in general, they all add up to make it very hard toMeasure these very small fluctuations. want to understand in plasmas so that we can build an economically viable fusion reactor. Now, the fact that the noise is too high does seem like a big limitation. But there are some clever tricks that we play where we use correlations. And I'll talk now about what exactly these correlations are and how they provide us with information that allows us to get a signal out despite the overwhelming [INAUDIBLE]. So our setup here is borrowed from ASDEX Upgrade. And, in effect, I referred to Alex Creely's PhD thesis, which you can find online if you want more information. can get very detailed. So in ASDEX Upgrade, we don't really have a circular cross-section plasma, but I'm just drawing it like that, be a nice D-shaped plasma, got our plasma inside here. And our system, at first glance, looks an awful lot like the system that we sketched out up here. We're going to have some sort of special lens. It turns out, you can make lenses for microwaves. And that lens is going to collect light from a region like this. some sort of top hat. It's centered around the frequency where most of the electron cyclotron emission is. And this has a bandwidth of 10 gigahertz. So we've cut out an awful lot of the radiation in bands that we're not interested in. We are no longer going to study those, any bremsstrahlung, any higher order things. This is going to capture all of the information in, say, the first harmonic within some relatively small window. frequency range. Once we've got our bandpass filtered signal here, 110 kilohertz is still too fast for us to digitize. This would be an extremely expensive digitizer. So, what we actually do is we downmix it with the signal at 100 gigahertz. And so, then we get out our beat signal, which we can digitize, which is at 10 gig ahertz here. So this is-- actually, I will write this as 0 to 10 giga hertz. This is the sort of signal that we can actually digitize now. bins is 125 megahertz. It's important that these bins do not overlap in frequency space. They are each sampling a separate discrete part of the plasma inside here. So each of these represents a measure of the power that's being emitted by a very small region. And you can tell that these regions are very small because we're dealing with 100 mega hertz bandwidth. And we originally started with 110 gigahertz here. And so, you see we've gone down by a factor of 1,000. downsampled these is that digitized is now much less expensive. We're doing it something like 4 mega samples a second. And that is quite an affordable digitizer compared to the ones you would need to digitize this signal. So I have not yet told you anything about how correlation ECE works. I'm just giving you an outline of exactly how these measurements are made with an example from ASDEX Upgrade. But there are other similar devices on other tokamaks. many oscillations. And so, it will average out to-- well, because it's power, it'll average out out to 1 or something like that. So it's some DC offset that we can subtract off after. So all this is doing here is mixing the signal down so it gets to a regime that we could effectively digitize. Yeah, another question. [INAUDIBLE] JACK HARE: So if we were doing geometric optics, which we're not, then you would have a lens like this. That lens could collimate your beam. The idea here is that there was some region over which, in the transverse direction perpendicular to your collection volume, you have a very narrow scale. You can actually collect from a very small region on the order of 100 microns. Anyone know how micro splitters work? Looking at you? STUDENT: RF. JACK HARE: The answer I got is that you can buy something from DigiKey or something like that that will do it for you. It depends on your size of your lens and the wavelength of light. was RF, which I don't think is much more satisfying than my answer. So, yeah, there are circuits which will split microwaves. What they were actually doing with this system is all of these were very tunable. And so, if they wanted to look at turbulence in the edge or turbulence near the center, they could actually tune all their bandpass filters to do that. But this is getting way beyond what I was hoping to talk about on this. So let's get on to correlation ECE see what that does. we're going to write this little tilde here to remind us that this signal is some oscillating quantity or time varying quantity. And that signal has two components to it. It's got some fluctuation, which is due to temperature fluctuation. And then, it's also got some noise. This is the thing that we don't want to measure here. And so, the signal, as a function of time, is going to look like, again, our temperature signal, which might be some nice and smooth function like this corresponding to some turbulent eddy. of extracting this temperature from the noise here. And what we do is we pick two adjacent channels. These channels are adjacent in frequency space, which means that they are measuring from adjacent parcels of plasma in real space or inside the tokamak. So we say, our term is greater than delta R. Which means that, if there's a temperature fluctuation associated with this little vortex, it is the same temperature fluctuations in S1 as in S2. And, again-- oh, I don't need this to be much greater than. I just need it to be greater than or less than. on the order of 100 microns or so apart. We are going to correlate these two signals. And we're going to find that the noise is uncorrelated at random. These two signals will correlate together, and we'll be able to measure it. And, again, these are really, really closely spaced, 100 micron or so away. But, the nice thing is now that theseTwo signals are carrying the same components that we're trying to measure. And this is where the correlation comes in. is an example of nominative determinism. Someone called Watts goes around making power measurements. Yeah, and this technique is incredibly powerful because it's enabled people to measure, again, delta Te upon Te on the order of 1%. And they've done this at 13-- on ASDEX Upgrade-- 13 radial locations. So 13 positions they can measure these temperature fluctuations. And they have done this with a time step of 100 kilohertz. So 100,000 times a second they've been able to measure these temperatures. we have positioned these two volumes, which are producing frequencies omega 1 and omega 2. And we think that that distance is smaller than the size of our turbulent eddy. The temperature should be the same going up and down. And if you do this correlation and you get out nothing, that probably means your volumes are too far apart because there is-- this T correlation would just go T1 T2. And there's no good reason to believe those temperature fluctuations are correlated, because they'll be part of a different turbulent Eddy. situation where, at some point, your eddy has moved across, and these two are no longer correlated because the next two are correlated. So it-- yeah. I think we're reaching the limits of my knowledge. Yeah. Now we're going to go to bremsstrahlung. Some people these days just call this breaking radiation, which is just the translation from the German, and that's a perfectly reasonable term to use. And so, what we're dealing with is heavy ions, and all ions are heavy compared to electrons. And we've got some electron whizzing by. from its trajectory. Now, this electron isn't then just going to sail off and never see an ion again. In fact, it's going to see one very, very soon. And so, effectively, our entire plasma is full of electrons which are gently being deflected and breaking and emitting these photons. So the main thing we can say in a classical treatment is that the bremsstrahlung is going to be isotropic. That's actually quite different from electron cyclotron emission, even though we didn't really look at that in any detail. here with the ions and electrons as point particles. There's a semi-classical approach where you start bringing in some quantum physics and treat, I think, the electron as a wave. And then there's a full quantum approach. What's remarkable about all of these approaches is they all give the same answer with just a very slightly different coefficient. So we get a small change in coefficient. The scalings are the same. So, in some sense, although it's important to get the exact coefficient, it doesn't matter exactly which one of these techniques you use. from the point of view of this course, it makes no difference. Yeah, I think it's kind of remarkable that it doesn't make any difference. So, again, if you want the full treatment, go have a look in Hutchinson. And there's also a long treatment in Jackson of this same problem. I'm just going to quote some results. I kind of already spoiled it now. It's here. For the Maxwellian average, because we can have all sorts of different distribution functions, but our plasma tends towards a Maxwellian. This, therefore, has units of watts per hertz per meter cubed. And these constants are things like e, the electron charge, and the electron mass, and epsilon 0, and h bar, and c, all arranged in some way to make all the dimensions work. And you'll also find this Gaunt factor varies very weakly with the temperature of the plasma here. So this is a pretty weakly varying function. We can change it by two orders of magnitude in this parameter here, but this only changes by one order of. magnitude. And so, in general, it's reasonable to just treat G as being a constant and then, for this calculations we're doing, where we're going to drop the absolute intensity, we can just drop G with all the other constants as well. So we can drop [INAUDIBLE]. But if you want to go back and do this properly for some measurement that you'redoing, then you'd have to include this. And that is all you need to do Problem Set 3. at all frequencies, like a black body kind of spectrum here. That goes down to very low frequencies and goes up to very high frequencies. We're going to talk about lots of other effects which produce emissivity which is higher than the bremsstrahlung. But, often, when we're doing power balance calculations for a tokamak, we will just use this, and that represents our most optimistic take. So, I guess, you always need to worry about this, even if you managed to clear out all the impurities. something like that. But this bremsstrahlung may be quite small. But even if it's not quite small, it is constant because it varies only slowly as a function of a frequency. So for a small frequency window, it looks constant. And then you can just subtract off some background intensity and look at the actual signal you're interested in, like you see there. Yeah. So, yeah, we haven't really talked about that. From this j, you can now calculate alpha, the opacity, because we had j upon alpha is equal. In reality, for some plasma, we might have a spectrum that looks like this. So it goes back to being optically thin here for the high energy photons. But the low energy photons will get absorbed as well. There's actually another effect, which is in Hutchinson's book, which I haven't covered here. And so, the spectrum will be even further modified because that wave will be evanescent. But we're skipping over that this year. But it's in there if you're interested. at synchrotron, yes. Jack HARE: I think someone told me that maybe for a high field tokamaks synch rotron could start being significant. But I actually have no idea how big a deal it is. And I don't know if people are using it as a diagnostic. I've not heard of someone using it. But it's interesting in its own right. It's a source of X-rays for diagnosing many other things. It depends on what you're trying to diagnose. mostly on the magnetic field and the radius. And those are two things in a tokamak you already know. But maybe there's a really clever diagnostic you can do, like fast particles or something like that. So worth thinking about. STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] JACK HARE: Right, but I'm not interested in [INAudIBLE]. This is a diagnostics course. Any questions online while we pause? So this is bremsstrahlung radiation, and often people call this free-free. That entire acceleration yields one photon, one energy. And so, initially, we have a kinetic energy, a 1/2 mv squared. Then, afterwards, we're going to have an energy 1/ 2 mv prime squared minus h nu. Now, if h nu is less than the initial kinetic energy here, then we still have some kinetic energy left. So v prime is greater than 0, our particle is still free, and it can continue. But, of course, there's another case where this photon takes away so much energy that this starts, I guess it becomes imaginary. where we have a range of different discrete energy levels that the electrons can occupy. These energy levels are labeled by the principal quantum number n. n equals 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on. And, up here, infinity, this is ionization. If your electron gets this much energy, it becomes free again. And the energies of these levels are given by this unit, Ry, which is the Rydberg z squared of our ion over n squared. And that's the thing that we're going to see with our spectrometer. The spectrum, therefore, looks like we had something like this for bremsstrahlung before, and now we have a spectrum that contains a series of edges, like this. And this lowest edge here-- I should draw this as a straight line-- this is n equals 1, 2, 3, 4, and all the way back up here, where, again, this is our brems result, and this isOur recombination.n of jn here. So if you're asking, what happens if you can't fulfill that, it just doesn't happen. Quantum mechanically, that would be a forbidden transition. I understand. So I was just wondering, because it's not the condition that there are photons that are released with greater than 12 mv squared the kinetic energy. It's the photon energy that's-- yeah, maybe we're doing this backwards in some sense. STUDENT: I see. So if you see a photon being emitted with more than 1/2mv squared, then the electron has over-emitted. And the only way it could have done that is if it fell down into one of these principles. we just did it in reverse. So this long tail here is due to the fact that we have electrons not just with v equal 0 but much more than that. Now, are they actually sharp or is it that we want f of distribution of v squared? I'll have a look into that. Any other questions? Yeah. I understand. JACK HARE: Yeah, I think maybe I motivated this the wrong way around. Yeah. Other questions? yeah. STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] Jack Hare: Yes, exactly. related to the overlap integral between those with a dipole operator, the dipole operators being the thing that emits the photon in between them. So, yeah, it depends on the ion charge. If you've got some helium with 2 times ionized helium, and you'veGot some hydrogen, then it will have different recombination lines here. And that's because, fundamentally, the energy levels are in different places inside here. The energy levels shift by the ion charges here. Any other questions? time, that absorbs some [INAUDIBLE]. JACK HARE: Ooh. Wouldn't this balance out, electricity going in and out of ions? There's a very good question. We're going to get to that and the idea of detailed balance and thermodynamic equilibrium and things of that ilk. One use of this is a diagnostic called bolometry. It cares not at all about the detailed spectrum of what the emission is. It just wants to know how much power is being radiated by the plasma. This is balanced by conduction losses and what we, at the time, we assumed were bremsstrahlung losses, but in general could be any sort of radiative losses here. And so, bolometry is focused on measuring the total power that's being emitted. So we take our beautiful spectrum like this, and we integrate over all of this. We lose all of the detail. But, of course, the detail matters when we're doing the integral because you can see the recombination increases the amount of emission. So there'll be more emission here. divider just drawn in a complicated way. The reason why this is interesting is that, in general, M is going to change with T. We're going to have some resistivity as a function of temperature. And so, as this resistor heats up from absorbing the radiation, its resistance is going. to change. So if we're measuring the resistance M, we can then use some table of rho of T to get out the temperature. We'll talk a little bit more about how to do that in the next step. be digitizing this as a function of time. And so, this is also a function. of time and temperature. And all of this is time some heat capacity. And, in general, this resistor is going to be connected. It has its own heat capacity c, but it's also going to. be connected to some heat sink, which is unavoidable. And that heat sink will have some thermal transport time tau. So there's two different ways that the resistor is connected. There's actually a second term here, which was delta tau delta T upon tau, like that. radiation can affect this. And so, by measuring delta T up here, the change in temperature in our resistance, we can invert this equation and we can back out the radiation power. So this is just a really simple way of using a resistor to measure the power coming out of the plasma. And bolometry was one of the first diagnostics that we had on many MCF devices. It does not work because it is very susceptible to noise. So we have to, as always, come up with a clever system, which is noise resistant. resistors. So there's a resistor here, another resistor here. And we connect these resistors up. And the clever thing, in a bolometer, is we allow two of the resistors to see the plasma. And these are the ones we call the measurement resistors M1 and M2. So these measurement. resistors, they see the radiated power P rad, and their. temperature is equal to the temperature of the reference resistors plus a change in. temperature due to radiation. setup is your entire bolometer is going to heat up. And so, what you want to know is not just how hot they are, but howHot they are relative to the vacuum vessel. So, this is why we have this system where we're trying to measure a very small change between R1 and R2, which would be identical, and M1 and M2. And it's this small quantity here, delta T, that's due to the radiated power that we're really trying toMeasure. At the Wheatstone bridge, we also use a phase locked loop measurement, which is a form of heterodyning again, my favorite technique. And so, we actually have V0 is oscillating at around 50 kilohertz or so. So, we can see that our signal, delta T, or the change in temperature as a function of time, is a slowly varying signal which is embedded on top of this 50 kph signal. And then, using heterodyting techniques,we can measure it very cleanly without noise. This is often made out of gold. Gold is chosen because it absorbs all wavelengths relatively evenly. So you don't need to worry too much about the spectral response of this. This thin layer of gold has been deposited on top of a substrate. And it's on the back of the substrate that you have your resistor. And your resistor is literally a little zig zag of gold deposited on theBack side of this, so this is M or R. And depending on whether it is M. or R, you either have this open to the plasma or you have a thick block some distance in front of it so it can't see the plasma. heating down from direct heating and then also a time lag phenomena delta T on tau. And, effectively, this tau here sets the timescale at which we can measure. So the larger tau is the slower our measurement of the radiated power is going to be. If tau gets very large, because we've got a very thick substrate here, or it doesn't have very good heat transport, then we're going to have a very poor time resolution of our radiation power. difference between those. neutron damage leads us to use much thicker substrates, which gives us a longer time response and so, therefore, a worse bolometer. So, ironically, the bolometers that will be used on [INAUDIBLE] are significantly worse than the bolometer used on existing devices. And I'm sure that [? Spark ?] will have exactly the same problem. Almost everyone in the world uses this design of bolometer that they pioneered on ASDEX Upgrade in the '80s. No one has come up with a better system yet.