Marginal rate of substitution of good 1 with respect to good 2 is infinity. When we do not say when we say just MRS, we are not using any particular term, you can use both way. We will always use this, yes here is 0 and MRS here is infinity, but in both the examples MRS of cola is Infinity. So, just be careful what we are talking about. This is you know a point of confusion many people just change the axis when they talk about it. getting x you get 1 by x, and why? Let us see what do we mean by marginal rate of substitution mathematically. We will let us change it little bit, let us put it here 3.25 just for example, because what is the marginal rates of substitution here, MRS by the definition that we have used is minus 0.75. Just wait I will come to that, why what is happening, increase in x is, why we are getting minus sign, because of course, when we have convexity what we will get. To get 1 good you will have to give up the other good, both what we are assuming that both these items are good, means they give certain satisfaction or certain you know utility to the person, and what we want. So, of course, when we are increasing the amount of 1 good to bring what will happen using this, if we use the monotonicity what will happening. If more of 1Good what is happening let us see. From here you are moving here in this direction, here at the screen, its increasing from 2 its going to 3. accompanied by decrease in the other good, if both are the goods. So, here we have in denominator we have good 1 and changes 1 unit. How much change do we need in the second good, 4 minus 3.25 and of course, I should put a minus sign here, and this is you get 0.75. Marginal rate of substitution is nothing, but the slope of this indifference curve. It would be mathematically more sound to talk about very small unit of good 1, and with respect to get very little amount of good. good 1, how much the other person is willing to give up, the another good, but we have to measure in terms of per unit of good 1. So, that is why in that case MRS is going to be, let us say in other word, 'MRS' MRS. 1 is the original bundle is x y, and let us. say what is happening from x y what we are having, change is x plus delta. x and y plus delta y, what would be the slope. see, that MRS is given as a positive number, that only means that the author has introduced a negative sign here to convert the MRS into apositive number. So, it does not matter. Is it clear? Do you know the answer to this question? If so, please email us at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. If you don't, we would like to hear from you. Please send us a photo of your MRS and we will send it to you.