50 years ago, John McCarthy and Marvin Minsky coined the term artificial intelligence. Progress has been made, especially in the last 20 years. But we need different expertises. Not all in computer science, but in other ones. And so, this was the people that we put together from different labs, from neuroscience, from computer science,. from cognitive science, and from a number of institutions in the US. Especially MIT and Harvard. Let me tell you a bit more about the background here. This idea of merging brain research and computer science. cover of a Nature supplement, on artificial intelligence and machine learning. I think it's a golden age for intelligent applications. We are still very far from understanding how people can answer questions about images. And we would like to know to have a system that does that. But also, to know how our brain does it. So that's the science part. It's not enough to pass the Turing Test. In In Nature, David Wheeler looks at the future of artificial intelligence, and how it will affect our lives. this case, to have a system that does it. And we want to compare your model, our system, with measurements on the brain of people, or monkeys, also during the same task. So that's what we call Turing plus, plus questions. And part of the rationale about it is, this is kind of a more philosophical discussion. I personally think that it's very difficult tohave a definition of intelligence, in general. There are many different forms of intelligence. What we can ask is questions about, what is human intelligence? Because we can study that. able to answer how people do understand images. We start with vision. We are not limited, eventually, to vision. But in the first five years of the center, that's the main focus. And answer the question about images. And we want to understand how the answers are produced by our brain at the computational, psychophysical, and neural level. It's ambitious. And I think there are probably, in terms of having all these different levels, levels of really understanding from the what, where, the neuroscience, to the behavior.