Thiazide tells us that this medication works in the early part of the distal convoluted tubule that's found within this nephron. This transporter is called the sodium chloride co-transporter and it is considered a cyanide sensitive transporter so hence why this drug works so well. While loop diuretics are a lot more effective than a thiazide diuretic but the thiazid does provide a nice diuresis effect. They're less effective in patients who have a compromised GFR a go merrill ER filtration rate. Thiazide diuretics can increase uric acid levels which can lead to gout attacks. These drugs alter how the proximal convoluted tubule deals with your ate and it actually increases how urate is reabsorbed which can increase your gas levels and lead to gaol attacks so you may need to monitor those uri acid levels. High uric Acid levels for a male tends to be anywhere anything greater than seven and four females greater than six. If you see a uricacid level of 15 that is not good that means that they have high uric acids levels. These medications can do is they can be prescribed a lot of times with ACE inhibitors and this can help actually increase the function of the heart and help the patient feel better. Thiazide diuretics can be used in the treatment of renal calculi which are those renal stones that are composed of calcium now let's talk about nursing responsibilities the side effects and education pieces for the patient who may be taking a thigh-high diuretic so whenever you have a patient taking a thiazide you really want to be watching out for signs and symptoms of dehydration. is you can look at their vital signs how is their blood pressure if it's hypotensive low that's the salts less than 90 that probably means that we've removed a little bit too much fluid volume from their blood also the heart rate will be increased as well. A lot of patients with heart failure may be on these medications and we want to teach them to weigh themselves every day and to write it down to keep track. If they've gained more than like three pounds in one day that could mean that they're retaining fluid and they may be having heart failure exacerbation and will need to go to their doctor. on digoxin and their potassium level goes too low it can increase the risk of digoxin toxicity. A normal lithium level is about 0.5 to 1.2 millimoles per liter so remember these two drugs if we go into these hypo conditions either hyponatremia or hypokalemia with those it can cause toxicity. No exams love to ask about the hyper conditions that these drugs can cause our hyper hyper Cal C Mia the high calcium level hyperuricemia. the high uric acid level and hyperglycemia again teach your diabetic patients to monitor their blood glucose really closely while taking a thigh. Avoid giving doses of diuretics at night because we want our patients to sleep at night we don't want them up using the bathroom all the time so make sure you're not doing that. orthostatic hypotension this is where the when the patients maybe they've been sitting or lying down they get up they can fall they become dizzy you want to teach them to change position slowly. weight or losing weight so we play a huge role with that as well okay so that wraps up this review over thighs I diuretics. thank you so much for watching don't forget to take the free quiz and to subscribe to our channel for more videos. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @bbcopinion. Follow our Facebook page and our YouTube channel for all the latest from CNN.co.uk and CNN iReport.