In order to make proteins like hemoglobin and antibodies-- these are made up of amino acids-- we need large entities. And so the things that will feature today are the transfer RNAs and the ribosome. And I want you to look at the size of this molecular machine. This is we're getting pretty large now. We're needing to use large machines to make the smaller catalysts that are essential to making proteins and other molecules that we use every day. And we are going here now from the smallest carbon atom. The ribosome organelle is a large entity in the cell. And, when you do look at electron micrographs of cells, you can see these dark dots, which represent ribosomes. They're big enough to see, whereas the proteins themselves are not. So that's what you're destined for today. The structure of the mature messenger RNA just for a minute because, in the last class, we talked about a lot of manipulations of that pre-messenger RNA. And now I just want to remind you that the messenger RNA is the fresh thing out of transcription. messenger is single-stranded RNA, obviously. It has a 5 prime cap, which has got this funky 5 prime, 5 prime bridge that's resistant to exonucleases. Somewhere in that sequence is a start codon. It's something that says this is the bit I want to translate. Often, there's a lot of stuff here that you don't translate. Part of what's known as the ribosome binding site. And there are many features in this part of the sequence that are very important for translation. The genetic code, which forms the basis of this entire concept, has some features to it where it does have some degeneracy. But we'll go through the degeneracy, and we'll take a look at the genetic code because it will tell us exactly how the three letter-- the words made of three bases encode everything we need for translation, all right? So let's just go back and take a looks at this. So we've looked at the messenger. I've told you a little bit about the tRNAs and. Once the structure of double-stranded DNA was deduced, everyone was moving on to trying to understand how that converted to the translation to proteins. Crick and Brenner realized it was three bases to code for one amino acid, but Khorana, Nirenberg, and Holley defined that genetic code and got all of the details. So that's the work thatKhorana and others did. And that was awarded them a Nobel Prize for that work. And then, later on, things started to get-- you know, these are decades of work I want to point out to you. decade later, the sort of details of the structure, but not the structure itself. And it was really exciting in the 2000s when Ramakrishnan, Steitz, and Yonath solved the structure of the prokaryotic ribosome. So each of these things has taken a decade to happen, but they are fundamental, major, important things that we can act on and move forward to understand more. All right, so let's move to the transfer RNAs. And I've flashed up this slide a couple of times, but I actually now have the movie of theructure of a transfer RNA. The ribosome is an important structure in the mechanisms of protein translation and synthesis. The 3 prime hydroxyl group of the last ribose within this ribosomal sequence is where the amino acid that's going to be loaded into your protein is attached. One of the loops has a special name. It's called the anticodon loop. It comprises three nucleotides that are complementary to the nucleotide in your messenger sequence. So this really is a decoder because, at one end, it's carrying an amino acid, but it's also carrying the aminoacid that corresponds to the code that's in the messenger via that anticodon loops. We're starting to understand the tRNAs. What we need to move on to now is really taking a look at the genetic code. This is the absolute-- the sort of Rosetta Stone for translating messenger RNA to amino acid sequence using codons. So this sort of-- whoa. Getting a little-- I love translation. I'm getting a little bit excited about translation. OK, so there are a few features of this genetic code that are very important. Number one, you won't have to remember it. is how we designate the triplet of nucleotides. The way you read this table is you read the first letter. So, if I'm going here, here, it's going to be starting UU. Then, within each block, there are the four alternatives for the other four bases. And then the third one, basically, just designates those. So you can read, for each amino acid, what three-letter codon would correspond to it. Some people quite like-- oops. I got rid of it too fast. stop codons. The stop codons tend to be used variously. Some are more predominant in some organisms than other. Some organisms might prefer two or three of the degenerate codons, and others may prefer a couple of the others. The last thing I want to do is, basically, explain to you one more time, when you're looking to read what your amino acids that get put in may be, you're going to look at the codon. And it will tell you exactly the amino acid. synthetases for different amino acids that show you that there's a recognition not just for the amino acid that's being loaded, but, rather, for the entire transfer RNA. So some of these look quite different. The isoleucine one interacts in one way. The valine one is a little different. And the glutamine one is different again. So they vary in the way they interact with the transfer RNAs. That's how you get the specificity. Does that address your question from earlier? Hello? small and large subunits. In orange-- well, that's kind of a burnt orange-- is a sneaky little bit of the messenger. In yellow are the transfer RNAs. And there's one more unit on here that I won't describe too much. It's a protein factor that helps all the processes occur. And, in each step, you're bringing in a tRNA that's loaded with an amino acid where the anticodon of the amino acid is complementary to the codon that's within the messenger RNA. When proteins are made on the ribosome, they have a bit of a choice. They can get made and fold beautifully into active proteins. Those proteins could be modified. They could go to different places in the cell. Occasionally, proteins misfold. Maybe the rate of synthesis is too fast, or the environment isn't right. So there will need to be mechanisms whereby proteins get degraded if they're not folded properly. It's not always perfect, but what is known now is that they're starting to fold almost immediately from that N-terminus. writing 5 prime to 3 prime, except when we have double-stranded because we have to put the bottom strand in a different order. So this would be a situation where you have a wild-type enzyme. Everything is transcribed and translated properly. Occasionally, though, there are errors that will introduce defects into the ultimate protein. The first type of error is a nonsense mutation, which might be leaving out a base pair, inserting one, substituting one. And this would, ultimately, cause an error in the DNA that then causes an error in your messenger RNA. A missense mutation is where you put in the wrong amino acids. Nonsense mutations are not so bad because you probably just truncate the protein. The last ones are the ones where we start to encounter errors in DNA that result in errors in proteins that may cause genetically inherited diseases. "I am going to tell you that I'm handing over the baton to my colleague, Professor Martin. He'll take over on Monday. He's keen on genetics, yeah?" "I think this field is fascinating. Once you get used to the mechanics of it, it's really cool to think of how you go from DNA to RNA to folded proteins," he says. "Don't forget my office hours on Monday if you need them," he adds. "I'll be in the lab all day, every day, if you want to talk to me about it." "I've got a lot of questions for you," she says, "but I'll be happy to answer them."