In this chapter we will discuss two applications, one price control and second taxation, so right. Sir, does this slope of this graph denote anything price demand upon, some price upon some quantity? So, wait little later we will talk about that that topic, right now we are just talking about movement and shifts, the direction of movement. We are not talking about the slope. So, what is price control what do we mean by price control? Price control is how we can regulate the prices of the goods in the market. In India we have pagadi system and it is more prevalent in Bombay because in Bombay, we have more we have stringent rent control laws. Pagadi is something that security deposit that land the house owner or the apartment owners they take from the person who would like to rent their house. So, to compensate they charge pagadi in name of security fee and this is in a way when they say that it is a security fee it is not illegal. Now, we can also think about the black market, the rise of black market or in other word illegal trade at prohibited prices. Yes, sir we do have agents like who supply. I am not trying to say that they do they provide us they of course, provide us a service. The idea here is not to defend them, but to explain why it is happening and then what we have is some kind of tie-in deals. Then tie in deals is many people would like to have gas connection. And that is also quite common. You are not interested in buying gas burner at really at the price which is much higher. than the price that you will you have to pay in the market for a gas burner. So, this is the tie in deals, it is not that you are buying the gas burner here. Similarly, when you go for apartments in Bombay, the apartment owner may say rent is this much. You have to take the furniture that I have put in the house, you also have to rent the refrigerator. These are tie-in deals that is what you get. I am not defending their position that they do a right or legal thing. Let us look at what happens when we have a price floor. Of course, you will have excess supply and also you'll have non-market rationing. Can you give me one example of non- market rationing mechanism in case of excess supply of wheat because of price floor? Sir, like the payment is not done at the time of buy, it is done after year or after few months. That can be one, again it is very difficult to discern it because of some other reason. And one more thing we have to pay a minimum wage to the laborers. That is stretching too far. very very, they wait long period to sell their product or when they go to the government unit to sale their product there is a long queue. So, long waiting period is there for offloading their products. What else, illegal market; you will have to pay bribe, illegal trade instead of writing market illegal trade to offload your wheat at government units. We do not have a proper distribution system by which we can distribute like some people with like below poverty line people, they are dying because of hunger, and we are throwing a lot of grains as surplus.