Chef Todd Moore shares with you the seven basic skills that I think everyone should have to cook food consistently in the kitchen and be proud of the results. If you already have all seven of these skills and cooking techniques great you can work for me on the other hand if you only have one or two of these Skills that's still fantastic why because I know you'll want to add other skills and learn to cook basic methods know the methods behind all written recipes then you'll be making your cooking a winner every single time. like to cut things up you'll be using fresh vegetables uh anyway uh second in my chef test to anticipate when oil is about to smoke now the skill here is understanding the convective cooking process. When the chef notices the oil starting to change from being perfectly smooth to beginning a convection process then adds the protein product to the pan just before there's visible smoke this is where you get the splattering reaction in the pan. If you give me a chicken breast with a beautiful brown plate appeal that shows your ability to control heat so that the item develops color but doesn't lose moisture or burn you fail this test. one that's lost moisture one that's burned one that shows the lack of involvement in the preliminary steps of the sauté process Chef test number four here's the answer thicken a liquid to make a sauce. Without an understanding of how starches thicken it's difficult to make consistently great sauces this is a skill of someone that really knows how to cook number five Chef test softly poach an. If you give me a cup of milk that looks like mashed potato Poes or cottage cheese you failed this test. egg well this shows the moist convective process and it means that the Chef should have an understanding of the difference between boil simmer and poach a common mistake of Home cooks and chefs alike for that matter is always boiling items boiling is not a cooking method once you understand how to control the reaction of liquid in a pan you'll be able to perform a poach of a very delicate item like eggs without making all busted up egg drop soup so you pass this test when you give me a nicely poached egg one that looks like it should be in a magazine. and it's dry it's much smaller in its uh cooked State than it was in its raw State because of the drying effect of the oven this Chef doesn't know how to retain moisture in a dry cooking process Chef test number seven how to tell when a grilled steak is done I mean the best test that I can think of for this is to hand a chef three steaks ask them to cook them to order cook me one rare one medium one well done a lot of people can't do this how you do this. every single time because understanding these methods will allow you to make sense out of any recipe or not even use a recipe. Your increased understanding of how different cooking techniques work not what to cook but how the techniques work and then you'll be creating the things that you want you want them to be. Make sure you get a seed at my webinar [Music] and then come back again and again to try and create the things you want to create. You'll be able to create them again andagain and again.