"We were looking at our atas model and we had real GDP a real output whatever you want to call it doesn't really matter we had our price level that aggregate demand short-run aggregate supply long- run aggregate supply and we were at some full employment level of output which we called YF" "In essence what this was saying you'll recall is that we said hey on an average prices have gone up 10% but remember that in the short run these input prices are fixed therefore input prices stay the same output prices are increasing people's real wages are actually declining" We're going to see a decrease in aggregate demand right there's a stock market crash exchange rates change foreign income Falls whatever it is it's causing aggregate demand to decline. So we see output begins to decline we see unemployment increase and we see employment decrease. And so we kind of go once again from point A to B to C so we return to C here at this full employment level of output unemployment Falls to this natural rate of unemployment employment Rises the only thing that's different is the price level Falls to 80 it takes fewer green pieces of paper to buy the same goods and services at sea than it does at eight now how often do you see prices falling generally pretty often are not very often not veryoften all right. important anymore so if these guys over here you're kind of going from A to B to C right same thing over here. What could we do if we want to return the economy to full employment what could we change. We could do this oops wrong direction all right I mean that's an option is what I'm saying. But doing that returns you to fullemployment but it also increases the price level right and remember I said if we think of this model dynamically is that not that this is the pricelevel but this is more like inflation than we've just gone permanently from one rate of inflation to a rate offlation. much higher rate of inflation whatever this guy up here is you know 120 or whatever he is a higher rates of the prices are increasing faster similarly if you have a increase in your short-run aggregate supply curve it's the exact same thing. If we make the model dynamic at a lower rate inflation let's look at our changes in long run because remember when we said the long-run changes it brings the short- run with it so here's our real output there's our price law here's a go get them in that supply long where that good supply is. Garrett: We're going to see this change in long-run aggregate supply. We're seeing an output increase from YF to Y 2 similarly you're seeing the price level fall or like I said if you want to make the model dynamic. We make a whole lot more stuff today than we did 20 years ago but what do we generally see about price level or the price levels lower today No so here's what we typically see happening we're seeing aggregate or we're saying our long- run aggregate supply curve increase. we said for most of the 20th century this guy was about 3% now we're wondering is he maybe 2% I'll have to see but our real business cycle model over here said we're gonna see these ups and downs in economy are gonna see periods where it's increasing. We've got this general long-run trend that's going up at some point 2 percent 3 percent 1 percent 4 percent 12 percent whatever the number is. For most of human history it was this right it's some really low level of output. it's gonna be trust me I've been doing this for 20 years questions on the AAAS wanna yes so that's what we're going to talk about when we talk about fiscal policy and monetary policy. Changes in taxes and changes in government spending are also pretty obvious right if your taxes go up and the government doesn't give you more goods and services for that you have less stuff. If taxes go down and thegovernment doesn't change the amount of services that they give then you have more money in. your pocket right so you can change people's wealth by changing their taxes or by changing the services that they're getting in exchange. Keynes comes along and says famously and the long run we're all dead in other words yes eventually we'll get back to a but why wait why not go ahead and do something change aggregate demand and get you here to see because there's really no difference between a and seeing anyway other than the number of green pieces of paper it takes to buy the goods and services.