A random variable can take different numerical values depending on the outcome of the experiment. Some outcomes are more likely than others, and similarly some of the possible numerical values of a random variable will be more likely. We restrict ourselves to discrete random variables, and we will describe these relative likelihoods in terms of the so-called probability mass function, or PMF. The PMF is also sometimes called the probability law or the probability distribution of a discrete random variable. The probability of this event is equal to 1/2. with a probability, and we indicate it using this particular notation. More formally, the probability that we're dealing with is the probability, the total probability, of all outcomes for which the numerical value of our random variable is this particular number, x. We use a subscript, X, to indicate which random variable we're talking about. This will be useful if we have several random variables involved. For example, if We have another random variable on the same sample space, Y, then it would have its own probability mass function. The argument of the PMF, which is x, ranges over the possible values of the random variable. The probability mass function is a function of an argument x. For any x, it specifies the probability that the random variable takes on this particular value. Since the total probability of all outcomes is equal to 1, the probabilities of the different possible values of the random variables should also add to 1. The probability massfunction is always non-negative, since we're talking about probabilities and probabilities are alwaysNon-negative. In terms of our picture, the event that x isequal to 3, which is this subset of the sample space. In order to do any probability calculations, we also need the probability law. Let us assume that every possible outcome, there's 16 of them, has the same probability. We will concentrate on a particular random variable defined to be the sum of the random variables, X and Y. What we want to do now is to calculate the PMF of this random variable. We need to find this value for all choices of z, that is for all possible values in the range of our random variables. the form of the answers. And it's always convenient to also provide a plot with the answers that we have. The answers come in the form of a plot. The plot comes in the shape of a map. The map is a map of the world as seen from the top of a mountain. The top of the mountain is a mountain with a waterfall at the top. The waterfall is a waterfall as well as a river. The river is a river that runs through the middle of the village. The rivers run through the village and the valley.