salt makes up a tiny part of any bread though which has a huge effect on it and most bread is made with salt nowadays. salt has only been used in bread making for the last couple of hundred years which i can't believe surely someone would have thought to add salt to bread. Earlier bread has been around for thousands of years but regardless of what the truth is salt is an essential ingredient in breadmaking. We're going to make three breads one without salt so here's what we're Going to do today. This is not a recipe video so i'm not going to talk you through the steps here i'm making 3 breads they contain all the same amount of ingredients except the salt. Instead of talking about these breads i'll talk about how to use salt in ahsoka. This is a method of adding seeds and grains to your bread though and i will make a whole separate video covering this topic in detail right so we'll start with the three breads.just flour yeast and water the second one made with a standard two percent salt and the final one will be made with way too much salt at 10 percent these are of course extreme examples and only the tubes and dough is the correct one. Salt is a tiny part of any bread though this small percentage has a great effect on flavor texture and fermentation salt has a tightening effect on the gluten it strengthens the dough and makes it more cohesive as yeast consumes the sugars in the dough it expels carbon dioxide it is the carbon dioxide gas that makes our dough rise and it's not able to hold that gas very effectively. bread made without salt is bland and has no character salt doesn't just make bread salty it accentuates the flavor of the flour and any other ingredients contained in the Dough. Ahsoka would be made with hot or boiling water leaving it to soak at room temperature and keeping it warm for a long time would run the risk of it going off and spoiling salt inhibits enzymatic activity. adding just two percent of salt to your soaker will ensure that it doesn't get any funky flavors. You should account for the amount of seeds and grains and for the flour in the recipe when you're calculating the total amount of salt. If you don't add enough salt you'll end up with a bland tasting loaf. starter or yeast you would mix your flour water yeast or starter and then leave to ferment for several hours ahead of time before making the final dough pre-ferments add a great deal of flavor improve the texture and the keeping quality of your bread. Normally brief mints don't contain any salt that's why in hot kitchens or hot climates they can ferment too rapidly. There are ways of controlling this you can lower the temperature of the briefment you can place it in a cooler area or even lower the hydration of it by adding salt. it's rising more slowly whilst the one on the left is already collapsing. the one in the right is still pushing on. what did you think of this experiment did you learn something new let me know down in the comments see more videos like this one click right here that's all i have for you today thank you for watching i'll see you in the next one. i'll be back with a new video in a week or so. I'll let you know what it's about.