The CDF of x is the probability that X is less than or equal to little x. We use the standard formula, which is minus infinity to infinity t times fx of t dt. The integral of u to the a t is 1 over a times e to the t. The derivative is what's going to go in that integral. The CDF is evaluated from 0 to infinity, but then you take the limit as x goes to x. It's not going to going even if you try all kinds of u substitution. Infinity. So for the limit, notice that x increases as x goes to infinity. And this exponential decays. So they're kind of competing for each other. But the exponential is going to win because it decays way faster than x. And so this first term is going. to go off-- the limit isGoing to go to 0. All right. For this, if you evaluate the balance, the infinity makes this 0. And 0, you're going to get 1 overlambda. So that's 1 over lambda. the limit as x goes to infinity-- the exponential will beat x squared. No matter what polynomial we put in there, the exponential's going to win. We're given that x1, x2, and x3 are independent and identically distributed. They're exponentials with rate Lambda. We are asked for the PDF of z, which is the max of x1,. We take the CDF and then take the derivative, right? And so we have 1 over Lambda squared for the variance. of structure as before. If z is less than 0, x1, x2, x3 are positive-- non-negative. And so this is the probability that if you get little z less than0, you're not going to have any probability there. And if z is greater than or equal to 0 is where it gets interesting. We need to do something special. So the special thing here is to recognize that the probability of the max being less than orequal to z is actually also the probability. of each of these random variables individually being more than or less than z. events are equivalent and this is true. By independence we can break this up. And we get-- these are all CDFs of the exponential and they all have this form. Plug this in here. And then, try to take the derivative to get the PDF. Let's see. So it's going to be the same, like this for z less than 0. For z greater than or equal to 0, it's Going to be 1 minus e to the minus lambda z cubed. So it's going to be-- Notice the similarity between this and this. The only difference is this has a 2 lambda in there. That means that w is an exponential random variable with rate 2 Lambda. You can also take the derivative of this and find that you get this. OK, so we're done with the problems. We computed some interesting quantities for the exponentialRandom variable in this. So then the PDF isgoing to be an exponential, whatever it is for an exponential.