NORVIN RICHARDS: Today is phonetics, which means that today we begin making funny sounds at each other. Let's see. I'm trying to remember if there's anything that I ought to announce. You remember, maybe, that problem set 1, which confusingly is your second problem set, is due on Thursday. Normally, it would be due on Tuesday. But because I am technologically challenged, it's due Thursday. I just figured out how to get the projector to project over there instead of in the middle. When we speak, if we're speaking an oral language, what we are typically doing is producing a flow of air. And it gets obstructed in various ways in the vocal tract. One way of categorizing the various things that your vocal tract does to the airflow is by what's called place of articulation. So for example, there are what are called bilabial sounds. These are sounds which are made with both lips. And that's what we're going to do. This picture over here on the right is the old technique. And we'll go back to the old days. Linguists have a system for writing sounds down so that we'll all know what kind of sound we're talking about. A lot of the symbols of the International Phonetic Alphabet resemble letters of the English alphabet. The symbol for the sound at the beginning of "paint" is the letter p. There are also what are called labiodental sounds, which involve your top teeth and your lower lip. We'll talk about other kinds of articulation that English doesn't use, but I think that one just doesn't exist. Interdental sounds are linguistically not hugely common. We have them in English. There are various dialects of Arabic that have them. But they're not all that common. These are the sounds of the beginnings of words like "thistle" and "this" The symbol for the sound of the beginning of "face" is an f, and the symbol for "vase" is a v. The International Phonetic Alphabet is there so that we can unambiguously talk about what we're talking about. There are two different IPA symbols for them. The Greek letter theta is used for the sound at the beginning of "thistle" And that second letter is an old English letter, still used in Icelandic. It's sometimes called "edh," and it stands for thesound at the start of "this" Then there are what are called alveolar sounds. If you put your tongue at the top of your mouth and drag it-- so put it first against your front teeth and then drag it backwards along the top. another new symbol. That's the symbol for the sound of the beginning of a "ship," and another new symbol that's the sound in the middle of "azure," the "zh" sound. Both of those are postalveolar sounds. A little further back, there are what are called palatal sounds. These are either even further behind the alveolar ridge, back where the roof of your mouth gets as high as it's going to get. And the one palatal sound that we have in English is the "y" sound at the start of "year" The IPA symbol for that sound is a "j" Continuing our tour of the mouth, there are what are called velar sounds. In the velar sound, the body of your tongue is up against what's called the velum. The velum is responsible for partitioning your mouth from your nose through your oral cavity. And then further down, further down in your throat, you've got the vocal cords, the glottis, this space that's down there inyour throat around your larynx, and your vocal folds. English doesn't make a huge amount of use of the glottal stop. But it's what shows up at the beginnings of words like "uh-uh" You can also hold them close together and let the air whistle past. That's how you make an "h," right? As in, what's my word up there-- "help,"Yeah. OK. There are questions about any of that? So that was just a quick tour through the vocal tract. Yeah? Where's, like, "chuh"? "Puh" is not an English word for me. There are dialects of English in which that's something you would say, right? "Puh." There are places in English where things that we write as other kinds of sounds actually are, in fact, glottal stops, at least in my English. "Can't" is really just "can" plus aglottal stop. I'm not saying "can't," usually, unless I'm being very emphatic. in mind? STUDENT: No. So we haven't gotten yet to "r." We'll get to " r," eventually. But actually, people discovered at a certain point-- so people investigate this kind of thing in all kinds of ways. These days, people do a lot of MRIs. I'm going to put on the website a couple of websites that have charts of all of the sounds that we're going to talk about plus many more together with MRIs of the insides of people's mouths making these sounds. "r" is one of the kinds of sounds that people classically have trouble with. If you've been around small children, for example, it's standard for them to not quite get "r" right and to say something that sounds more like a "w" at a certain stage. So a place of articulation is obviously not the whole story. Here's another part of the story. It's what's called voicing. So if you think about an "s" and a "z," those are both alveolar sounds. Your tongue is reaching toward the alveolars. NORVIN RICHARDS: What's the difference between a cat and a dog? "Cat" and "dog" end in sounds that differ in voicing. "z" is voiced and that "s" is voiceless, so it's a distinction in voicing, right? Yes? STUDENT: Just the fact that [INAUDIBLE]?? NORVin RICHards: Yeah, so the differenceBetween "cats" and 'dogs"-- yeah. So then is it possible to whisper "z," "g"s? Are they-- f, v, f, f,. v, v. f, v,. v. Does anybody feel a difference between "f" and "v"? Not here, right? Yeah? STUDENT: I guess the "v" is more-- there's more air [INAUDIBLE] NORVIN RICHARDS: So yes? STUDent: Also, my mouth is opening slower, I think. NORVin RICHards: Ah, there might be a difference in the aperture of your mouth. Student: I actually have the opposite of your feeling. what it means is that your vocal cords are vibrating. But I think maybe what we're learning is that you do some other things, too, to optimize the flow of air so that you will get a good vibration going. There's experimental work on this. This is the kind of thing people try to figure out. Yeah, really good question. OK. So when you whisper, you're not engaging your vocal cord, but you're doing all of the other stuff. And that's what you're using to hear the difference. Polish has words that end in "k" and words that ended in "g" underlyingly. Polish also has a rule that changes "g," to "k," at the ends of words. Voiced "b" becomes the voiceless version, which is "p," in Polish. "z" and "d" are voiced, and "t" is voiceless, but both are alveolar, so they're both different from "to" And it's a cross-linguistically quite common phenomenon. English doesn't allow words to begin with velar nasals. But there are languages that do. Tagalog is one. Cantonese is one, and there's a bunch of others. English, for example, has bilabial stops, "p" and "b" But it doesn't have a labial fricative, which sounds like a candle, just like blowing out. Are there questions about any of this? Is anybody looking at this and saying, whoa, this table has grown out of my ability to keep up? English has interdental fricatives-- thuh and thuh. There are languages out there that have what are called dental stops. Part of your job, if you're learning Tagalog, for example, is to learn to make dental "t"s instead of alveolar "t," because that's what they've got. If you're studying another language, this is the kind of thing to think about because sometimes, your teacher will not be thinking about this. But you should. There are even languages out there that have both dental "t"s and alveolar "t's. So the Dravidian languages of India are famous for having those. And a lot of the Aboriginal languages of Australia are really rich in places of articulation. These are all languages that have lots and lots of places to make sounds. But they often don't make the languages of Australian, for example. So they have stops, but they don't distinguish voiced from voiceless. So there are places in the vocal tract that English uses. Sometimes, it doesn't use them for the same things as other languages do. English just does not use. what are called retroflex sounds. Instead of a tuh, you're making a cuh-- [NON-ENGLISH]. So your tongue is curled back a little bit further than it would be for a "t" And it's making a closure, if you're make a stop, right there. Retroflex sounds are very popular in India, and Australia, and Indonesia. They're all over the place. There are also pharyngeals. Pharyngeal fricatives involve constriction near the pharynges. uvulars, retroflexes. And for some reason, the dental stops are still red. I don't know why. Have to fix that. OK. Now people keep asking me about sounds that I've been carefully avoiding, so let's talk about them. There are what are called approximants. Approximants are not stops, and they're not fricatives. They're not nasals. They involve your articulators vaguely gesturing towards each other in some part of your vocal tract. A "w" is like an "oo" sped up. A "y" sound, yuh, is a sped-up version of an "e" as opposed to an "r" or an "l," which are just something else. Eventually, we're going to start talking about sequences of sounds. And so it's going to be useful, at that point, to be able to distinguish, for example, consonants from vowels. "That's the prima facie reason for distinguishing them," he says. said is the right way to think about this or not. What people do is say, yeah, there's this package deal, an affricate. When you're trying to figure out what sequences of sounds are allowed in a syllable in a given language, sometimes it's useful to be able to say this is a language that doesn't ever, ever allow, say, a stop followed by a fricative. Oh, but it's OK for it to end with chuh. That's the move people make, yeah. There are glides like wuh and yuh. There are some other glides there which I can try to read to you. What would a labiodental glide sound like? Vuh, right? Like a "v" sound. English doesn't have those. I believe Hindi does. Similarly, there are velar glides, [NON-ENGLISH],, where your tongue is just vaguely gesturing in the direction of your velum. It looks like something out of Tolkien. English has a very large number of vowels and a not-very-good system for writing them. One way of classifying vowels is in terms of height. For "ee," your tongue is tense. And then for "ooh," where does it go? It moves, right? So you aren't just rounding your lips and leaving your tongue where it was. In fact, that's why when you take photographs of people, you have them say something with an "ee" vowel in it, like "cheese" English is supposed to have five vowels. It does not have five. It has 14. Why do we only have five letters for vowels? Who gave us this alphabet? The Romans, right? Yeah. And in Latin, there in fact are five vowel, which can be either long or short. And so we've ended up with 12, 14 vowels, different dialects of English are different. And we have 5 letters to spell them with. And this is why we have spelling bees. yeah-- one of the reasons. OK, so I've written six of our five vowels here on this chart. And then we have more. So think about "ooh" and "uh," in "who'd" and 'hood," or "ee," and 'ih" in 'heed' and 'hid," or 'ay' and'eh' in 'raid' and "red" or 'oh' and '' in 'coat,' 'caught' There are various ways of talking about this distinction. We say that there's a distinction between what are called tense vowels. English doesn't have words that end in "ih," "uh," or "eh," with the possible exception of "meh" English monosyllables can't end in lax vowels that are either front or high. Not all speakers of English distinguish schwa from wedge. Not every dialect of English has all of these vowels or has them all in the same places. There are people who pronounce "caught" and "cot" the same. For me, those are two different vowels. this exercise next time. As we go along, I'm going to be asking you to read things in IPA. So I'll start putting IPA on the slides more and more. So start trying to familiarize yourself with it and get to where you're familiar with at least the symbols for sounds that we use in English. Do you want me to read the rest of them? I'll do some more IPA. OK, so what's the second one? STUDENT: "Sue says he's a bad egg."