There's no age, education, profession, or even native-born citizenship requirement. Most presidents nominate individuals who broadly share their ideological view. So far, six justices have been foreign-born. At least one never graduated from high school, and another was only 32 years old when he joined the bench. For example, when President Eisenhower, a Republican, nominated Earl Warren for Chief Justice, Eisenhower expected him to make conservative decisions. Instead, he chose to appoint him to the Supreme Court. After the president interviews the candidate and makes a formal nomination announcement, the Senate leadership traditionally turns the nomination over to hearings. Depending on the contentiousness of the choice, that can stretch over many days. The Judiciary Committee votes to send the nomination to the full Senate with a positive or negative recommendation, often reflective of political leanings. Most rejections have happened when the Senate majority has been a different political party than the president. When the Senate does vote on the nomination, it usually takes 60 days. approve, it's by a simple majority vote, with ties broken by the vice president. With the Senate's consent, the president issues a written appointment, allowing the nominee to complete the final steps to take the constitutional and judicial oaths. In doing so, they solemnly swear to administer justice without respect to persons and do equal right to the poor and the rich. This job is for life, barring resignation, retirement, or removal from the court by impeachment. Of the 112 justices who have held the position, not one has yet been removed from office as a result of an impeachment. to be debated and dissected by the ultimate judges, time and history. To be debated, dissected and debated, we need to look to the past, present and future. We need to see how far we have come and what we can learn from the past. We also need to learn from our mistakes and learn from each other. We want to be the best we can be, and we want to do it in a way that honors the past and the present. We hope you will join us in this quest.