This is part 2 of a guide to clinical reasoning or how to create an accurate differential diagnosis from a patient's presentation. In the first part I reviewed a practical five-step bedside approach to clinical Reasoning. In this part I will demonstrate how to use this approach with an actual patient case at the student level. I present this patient to you the same way in turn might present the patient to his or her attending on rounds or to their colleagues during a morning report or teaching conference as I present the case I'll keep a running list of the key features of the presentation. The patient is a 75 year old woman presenting with epigastric pain for four hours. The pain is relatively well localized to the midline in the region between her ankus and xiphoid process. There did not seem to be any particular trigger and the duration from initial onset to its maximal intensity of 8 out of 10 was about 45 minutes. She had moderate nausea it has refused to attempt to eat or drink anything since the pains onset because she is concerned that it will concert a vomit which she has not yet done. include hydrochlorothiazide 25 milligram daily and below to pain 5 milligrams daily metformin 500 milligraphic daily thymine 100 milligrap daily and folate one milliggram daily in her social history. She is an elderly woman a piercer stated aged in moderate discomfort secondary to abdominal pain her temperature is 99.8 heart rate 110 blood pressure 132 over 80 respiratory rate 26 and oxygen saturation of 98% on room air h ee and t. She has smoked one pack per day for 40 years for her family history. The patient is a 75 year old woman with abdominal pain for four hours. She has hypertension diabetes moderate alcohol use smoking and is drinking water from a newly drilled well. The patient was oriented to person place time and situation. She was fully conversant and appropriate speech and language. She had normal cranial nerves 2 through 12 normal patellar and brachial reflexes one plus bilaterally thorough strength testing and gait were deferred due to patient discomfort and exam petite for her labs. well on exam she is MA in moderate distress she has a borderline temperature tachycardia and tachypnea. She has a non distended abdomen that was soft with no rebound severe epigastric tenderness and guaiac negative. The key test results are a white blood cell count to 15 normal basic metabolic panel mildly increased indirect bilirubin modestly elevated lipase normal troponin and CK and an EKG with only sinus tachycardsia. primary symptom using semantic qualifiers and ending with the highly relevant diagnostic data using clinical syndromes when possible. For this patient we would start with mrs. Smith is a 75 year old woman with multiple cardiovascular risk factors and alcohol use presenting with acute constant epigastric pain. We would then group together the white blood cell count borderline fever tachycardia and tachypnea as sirs or the systemic inflammatory response syndrome. The soft abdomen and lack of rebound would be grouped into the collective descriptor of absent peritoneal signs and we would also include the elevated lipase. Step four adopt a framework as I discussed in part 1 of this video series no problem representation has only one correct framework the organization of a particular framework may just appeal more to some people than others in general when the primary problem is some form of abdominal pain most people find an anatomic framework works best particularly one which subdivides the abdomen into quadrants or regions in which a disease of a specific organ is listed within the region under which it lies. The epigastrium would obviously be the most critical anatomic region to include organs that physically lie directly underneath it. pain from a pulmonary embolism can be referred to the abdomen although it more typically is to the right or left upper quadrants and not the epigastric. Now that we have a framework we move on to the final and hardest step applying the key features to that framework so here is our framework once again and here are our key features how does one start this process the brute force method would simply be to take each diagnosis listed one at a time and review each individual key feature to decide if it impacted the probability of the diagnosis. There is PUD in the absence of an ulcer perforation there is not a very reliable means of distinguishing PUD from gastritis on clinical grounds. Wiles certainly can become contaminated with enteric bacteria but for this to happen with a brand new well it would imply that they literally drilled it into a patch of pre-inoculated earth. Without knowing more details about the wells location seems quite unlikely depending upon the specific pathogen her severity of illness could certainly be consistent with a severe form of this. The patient does have numerous risk factors and the combination of epigastric pain and nausea is not an uncommon way for acs to present particularly in a either a woman or a diabetic. The unremarkable lfts in and of themselves rule out acute hepatitis a paddock abscess usually has symptoms localized to the right upper quadrant and is also associated with lft abnormalities. A normal light bass cholecystitis also typically causes right upper Quadrant symptoms and signs along with elevated alkaline phosphatase although it's not enough to make the diagnosis likely enough to seriously consider. A pulmonary embolism can cause abdominal pain but as with acs would not be expected to cause abdominal tenderness. The patient has no major risk factors for RPE and has no shortness of breath. There are no causes of four hours of epigastric pain in which we would expect the troponin or CK to be abnormal even in the event of RPE. It's possible to present with a PE with just pain this case is just not what a PE looks like either in its classic presentation or even atypical variations. that the patient had an acute MI it really is too soon for these enzymes to become elevated and so therefore they probably should not be key features. The guaiac negative stool was critical in establishing the problem representation in step three. The history of the newly drilled well depending on where you are in your training is the most interesting. The combination of acute abdominal pain nausea and a possible contamination of well water is all consistent with heavy-metal poisoning specifically arsenic and lead this brings up an important point. element does not fit into the framework yet still seems to be a key feature the framework must be incomplete in this case I would add another category of diagnosis to our four existing categories of epigastric right upper quadrant left upper quadrants and chest that fifth category is acute abdominal pain secondary to systemic toxic metabolic problems. The four major members of this group are heavy metal poisoning a rare genetic disorder called acute intermittent porphyria another virgin etic disorder called familial Mediterranean fever and finally angioedema for any of these to be the final diagnosis this patient would need to have an atypical presentation of a rare disease. The most likely diagnosis for this patient is acute pancreatitis. pancreatitis is associated with her heavy alcohol use. It explains her nausea her distress the vital signs her tenderness on exam leukocytosis and is the best explanation for the elevated lipase. The only key feature arguing against it is the fact that the pain is not made better or worse with changes in position which as I suggested earlier is not likely to be a highly sensitive or specific finding. This is a relatively classic presentation of a common disease and therefore our leading diagnosis also known as the provisional diagnosis. atypical presentation those diagnoses which are rapidly fatal if missed for which this could plausibly be a presentation. Finally any diagnosis that is specifically suggested by an unusual element of the presentation even if the diagnosis itself is rare common disorders which could be a typical or atypical Presentation include gastroenteritis food poisoning and either gastritis or peptic ulcer disease which I have grouped together because I think it's very difficult to tell the difference between them without endoscopy don't miss diagnosis for this presentation would include a bowel infarction and acute coronary syndrome. involves the provisional diagnosis and as you move further down the list ideas start to diverge a little bit I would certainly expect most experienced doctors to identify pancreatitis as the leading diagnosis in this case so that concludes part 2 of 3 of this video series on the clinical reasoning. I hope you found it interesting and useful while the approach I presented here is not the only one in use I guarantee medical trainees that if you consciously employ it while on the wards you impress your peers and evaluators and more importantly create a more accurate differential.