The coherent state has a simple definition, simple but subtle. It's an eigenstate of the annihilation operator, and it has a complex eigenvalue alpha. The person who popularized those states was Glauber, and he got amply rewarded for that. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu. today is that the coherent state is a complex number. The coherent state has a time evolution. It moves in a circle. And this is really the phasor of the electric field associated with it. So coherent state, the alpha value is directly related to an electric field. That's why this state is closely related to the classical limit of the electromagnetic field. We looked at the fluctuations and showed that it's a Poissonian statistic. And then we use now-- once you define something, you can use it as a tool. We are now using the coherent states to look at any other quantum state. look at a number state-- Well, you often know in quantum mechanics, number and phase are complimentary. If the number of photons is fixed, you know nothing about the phase. And indeed the quasi-probability of a numberState is a ring. It has no phase. It's completely random phase over the 2 pi circle. The energy is sharp of aNumberState, since the energy is e squared. But what you get is also something blurred on the order of unity. In the analogy with the harmonic oscillator, the electric field was a minus a dagger. In those quasi-probabilities-- and we will see more about it-- something which is sharp in momentum is a sliver parallel to the x-axis. So therefore, since momentum is electric field, you always get the electric fields by projecting onto the vertical axis. And if this quasi- Probability starts to rotate due to the time evolution, we get an oscillating electromagnetic field. fuzziness. For instance, if you would say the phase is determined by the 0 crossing, you don't know exactly when the0 crossing happened, and that corresponds to an uncertainty in the phase. So this fuzziness here is the intrinsic uncertainty of quantum physics. So that's what we want to discuss today. But then we will immediately start with non-classical states. And that is, well, if this area is determined. by Heisenberg's uncertainty relation, what can be maybe deform the circle into an ellipse, and these are three states of light. In quantum mechanics, you cannot measure x and p simultaneously. These are non-commuting variables. So therefore, what happens is, if you now define a phase space function, which is done in quantum mechanics textbooks, you can actually do it in three different ways. And the three different way are Q, P, and W. The definition of those functions involves the operator definition, a and a dagger. If you define something in units of X and p or a and the dagger, you could actually do something in three ways. have a product which is fully symmetric i in the ordering of x p, which is anti-normal or normal. The reason why I picked for the course Q of alpha is that it's a real probability, it's always positive. The other guys, P of alpha, can be positive or negative. And also, W of alpha can be negative or positive. But the fact is all three have their advantages and disadvantages. So they all have pluses and minuses. And as a result, it can be written like this. the coherent state is now not this Gaussian. It doesn't have thisGaussian distribution as a course of probability. The probability of the coherent state alpha has a delta function peak at alpha, which is sort of nice. And the number state is not a ring of a finite radius. You would naively expect the energy is sharp. The square root of the energy's electric field, shouldn't it be sharp? And indeed, it issharp. It's actually worse than aDelta function. W stands for Wigner distribution, which is something you actually find in most quantum mechanics textbooks. The Q and P distribution are more common in quantum optics. All the three distributions are the same. It's more sort of on the level of whether something is a delta function or has widths unity. So on the small scale, it matters. But if you map out something on a bigger scale, they are all related to each other. And for the rest off today and the next class, when I project onto the vertical axis to get the electric field, I'm not completely rigorous which of the three functions I've really chosen. want to understand in more depth the fluctuations. And in particular, I want to show you that coherent states are minimum uncertainty states. So by identifying the vertical axis with p, the horizontal axis with x, we immediately expect that we find a result related to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. And we can then immediately, by just using elementary commutator, calculate what are the expectation values in a coherent state for P, P squared, Q, and Q squared. For P, it is-- the P operator is a dagger minus a. If we act with a on alpha, we get alpha, because alpha-- the coherent state-- is an eigenstate of alpha. The fluctuations of the intensity are usually expressed by the second order temporal coherence function. The classical description is you measure the intensity of light. And then you'll see what is the difference between quantum states of light and classical light. But I always feel that if you want to really appreciate the quantum character, you have to know the classic description first. It is simple. It's quantum mechanical. It’s exact. That's what we want to introduce now. Yes, this is theSecond order temporal correlation or coherencefunction. If tau equals 0, it's nothing else than intensity squared average divided by the average of the intensity squared. So this is the classical definition, g2 of tau. But quantum mechanically, we will see that the g2 function is not necessarily larger than 1, it can be smaller than 1. And that's actually an interesting-- you can see-- litmus test for the quantumness of a state. If you generate states of the electromagnetic field-- Fock states, photon number states-- we see that in a moment. In classical physics, you can determine an ensemble average by taking an ergotic system and observing it at many, many times. The idea is that one system as time goes by will sample all possible states. So in other words, you would actually think, if you switch on a light bulb with a stable power supply, that the light emitted by the light bulb will go through all possible quantum states as time evolves. So how do we generalize that to quantum mechanics? Well, one possibility would be that-- OK. of tau is we measure the intensity now and a little bit later. But measuring the intensity really means absorbing photons. So what is more closely related to an experiment how you measure the correlation function is you want to look at the probability of absorbing 2 photons. This suggests that experiments where we look at two subsequent clicks of a photomultiplier where we determine the photon correlation, that this is measuring a correlation function, which, for quantum states of light, should be defined as the expectation value of a dagger. Professor: As long as we limit ourselves to a single mode of the electromagnetic field, things are independent of tau. He says if g2 of t Tau changes, it comes because you have several modes. But if you have one mode, there is no coherence time, he says. Professor: In your homework, you will show immediately that the g2 function is related to number fluctuations. It's related to an average and an n-squared average, and it's independent of time. number state, the number of photons is an eigenvalue. Therefore, n squared average is n average squared. The Fano factor is minus 1. Sub-Poissonian distribution. And the g2 function, which classically cannot go below 1, is now n minus 1 over n. It is smaller than 1. And you see immediately that the biggest violation for g2 is to go to minus 1 for the case of a single photon state. Any questions? AUDIENCE: Shouldn't it be 0 for [INAUDIBLE]?? PROFESSOR: The g2function? No, if you put in-- wait. Gosh. I'll double-check. Light is not a continuous stream of energy, it comes quantized in photons. The granularity of light due to the photon character is, of course, most pronounced for a single photon. If you've only one photon, you find one photon and for the next photon, there is no photon to be detected. So the probability of detecting two photons is 0. And that only happens when you go down to similar photons. So this is when certain fluctuations are most pronounced, because the energy is dependant on a singular photon. me first address one misconception. Coherent states, as I've just shown you, are very classical. They've always a g2 function of 1. And attenuation is not changing it. So a coherent state with an expectation value of 1 photon is not a single photon. But of course, there are ways how you can get single photons. And this is, well, you start with single atoms. If you have a single atom in the excited state, it can emit only one photon. So that's a way how we can create non-classical light. states of light. So we obtain the quasi-probability distribution by taking the single photon state and projecting it on a coherent state. The ring immediately tells us that there is no phase defined. All the phases are equally probable. And that also means, if you don't have a phase, the average value of the electric field this 0.1. The equation of single photons is essential for studying non-classical light, but also since it's a very active frontier of our field. it's about-- it involves single atoms. But it's a little bit more demanding like that. So you want to take 1 atom home or 1 ion. But the problem is if the atom or ion emits a light, it can emit the light into all directions. And therefore, you have a single photon afterwards. But you have many, many different spacial modes. And in any given mode, it will not have a. single photon. So therefore, what you have to add to the single atom or single ion is-- you. have to put it in a cavity. The Hanbury Brown Twiss experiment was a landmark experiment done in the 1950s. It was the first experiment which really looked at g2 functions correlations, which one could say was the beginning of quantum optics and modern experiments with light. In principle, you can now find 2 photons which are only a few picoseconds apart, because the first photon is observed by the first detector, and the second photon is detected by the second detector. In the classic limit, you don't have to worry about it. say photon, I should actually say intensity. The intensity splits equally. And if you do the measurement with the coincidence detector, you find the difference between the g2 function, which I discussed earlier. That's actually the only way how you can distinguish a light bulb from a laser beam. But it is the correlation experimental which shows you that you started with a thermal source. It has a g2function of 2, and you can never get rid of it, whereas the laser beam has ag2 function of 1. especially when we have a single photon, the photon can go to only one detector. And that means, for this extreme case of a single photons, the g2 function is 0. Anyway, you will look at those situations in more detail in you homework assignment. Yes? AUDIENCE: Sir, if you know that different for tau non-zero, then even the single mode in the function would have a final g2 [INAUDIBLE],, because there would be some probability. The experiment how it is done is often done as in an open system, where you couple the system to a light source, which is always replenishing your experiment. I think, in essence, the experiment would be done with a single photon light source. But the single photons have a high repetition rate. You have an heralded single photon. You know the term heralded photon. I showed you how to generate single photons. But in other words, what we have focused in the simple description is that we have a quantum state which is prepared-- it's a closed system. And now we do our detection. single photon comes now. You do the experiment, and then you repeat it again. And then you find indeed, that during that temporal window, you will never find a second photon. So this may happen in a few nanoseconds. Then you wait a microsecond, and the next photon arrives. But this is then related to the repetition rate of a single photon and not to the single photon itself. I think you've got the taste. Your homework is a really simple. You just deal with a closed system. The only property which distinguishes a laser from the thermal light source-- we're not taking advantage of it. You cannot create an intense enough single mode light source unless you use stimulated emission into a single mode. There are LEDs or semiconductor devices, which provide photons with interesting statistical properties. The correlation function for, for example, an LED light-- that's not really a thermal source. It's not described by a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. It would be closer to something for a laser, even though there is no cavity.