John Stuart Mill was the principle expositor of neoclassical utilitarianism. The rights-utility synthesis signals that we're looking for an attempt to put together both a commitment to utilitarian efficiency that's grounded in science on the one hand, and respect for individual rights on the other. We're not going to actually get to the rights-UTility synthesis as it's expressed in politics by John Stuart Mill until next Monday. What instead I'm going to do today is explain how the transition for classical to neoclassicals utilitarianism really went on in all fields of thinking about the human sciences. in philosophy that are going to be my principle focus in today's lecture. What you're also going to get is everything you ever needed to know about neoclassical economics in 45 minutes. At the same time, more or less, there were very important developments in moral philosophy that I just want to alert you to, that we're going to return to later when we come to consider Alasdair MacIntyre's book, After Virtue. And this movement that I'm mentioning here is the doctrine that would come to be called emotivism. It was associated with a man by the name of Stevenson who wrote several books advocating the emotivist doctrine when he was an untenured professor in the Yale Philosophy Department. His doctrine was that when we make claims like murder is wrong, we're making claims that express our emotions, our emotive reactions to propositions. All we're doing is expressing our tastes, our emotional reactions and that there is nothing more to say about ethics than that, he says. He says it's an endpoint in a philosophical evolution that really begins in the seventeenth century. Hume's famous for the idea that an ought cannot be derived from an is; that there's a fact-value problem. But he thought, nonetheless, people are pretty much the same, and so if you can figure out what makes one of them tick, you can find what makes all of themtick. And that was most emphatically Jeremy Bentham's view. It's presupposed in everything we discussed last time. If you think about the idea of doing interpersonal comparisons of utility, and making the judgment that taking that dollar from Donald Trump and giving it to me would be better, that's what Bentham would have said. it to the bag lady increases her utility more than it decrease his, you're assuming that they basically all have the same kinds of utility functions. Stevenson questioned that idea radically. He said, "We don't actually know. We should take Hobbes much more seriously in his critique of Aristotle than he was willing to take himself" And so that was thought to be a radically relativist doctrine because it seemed to undermine the possibility of making ethical judgments of any sort across people. That is a doctrine to which we will return, as I said, when we get to the anti-Enlightenment and, in particular, Alasdair MacIntyre's book, After Virtue. But today we're going to focus for the rest of our time on the economics of the transition from classical to neoclassical utilitarianism. And I'm going to ask you to suspend disbelief for the whole of today's lecture and just trust me, because what I'mgoing to do is go into this backwards. And it's not until you get to. the end of this narrative that you'll start to see why the transition in economics was essential for the transition. in political theory, and indeed in moral philosophy. lot of wine to get a second loaf of bread. If, on the other hand, you were choking on your six loaves of bread and dying of thirst the reverse would be true. And these are what are called indifference curves in neoclassical economics. And indifference curves basically imply exactly as the name suggests that you would be indifferent among the mixes of Bread and Wine anywhere on this curve. And this curve is always shaped that way, concave toward the origin. Anybody want to tell us why? What is it reflecting?  neoclassical economists wanted to understand the behavior of markets. They wanted to be able to more precisely to predict what prices were going to be in markets. Pareto, Marshall, and Edgeworth, and others who were in their circle, thought you could do this just with ordinal utility. So moving from cardinal to Ordinal utility is going to turn out to have huge ideological consequences, which I'm going to unpack for you towards the end of today's lecture. All All we would know about this person A, as I said, is that they prefer four to three, three to two, two to one, one to zero. But we can't say anything about how much they prefer those things because these distances don't actually mean anything. All we get is an ordered ranking. One other thing we can say is, that this is a no-no. These indifference curves cannot cross. Can anybody tell us why? Why can't they cross? Wait for the mic. you get it that way. But so now we have a diagram with two people on it, okay? So this is person A, and this isperson B. And these axes, the X-axis, here, is A's utility function. We don't know that A's happier than B from what I just said, right? These distances don't mean anything,right? So it looks like A's happiest than B, but that's misleading. If the different distances are taken to imply in your mind, disabuse yourself of that thought right away. he said, "Let's draw a line north-south through the status quo," okay? And we'll imagine that there's a finite source of utility. One thing we can say is if you can anywhere into the northeast quadrant both of them are better off, right? So if we go from X to Y we know A's utility has gone up. We don't know by how much, but we know it's gone up so they're both better off. On the other hand, if we went anywhere in here, this quadrant, southwest as it were, obviously they's both worse off. use, yeah, let's use J. If I put a point here, J, we would say that A's gone down and B's gone up. Now, to make this a bit more real imagine in here this is the sphere of market transactions. This is where A and B will go voluntarily, right? So A will say to B, "Well, I have all this wine, and you have all that bread, how about I swap you a bottle of wine for a loaf of bread?" And you say, "Okay." The Pareto principle out of which the whole of neoclassical economic theory was constructed depends on this idea of indifference curves. A is trying to get up on those indifference curves, and B is wanting to get along on them. And we can't say that B's gain is greater than A's loss because we don't allow interpersonal comparisons of utility. There's no scientific way to do it. We can't assume that everybody's basically the same. Perhaps they are, perhaps they aren't, but we just don't know, okay? A proposes to B swapping a loaf of bread for a bottle of wine and B agrees. They go to Y, and then A says, "Well, I'll give you another loaf of Bread for a Bottle of Wine" And B says, 'Forget it," and then they go to Z. When no transaction occurs, you know they've hit that frontier. So, the Pareto principle says that in a market system they'll move toward the frontier and when they get there, they'll stop. of course, they may have gotten there some way else. They might have gone from X to G over here, and then they would have done a new one. And that would just reflect shrewdness in bargaining, or how much people cared lower down their indifference curves. But once they wind up anywhere on this indifference curve they're not going to move off of it because now there is no way of improving one person's utility without diminishing the next person's. That's it. That is neoclassical economic theory in a nutshell. diagrammatically, and then if anybody doesn't get it we'll wait up and I'll go through it more slowly. But think about the diagram we just did, okay? Think about A is here in the corner,Okay? But basically now we're putting the two previous diagrams together. We're putting this diagram, where we have two commodities and one person, and this diagram where we've got two people and just utility. And so you'll see why this is helpful once we get to the end of it. John Rawls: The trouble with utilitarianism is that it doesn't take seriously differences among persons. He says classical utilitarianism says, "Well, if taking all of your utility increases overall net utility then we should do that, because we don't care who has the greatest number of the greatest happiness" John Rawls' argument is half-right, he says, because the truth is that's the classical utilitarianists' doctrine. John Rawl's Theory of Justice: The Case for Justice, the Case for Liberty, and Other Essays, is published by Oxford University Press, priced £16.99. which the radical fangs of classical utilitarianism have been ripped out and it is now a doctrine that is very friendly to whatever status quo happens to be generated in a market system. So it ceases to be this radically redistributive doctrine, and in the process imports into utilitarianism a very robust, some would say, hyper-robust doctrine of individual rights. We'll see how that played out in political theory when we come to look at John Stuart Mills' harm principle next Monday.