The amygdala is closely connected to the basal forebrain. The amygdala primarily projects to the more caudal one here. The abnormal brain connections that we know occur, at least many types of schizophrenia. The types that don't include the abnormal connections appear to have abnormalities, though, in the receptors, affecting the same system we're talking about. It's a hypothesis of and early lesion explanation of some forms of schizophrenia back in the '70s, based on work in the olfactory system. and visual system that I and other people had done. It was inspired by a study of people with temporal lobe epilepsy that had been operated on in order to get the tissue generating seizures removed. And they found that the patients could be grouped into two types. And I've summarized there at the bottom the real basis for this idea, other than the fact of early lesions. And that is that the earlier the lesion in these other systems, at least, the greater the plasticity, that is, more sprouting, more chances of regeneration. of the catecholamines, the monoamine, serotonin, and some acetylcholine axons as well. I knew at the time I drew up this hypothesis that there were dopamine abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenics in many of them. And I would predict this kind of sprouting. For one thing, by removing this structure we've eliminated these projections to basic forebrain and prefrontal cortexes. But we've also pruned these axons, making it likely that they will show compensatory sprouting in other areas. and early damage? The fact is, a number of schizophrenics, particularly the ones that are the hardest to treat, have enlarged brain ventricles. Now, of course, with more drugs to treat them, more of them are not in the mental hospitals. But this just shows schizophrenian monozygotic twins, where you have one twin with schizophrenia. The other doesn't have it. And as they often find in these cases, the affected twin has larger ventricle. And we know that larger ventricularles can result from early damage. of them do have this temporal lobe damage. Of course, there's always a lot of variability in the studies like this. But-- yes? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] in like epilepsy in schizophrenics? PROFESSOR: That's a good question. You'd like to know if in studies of schizophrenics, how many of them have epilepsy. Usually they're kept separate, but I don't know of studies that have just looked broadly at schizophrenics. It'd be worthwhile checking. are a little more widespread according to recent studies than they were in the earlier studies, where they were seen mainly in the cortex. Now we know they are also in the more caudal areas, but just less dense. But also we know the basal nucleus projections are shown here. They could be affected too. And in every case these four systems of widespread projections all go to the amygdala as well as to other parts of the brain. All right? And this is just to show you binding to receptors for these different transmitters of the various anti-psychotic drugs. that we know if you bind the receptor you'll reduce the effects of the [? rejections. ?] If the prefrontal cortex is functioning abnormally because of sprouting of these axons, also the basal forebrain, then binding to the receptors will move it more towards the normal. And that could be a reason. Just saying that it does [INAUDIBLE].. Let's talk about the other part of the basal ganglia, the larger part, the corpus striatum. In mammals and other amniotes, the birds and reptiles, the skates and the rays-- sharks, skates, and rays comes from the ventral tegmental area. And we know that, especially if you look in fish, that a major input to the hypothalamus in those animals is from the taste [? cyst. ?] In mammals it's never been emphasized, but we know taste can be very rewarding and influences the te segmental area cells. The studies of rats have indicated yes, there are some projections, even in mammals, from that system. to the VA of the thalamus, which then projects to motor cortex. The one with the colliculus goes directly from the dorsal striatum to the nigra. And then you need to know what we mean by doubled inhibition. Notice excitatory input from cortex. Inhibits the globus pallidus and inhibits the Nigra. So you're inhibiting an inhibitory pathway. Important for understanding the pathologyies when something goes wrong with these structures, as in Parkinson's disease. The subthalamic nucleus excites both segments of the globus pallidus and the nigra. So it's unique in that way. And it's critical for the balance of this system. So anything that goes wrong with it can cause major problems with movement. For people to see how knowing these connections explains some of the disorders. So we'll leave it here. But just note, if there's just a subthalamic nucleus-- here's the Nigra down here. So these are the two main satellites of the corpus striatum.