Aristotle was born 384,15 years after the trial of Socrates. He was sent by his father to go to college. Unlike most of you, Aristotle did not spend four years at the Platonic Academy. He remained attached to it for the next 20, until the death of Plato. Unlike his intellectual godfather, Socrates, who wrote nothing but conversed endlessly, Aristotle wrote disciplined and thematic treatises on virtually every topic, from biology to ethics to metaphysics to literary criticism and politics. Aristotle appears from the beginning to look more like what we would think of as a political scientist. He collected constitutions, 158 of them in all, from throughout the ancient world. He was the first to give some kind of conceptual rigor to the vocabulary of political life. Yet, for a man as notoriously secretive and reluctant as Aristotle, his works acquired over the centuries virtual canonical status. For centuries, Aristotle's authority seemed to go virtually unchallenged. But the authority of Aristotle obviously no longer has quite the power that it once did. animal. "That man" he says "is much more a political animal than any kind of bee or herd animal is clear" Why is it clear? "For we assert," he says, "nature does nothing in vain and man alone among the animals has speech" In other words, he seems to be saying that it is speech or reason, logos, that is able to both distinguish and create certain moral categories, such as the advantageous, the harmful, the just and unjust, and things of this kind. Aristotle says man is political not because we have some biological impulse or instinct that drives us to participate in politics, but because we are possessed of the power of speech. It is a reason or speech, not instinct, that makes us political, he says. To say it's natural for us to do so is not to say we engage in political life spontaneously and avidly, as you might say spiders spin webs or ants build anthills, he writes. The power to know is our ability to recognize, by sight, members of the same polis or city. condensed in very deep ways, carry a great deal of freight. There's a lot in there that needs to be unpacked. We need to avoid the temptation, in many ways understandable as it might be, to airbrush or sanitize Aristotle, to make him seem more politically correct for modern readers. The question is what did Aristotle mean by slavery? Who or what did he think was the slave by nature? Until we understand what he meant, we have no reason to either accept or reject his argument. kind of egalitarianism, so to speak, built in to the conception of rational animal and political animal? Yet, at the same time, Aristotle seems to regard education as the preserve of the few. The kind of discipline and self-restraint necessary for an educated mind appears, for him, to be unequally divided among human beings. It follows, I think, that the regime according to nature, that is to say the best regime, would be what we might think of as an aristocracy of the educated. the preserve of the few, of a minority capable of sharing in the administration of justice and in the offices of a city. Would you agree? Unappealing to us, perhaps, for that reason, very contrary to our intuitions and the way we have been brought up. But before we dismiss Aristotle's account as insufferably inegalitarian and elitist, we have to ask a difficult question. What else is Yale, but an elite institution intended to educate, morally and intellectually, potential members of a leadership class? Think about that. Aristotle might, as a natural aristocracy? I leave you with this question to think about. Before we reject Aristotle as an antidemocratic elitist, take a look at yourselves. So are you, or you wouldn't be sitting here today. Think about that and I'll see you next week. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @dailymailonline and @jennifer_newton. Back To The Daily Mail home.