JUDY HOYT: We're going to begin this lecture on handout number 14. We'll be moving now to chapter 7. This will be our first lecture on chapter 7 on the topic of dopant diffusion and profile measurement. So far, we've discussed a number of major topics, including the fabrication of wafers themselves and cleaning, point defects in silicon. During the next few lectures, including this one, we'll discuss the accurate control and placement of active dopant regions. In semiconductors or in silicon, we typically don't have a cube or a chunk of material. We're usually measuring the resistance of a thin sheet in the near surface region. The resistivity of the cube is given by, essentially, the electric field divided by the current density. The sheet resistance is just given by rho over the resistivity over xj. So that's a simple way and a convenient way of calculating resistance of various structures in semiconductor devices. The resistance of the regions that are extrinsic to the device, such as the contact resistance, the source and drain resistance, should be no more than about 10%. There's a fundamental physical limit on how much dopant we can put in the silicon and how much it will be electrically active. We need to find new ways to activate dopants to higher levels if we're going to be able to manage this design tradeoff. Being able to scale the device really amounts to, in the front-end processing to a large extent, to being able to control very precisely the shape of the doping profiles where the dopants end up. And what I'm going to spend some time in the next few slides is giving you examples from the present literature on device scaling. detailed device physics, but it's just to give you a flavor for why studying dopant diffusion is such an important topic. So let's go on to slide number 8 and talk about a topic called the short-channel effect. And this basically takes place when the distance between the source and drain-- that is the channel length L-- becomes comparable to the MOS depletion width in the vertical direction. And then that the source-drain potentials themselves from the sources and drain regions end up having a strong effect on the control of the current in the device. down these three terms, roughly, to calculate the threshold voltage. In the short-channel case, that threshold voltage equation has to be modified to a certain extent. And, in fact, the third term, which is represented on the second equation by the bulk charge QB prime over WLC ox. That term ends up being smaller than it would be in the long- channel case. And this QB prime is smaller, and that ends up affecting-- that third term being smaller affects the Vt. threshold voltage for a given device. But you get better leakage current control. So you can scale the device to a smaller L effective. So, again, this is an example of how you need to control the doping profiles in order to optimize the device design. Let's go on now to slide number 12. And this is sort of an extreme case of scaling, where we're trying to scale the MOSFET gate length down to 25 nanometers dimensions. And in the central region here underneath the channel, you see these p-type doping contours. It looks sort of like butterfly shaped. is not that sensitive to the vertical junction depth, as you can see by comparing the diamonds to the stars. So this lower variation of the Vt with L effective or with channel length allows a larger design window, which we need because there's always going to be some process variations in the channel length across the wafer. And this enables the technologists to push the channellength down to smaller dimensions. So it's not so much a fundamental improvement in device performance, but it really enables you to manufacture circuits with these shorter channel devices. refer to different lateral source-drain gradients. For lateral gradients larger than about 4 nanometers per decade, the Vt roll-off is just too large. The threshold voltage is approaching 0. You wouldn't be able to make a 25 nanometer MOSFET-- so, again, illustrates the importance of controlling the lateral doping profile and of controlling diffusion processes themselves. So given that brief introduction to the electrical effects, let me go on now on slide number 15 and talk about dopant diffusion fundamentals. really become large. In silicon IC processing, there are two different steps that we refer to in diffusion historically. The first step was so-called predeposition. And what this refers to is that you had an initial step in which the dopants were introduced into the silicon wafer with a required integrated dose into the substrate. In the more modern technology, it's usually done by ion implantation, which is a process that we're going to discuss later and is covered in detail in chapter 8. Dopants are typically introduced at their solid solubility limit. At 1,000 degrees, you can get something like 3 to 4 times 10 to the 20 electrons per cubic centimeter by introducing arsenic into the lattice. If you introduce more arsenic than that, it may still be below the solidsolubility, but you won't get any more electrons. It's not electrically active. It may not precipitate until you get up into the 10 to 21 range. People eventually came up with a number of models to try to explain how it is you can. get more arsenic in the lattices if it doesn't precipitate. Dopant diffusion is described by Fick's first law, which describes how the flux or the flow of dopant depends upon the doping gradient. When the concentration gradient goes to 0, essentially, the dopant or the atoms are uniformly distributed, say, in the solid, and the flow would stop. Later on, we'll talk about the more atomistic diffusion mechanisms and effects of dopants in the silicon lattice. We're going to consider macroscopic first-- macroscopy models for diffusion. In the thin oxide regime, we get a straight line that's just a constant number of the diffusion through the oxide. And again, in that case it's a concentration profile that's not changing with time. In the limited source case, we consider that we have the dopant in this region, and it has a fixed dose Q. And we're going to introduce it as a delta function at the origin. And then we're Going to let it diffuse and diffuse out. And as it turns out, the C-- if diffusivity is a constant, it diffuses into the shape of a Gaussian. given by that constant dose Q divided by 2 times the square root of pi Dt times the exponential of minus x squared over 4 Dt. So that's what's known as a Gaussian profile. And the important consequence of this are that one, of course, the dose Q remains constant. That means then that the peak concentration-- so the concentration at the origin-- is going to decrease according to the squareroot of Dt over time. So the peak Concentration goes down and the width of the profile or the diffusion distance from the origin increases. In semiconductor processing, linear scales for dopants are not all that useful. We often care about how the dopant falls off over many, many orders of magnitude of concentration. If we can assume that there's no dopant loss through evaporation or segregation at the surface, we have a relatively simple trick for solving this. See what the broadening actually looks like on slide number 28 and talk about the second case, which is a fixed dose Q, just like we talk about, constant in time. that the annealing takes place over a long time so that the initial profile is reasonably can be reasonably approximated by a delta function compared to the final profile. If those two assumptions are hold, then we can essentially solve it by assuming that we have virtual diffusion. We have a symmetric diffusion with an imaginary delta function of equal dose Q on the left-hand side. So, in fact, if we go on to slide number 27, that same the graph is shown at the top. surface where we have no loss from the surface. Again, it's a Gaussian profile. So let's go on to slide number 30. And the third case, essentially, that we can solve analytically is called the case of an infinite source. And what this is essentially an infinite. source of dopant which is made up of small slices, essentially each diffusing as a. Gaussian. So that equation at the bottom of slide 30 shows that the concentration in this infinite source case can be given by the sum of all those Gaussians. along the x-axis. That exponential squared over 4 Dt. So we're summing up all these Gaussians at the bottom of slide 30. The solution which satisfies Fick's second law is written down at the top of slide 31. The concentration is actually equal to concentration C prime over 2 times the quantity in square brackets 1 minus the error function of the argument x over2 times the square root of Dt, where the second equation and third gives you the definition of what we mean by theerror function. function is what the shape of this profile can be calculated according to. So let's look at slide number 32, which, again, the error function solutions are made up of a sum of Gaussian delta function solutions. And what you see is that here in this plot, the initial profile is shown in the dashed line in green. The subsequent profiles are time t equals t0 in black, 4t0, in blue, and 9t0 in red. And that the dose beyond x equals 0 continues to increase with annealing time in this infinite source sort of solution. above the solid solubility of the dopant. Then, in that case, at the surface of the silicon wafer the concentration of the dopamine is fixed. And the dose is given by this integral, which can be done integrating from 0 to infinity. So, again, now we see that this dose or the number of the integral of these curves on the right-hand side is increasing with time according to the square root of Dt. So we're getting a higher and higher dose into the sample. side the two different types of classical processes that we talked about in terms of their diffusion profile shapes. On the left is the predeposition case where we have, say, a constant surface concentration, assuming the pre-dep was being done by a gas phase in diffusion. And that at the different times, you can see the twice square root of Dt is 0.1, 0.5, and 1 micron. And so you see what's happening over time at the same time. shorter time. We have a certain peak concentration. That peak concentration is then falling or dropping for the second profile. And the profile is broadening, and then it falls again, and the profile broadens further. So that's for Q equals a constant, integral is constant, and left-hand side is for the surface concentration is a constant. That's just to get your eyes calibrated for complementary error function versus a Gaussian type of solution. Let's go on to slide number 35 and talk a little bit about dopant diffusion coefficients themselves. The placement of dope regions is critical because it determines many of the characteristics of short-channel MOSFETs. The time evolution of a doping profile, if the case is simple, is governed by a fixed loss-- the so-called diffusion equation. That's why we spent so much time calculating in great detail dopant diffusion, as we'll do over the next three or four lectures.right values. One way to check that, of course, is to back to slide 35 and actually compute directly with a calculator the diffusion coefficients. of cases where there are analytic solutions. We talked about the diffusion of a Gaussian profile with a fixed dose. We apply this diffusion to a constant surface concentration. And finally -- we talk about the diffusion of a complementary error function, which we apply for a constant level of surface concentration. The diffusion of this error function can be applied to a fixed level of surface concentration, or a constant level of substance on the surface, for example.