Professor Steven Smith: I want to look at two sets of issues. One is Locke's theory of the constitutional state, particularly focusing on the role of the executive, vis-a-vis the legislative branch of government. The other is thinking about Locke and the American regime and the current state of political philosophy, modern contemporary American political philosophy. Smith: Locke doesn't endorse necessarily one particular form of government from any other. He is an advocate of what we have come to call limited government, of constitutional government. a domestic, not an international issue, which is to say, in the case of a fire in a city it is sometimes necessary, he says, in his day for the fire department to tear down the house of an innocent person. This is acting for the public good of the community, even while in some ways it's clearly a violation of rights of property and so on. In fact, the example is not so far fetched. Think today for example about arguments we have today. Even in Connecticut, there's a big argument going on about the right of what's called "eminent domain" Locke asks what are the limits of this prerogative power. What check, if any, is there on this power to prevent their abuse? This is beginning to sound more and more in respects like Machiavelli than the advocate of, again, limited government. This power comes into play, he says, especially during times of national crisis or emergency when it is necessary to act for the public safety. And again, this seems to have special resonance for us today as we face issues like states of emergency and states of exception. utilize when ordinary constitutional operations, like the rule of law, prove to be inadequate. Consider Lincoln's famous suspension of habeas corpus during the Civil War. Lincoln argued quite forcefully that this sort of prerogative power is already deeply embedded within the structure of constitutional government. The Constitution seems to embody within itself, our constitution that is, this Lockean power ofprerogative that comes into effect or can be legitimately exercised in times of rebellion or invasion. Are we living in that kind of age now, not rebellion perhaps? LZ Granderson: John Locke gave the modern constitutional state its definitive form of expression. He says Locke's doctrine of consent and legislative supremacy should make him a hero to Democrats, to radical Democrats. LZ: Locke's conception of natural law, rights, government by consent, the right to revolution and all are all part of the cornerstone of our founding. Lz: A judgment on America is very much a judgment on the philosophy of Locke, if anyone is to be considered to be America's philosopher-king. a more or less kind of random or arbitrary genetic lottery or social lottery of which I or you happen to be the unique beneficiaries. Fortune, luck, Machiavellian fortuna, in that way, is utterly arbitrary and therefore, Rawls concludes, I should not be regarded as the possessor but merely the recipient of what talents, capacities and abilities that I may, again, purely arbitrarily happen to possess. So what does that mean in terms of social policy or theory of government? The result of Rawls' difference principle and its fundamental difference with that of John Locke could not be more striking. John Rawls and Jean-Jacques Rousseau offer radically different visions of the liberal state. Rousseau is a passionate critic of inequality; Rawls is attentive to the moralills of inequality. The question for you is which of these two views is more valid or which of the two strikes you as more powerful or plausible? I think my own view is far closer to American theory, to Locke's theory, which I think--than Rawls' Rawls'. The Declaration of Independence, the charter of American liberty, states that each individual is endowed with unalienable rights. A return to Locke such as it is, even if such a return were possible, is by no means a panacea to what ails us. Locke's effort to build a kind of modern republican government on the low but solid foundations of self-interest and self-ownership could not help but generate its own forms of dissatisfaction. America, as a former teacher of mine once said, is the land where the many facets, the many faces of modernity are working themselves out. We are but a moment in the kind of comprehensive self-dissatisfaction that is modernity.