Adam Martin: How do you go from something you're interested in learning about an organism to actually identifying genes and mechanisms that are important for that? At the end, I'm going to tell you how you can try to figure out the genes and mechanism that are involved in determining the behavior of an organism. And on my title slide here, I have three fruit fly mutant phenotypes that you can see, and each of them is a different type of gene. And each one has a different effect on the behavior. of these mutants defined genes that were subsequently found to be present-- or homologous genes were present in humans and were shown to play important roles in human biology. So later on in the lecture, hall kind of explain what each of these phenotypes is. But first, I want to just highlight the importance of model organisms and their use in biology. You've been seeing them already. I've talked a bit about flies, we talked about Mendel's pea plants. I just now have a compendium of model organism that I'm going to throw up to tell you about. The roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans, and the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, are the heroes of today's lecture. The mouse is our lab mascot, but it's also an important genetic model. Human cell lines are important, but you have to understand that they're sort of an in-vitro system, and they're not functioning in the context of an entire organism. So it's really unethical for us to do a lot of different types of experiments on humans. Genetic approaches are as fundamental to biology as math is to physics, says Drosophila genetics professor. "Geneticists are going to break genes and then look at the result and see if it gives the phenotype we're interested in," he says. "In a forward genetic screen, you're looking for a phenotype that you would expect if you affected a certain process, if you disrupt a process," he adds. "So the goal in genetics is to identify a mutation that alters a gene function that gives you a phenotype" induce mutations. So we're looking for mutations. And these mutations could be spontaneous mutations, meaning you didn't do anything to induce it, but they just appear as a variant in the population. In the way we can induce mutations is by using some type of mutagen. For example, you could have some sort of chemical mutagen that increases the error rate in DNA replication. Or you could use radiation to induce DNA damage, and that essentially accelerates the frequency of mutations that occur in the genome of an organism. In model organisms, we can actually find these types of mutations. There's a specific class of mutant that was called "wingless"-- where the flies have fewer than two wings. This particular mutant defines an entire signaling pathway, which is important in stem-cell biology and is also over activated in cancer. But obviously, we don't have wings, so this gene didn't get discovered in humans. It was discovered in flies, and then only later on, it was inferred-- or it was discovered that there was a gene for wingless. is a related gene in humans. One of the other phenotypes I showed you is called "notch" Normally, a fly wing has a nice, smooth margin. notch mutants have wings that have this chunk taken out of them at the end. But again, there's a human notch, and human notch is involved in human diseases, such as cancer.. How can you have a concerted effort to identify genes that have that function in a given process? I'm going to tell you about work done by Eric Wieschaus and Christiane Nusslein-Volhard. treated the males with a mutagen to induce mutations in the gametes these male flies would then be passed to subsequent generations. They mated the mutagenized males to females, and then they went on to look at-- to isolate individual F1 progeny. In order to look for organisms that have incorrect body patterning, you need to get a situation where each of the mutated chromosomes is homozygous recessive, and to do that, you have to do more crosses. Drosophila larvae looks like. And you can see it has a segmental pattern here. But you see there are these segments that alternate between smooth cuticle and hairy cuticle. And because there's a lot of hairlike projections here, it reminded the researchers of a hedgehog, and so this mutant became known as "hedgehog" And the hedgehog gene was the founding member of an entire signaling pathway. That plays important roles in human development and also, human cancer. the sonic-hedgehog gene is important in cancer. And actually, there are now a number of drugs that are being developed to target the hedgehog pathway. One was approved back in 2012 for use in treating basal-cell carcinoma. There's currently another drug that's in phase-II clinical trials for treating some forms of leukemia. So this is a story that goes from identifying this weird fly mutant all the way to clinical trials, developing drugs, whose purpose is to inhibit this signaling pathway. whether or not a cell lives or dies during development. One fate that Horvitz, Sulston, and Brenner saw is that sometimes, cells-- their fate was to just die. And this was defined as "programmed cell death" Because it followed a very stereotypic pattern, where the same cell, each time, would undergo cell death, so it seems like there's a program for it. This also is called "apoptosis." So what really enabled this work is the biology of C. elegans. Robert Horvitz's lab identified a pathway of genes that were involved in cell death. They identified a mutation that affected cell death that specifically blocked this engulfment process. They then mutagenized these ced-1 mutants. And what you see in this worm are these bubble-like structures that are cells that are dead but haven't been engulfed. So these dead cells, because they're not engulfed, are visible in the adult worm. And so they identified a mutant, and thus, a gene that causes "3," which is basically a double mutant. would lose these sort of bubble-like structures? What else could be happening? When you do a screen like this, and when you do science in general, you have to think through all the different types of possibilities. How would you differentiate between these two? Any ideas? Should this have an extra cell? No. Stevens says no. There should be no extra cell here. But if this is a bona-fide cell-death mutant, then you should have extra cells. And it turns out the ced-3 mutant blocks all 131 of these cell deaths. So there's an active mechanism involved in the cell death. Adam Martin: circadian rhythm is a behavior. We are awake during certain parts of the day and are asleep at night. If you're hidden from the light-dark cycle, you continue this cycle for some amount of time. Martin: There's something intrinsic in our system such that we want to exist on this 24-hour wake-sleep cycle. He says a genetic screen can identify genes that are important for circadian rhythm. The Nobel Prize-winning work was done by Konopka and Benzer. you need an X chromosome and you can't have three X chromosomes. But your females are all attached XY. So the females actually get their X chromosomes from their mom, which is the opposite of the way it normally works. And males getting their X chromosome from dad because the attached X strain has a Y chromosome. So it's a little bit of a genetic trick that, in this case, served the researchers a generation on their screen. But to establish a line of flies that have this mutation, they then took these. F1 mutated males, and crossed them, again, to attached X flies. So now, you have multiple males, all of which are mutant. The mutants that the Benzer Lab identified had altered period of the sleep-wake cycle, and therefore, the gene was named "period" So this screen identified a gene called "period." This is a gene. And the gene in humans is associated with familial advanced sleep-phase syndrome. So defects in the genes that were identified in Drosophila are relevant to human sleep disorders.