David KAISER: Today we're going to be talking about the kind of invention or the hybridization of a whole new subfield within physics that now is often called particle cosmology. It studies the smallest units of matter, the fundamental forces and elementary constituents of matter. It asks about what role they might have in shaping, really, the fate of the entire universe. The field is doing pretty well these days by other measures. Its annual budget just within the United States is on the order of $1 billion a year. On average, there are on average two new physics papers, two new preprints posted to the central preprint server archive.org every hour of every day just in this subfield. That's averaging over 24 hours a day, seven days a week. So it is really a booming, booming subject of study. And I find that all the more astonishing since this field literally didn't even exist 45 years ago. So this is a $1 billion area of study with devoted colleagues all over the world, not just here in the United States. or particle physics and that it somehow this set of ideas that bubbled up in the mid-1970s of that we'll look at today-- that that compelled researchers to change their whole field of study. And so there's a lot going for that explanation, but it's also, I think, really, really quite incomplete. So if we start using the kinds of tools that we've been working on together this whole semester, we can dig in a bit more and try to uncover some of the additional factors that were at play in especially in the early years of this field. Einstein was inspired by some of Mach's writings on this. Mach himself didn't call it Mach's principle. But it was attributed to Mach by Albert Einstein as early as 1918. So from the early days of the study of general relativity, it was often framed as a question. Do we have to think about the distribution of matter throughout the whole universe in order to make sense for why this block slides down this inclined plane at a certain rate? Local inertial effects, are they somehow tied to cosmological distributions? In the 1950s and '60s, a number of high-energy theorists were trying to put together these highly symmetric models to account for things like the nuclear forces. These nuclear forces are somehow mediated by particles exchanging certain kinds of force-carrying particles. There were other instances of that, cousin models, that were getting a lot of attention throughout the 1960s for the other main nuclear force, for what's called the weak force rather than the strong force. That is to say the force that causes things like radioactive decay. Self-evidently of short range, unlike gravitation or electromagnetism, which, in principle, can extend arbitrarily long distances. The nuclear forces really exert themselves across nuclear dimensions, very tiny fraction of the size even of a single atom, let alone macroscopic scales. So the idea was could have finite range nuclear forces if these force-carrying particles had a very large mass. That will make it very unlikely for that force to be felt across a verylarge distance because of the whole set of ideas about virtual particles. uncertainty principle. All well and good, but the problem was with these new fancy highly symmetric models of the nuclear forces. So you can have one or the other. You could have a short-range nuclear force that does not have any of those fancy symmetries. So this was a pretty substantial challenge. It got lots of theorists very exercised over the 1950s and especially 1960s, which is really like, why do these particles have mass at all? Can we account for mass of these elementary particles in a self-consistent way? The Brans-Dicke theory of gravity was published in 1961 by Carl Brans and Robert Dicke. Their idea was to try to go back to this notion of Mach's principle and more thoroughly account for it. Even though the ideas were bubbling up around the same time and often published in the same journals, they still were embedded in quite different research traditions and conversations. Theories of mass came from members of the gravitation and cosmology crowd on one side and the high-energy particle physics community on the other. for that within a quantitative theory of gravity. So they wanted to modify Einstein's general theory of relativity in a very specific way to try to address this question of mass as it had been articulated around Mach's principle. So their idea was to introduce a whole new kind of matter, a newkind of particle in nature. They labeled it with the Greek letter phi. And now the idea was that instead of having a single constant unit strength of gravity labeled by Newton's constant capital G-- that's the G that's in like Newton's force law. Geometer's tool of quantifying the warping of space and time is called the Ricci curvature scalar. multiplying that is this constant, this unit strength of gravity in Einstein's theory. So what Brans and Dicke do is say, well, let's replace G by 1 over phi. So now 1 over G becomes phi in the Lagrangian or in the action for gravitation, where in principle phi, the local strength ofgravity could change across time and space. their version would depart from the ordinary behavior from general relativity. The idea is that if omega is a very small number of order 1 or a fraction of 1, then, in some sense, it doesn't cost very much. So as omega becomes larger and larger, the field becomes more and more wobbly. And so, inSome sense, you're stiffening up the trampoline. It's like saying you can have quite dramatic differences in the local strength of gravity because this field phi could be wobbling. field is much less likely to vary either over space or time. In the limit that omega becomes arbitrarily large, then phi, in a sense, can't afford to vary at all. The kinetic energy cost is too high. If the field doesn't change at all, it acts like a constant. So they had this very clever fudge factor, a coupling constant, so that, in principle, the local strength of gravity could be changing all the time. But the amount of that variation could be controlled by this one new parameter in the theory. Jeffrey Goldstone was one of the first to suggest the idea of nuclear forces mediated by the exchange of particles. Goldstone's work was published in the same journal as the Brans-Dicke work, but embedded in a separate conversation. The equations for the governing nuclear forces could retain all the fancy symmetries for which these new particles were introduced to reinforce that symmetry at each point in space and time. The Higgs field is responsible for giving everything else the masses that we measure, including those force-carrying particles. seek its equilibrium. The governing equations maintain the symmetry, but the symmetry is broken spontaneously when the system relaxes to some lowest energy state. So now once this scalar field, once this what we now call Higgs field gets anchored or gets stuck in one of its local minima, it now acts like it has a molasses. It actually is stuck at a nonzero value of its field. Instead of being stuck at the origin, it's stuck at some non zero value. At the level of the equations alone, they have zero mass. They should be exactly as massless as the photon. But unlike the photon, these newer force-carrying particles interact with this new scalar field. They start acting as if they have a large mass. It's an induced mass coming from this spontaneous symmetry breaking. It got a lot of attention, as I'll say more about in a moment, because it offered the first concrete quantitative alternative to Einstein's general theory of relativity in nearly half a century. In 1979, two separate theorists working independently of each other suggested that the two fields might be literally the same, not just comparable or considering side by side. Alex asks, was it an accident that both parties chose phi? Not really, I see something come up in the chat. And so what's changed over time? That's what we'll pick up on in the next part of the show. Back to the page you came from. Click here for the next episode of The Physics Show. It was not a rule but a pretty widespread convention by that point that a field that had no spin-- so a scalar field-- would often be labeled by the Greek letter phi. The Greek letter psi was often reserved by this point for spin 1/2 particles. So the notation isn't super surprising that it was so similar. But the rest of it that is a new hypothetical state of matter, it pervades all of nature, everything else interacts with it, that's what gives rise to mass. more than just the letter that they chose. There was a lot of what we might have considered similarities. And yet, the two sets of ideas really were treated so separately. So we might wonder, well, was it changes in data? Did experiments force a new evaluation? No, not really. Let's look at the gravity side first. So I mentioned that part of what got the gravitation community so excited about Brans-Dicke gravity was it now gave them something very tangible, very specific to try to test for. objects like the Viking Mars spacecraft and so on. By the end of the '70s, things did not look very good for Brans-Dicke gravity experimentally. That is all the tests were easily consistent with the predictions from Einstein's theory within experimental errors. To match all of these increasingly precise new experimental measurements, Brans' Dicke theory was not highly favored. In fact, Einstein's looked really good. So that's on the gravity side. Meanwhile, as most of you probably know, there was literally zero experimental testing of Brans's theory. evidence, a big fat goose egg nothing in favor of the Higgs-Boson until July of 2012, or if you're extra generous, maybe December of 2011, the first hints experimentally. So it wasn't a new experiment. The main story that's mostly given is actually hearkens to changes in ideas and, in particular, on the particle physics or particle theory side. And these are brilliant and beautiful ideas. These ideas are well worth appreciating. I just don't think of the whole story. asymptotic freedom. And actually, it's the reason why our friend and colleague here at MIT, Frank Wilczek, received the Nobel Prize. So this was work introduced by Frank and his then advisor David Gross, and independently by a different very young grad student at the time, David Politzer. And what they found was that the strength of the strong nuclear force, that QCD force that we talked about quite a bit at the end of last class session, that the force actually decreases with the energy scale. The effects that Frank Wilczek, David Gross, and David Politzer were talking about would be noticeable exponentially higher energies, right? Well beyond anything that can be achieved even today, let alone in the 1970s. So it's suggested that if one could ever get to really super crazy high energies, you might see some very qualitatively different behavior among nuclear particles-- really cool, a very interesting set of ideas. The present-day experiments at the Large Hadron Collider are here. idea from asymptotic freedom. The force strengths look like they might converge. It's not just that these two get stronger with high energy, and this one gets weaker. The idea was that maybe all of these highly symmetry mediated forces that we see as very different at these low energies-- they have very different behaviors and characteristic strengths-- maybe they're all signs of a single force. That would unite these three forces of nature into a single one modulated by a single strength, a single effective charge. That was called GUTs. the 16 GeV, rather than 10 to the 3 GeV. So this became a natural reason-- this is the main argument-- for particle theorists to ask about things like a very high-energy cosmology. And the phrase that was often used at the time, a gendered term, was a cosmology would provide the so-called poor man's accelerator, the poor person's accelerator. And so this becomes the main reason that's usually given, the main kind of cause for why these two previously quite separated fields of study-- gravitation and particle theory-- were somehow merged. In the late '60s and early '70s, physicists saw a really dramatic change in the kind of infrastructure for the discipline. High-energy particle physics was the field that had the most to lose or that lost the most during this reversal of fortune. And the job scene was most hit, partly because its budget was most dramatically cut. And so when physics is getting hit harder than any other field, you have a net outflow by a factor of 2 just within the field. the discipline, including explicitly more focus on gravitation and cosmology. So that means that more and more departments, including very elite trend-setting departments across the country, start rushing to offer new graduate courses in general relativity. Questions on that field, really for the first time in the U.S., start showing up regularly on the general exams for physicists across all fields, all specialties, not just those who wanted to study relativity. And you see a market response as well. You see a flood of new graduate-level textbooks on general relativity on Gravitation and Cosmology-- twice as many published in the 1970s versus the 1960s. vast majority of those came really in the later '70s, in the wake of these pedagogical reforms. So remember that big report comes out in 1972. You start seeing curricular changes as early as '73, '74. By '75, '76, '77, you start seeing, in some sense, the market respond with many textbooks being really rushed into print. Some of these textbooks were basically mimeographed lecture notes. And now there's very, very fancy books published in a more typical way. for more than half of my life, to his great chagrin. He's won a number of awards, gold prizes and that big award-winning fella. But the award that I take most pleasure in is the fact that he won Boston's Messiest Office. So yes, we'll work on that. Let's see. Fisher says, on the chart of interactions with the field strengths, are those groups? Yes. Fisher, thank you. That's right. So I was avoiding the nomenclature, but you're quite right. a continuous unitary symmetry, which is like saying you could rotate the electron field by any continuum amount, and the equations remain unchanged. The photon only has to mop up a relatively simple symmetry, the U1 gauge symmetry. Whereas SU2 was what I was pointing to when I was referring to the weak nuclear force. That's a discrete symmetry. It's a more complicated symmetry structure. And that's the symmetry group that these force-carrying particles-- the W and the Z particles-- are invented to enforce. broken at lower energies, they take on different features. It's another example of spontaneous symmetry breaks. And that's super cool and fun and lots more to be said about that. But that is, indeed, where that nomenclature came from. Any other questions on that? OK. Anyone else want to share stories of Alan's messy office? No, going once?OK. Then let me press on for the last-- the last part is pretty short, so the last little part, and we'll have time for more questions and discussion after that. There's a direct coupling between this new hypothetical field and this geometrical structure, the local curvature of space and time. And so this is really, again, playing the role of the varying unit strength of gravity. That's in place of Newton's constant G. If that field can vary, then you better include its kinetic energy with, Again, some fudge factor. that's all the Brans-Dicke stuff. And give that field its own potential energy with that very specific shape, that symmetric double-well type shape. Even the electromagnetic force is exponentially stronger than the gravitational force. The force between an electron and a positron when they're close together is exponentially higher due to their Coulomb attraction compared to their gravitational attraction. So why is there such a strange hierarchy? Why such a huge divide in the average strength of gravity compared to these other seemingly elementary forces? And so that could be. And so if phi becomes stuck at some large nonzero value, either plus or minus, then the square of that will be some large number, some large positive number. setting the inverse gravitational field strength. So why is gravity so weak? They suggested maybe it's because it's arising from some broken symmetry. Much like the Higgs-Goldstone mechanism, the field is dynamical, but it's getting stuck. Only in the broken-symmetry phase do we experience a phenomena that we are used to. So gravity gets stuck being weak because its local strength is arising through the Brans-Dicke field getting accurate in a symmetry-breaking potential. physicist with whom he again kind of accidentally wound up swapping apartments happens to have been immersed in gravitation and cosmology. And as Tony recalls, he found these stacks of preprints all around the apartment that looked interesting. He'd been an undergraduate at Princeton, Tony had. And there, he studied a little bit of gravity with John Wheeler for his undergraduate thesis. So by the mid to late '70s, he's now asking questions at this interface between his formal training in high-energy particle theory and gravitation. Lee Smolin was the other person who independently introduced that broken-symmetric theory in 1979-- same year as Tony Zee. He was actually, from the start, combining the two fields, both in the courses he took and eventually with his advising team for his thesis and for his dissertation itself. So unlike this accident of trading apartments in Paris and reading a few preprints, more and more members of Lee Smolin's generation were going through a training like his, partly by design, in the wake of the National Academies report. Few physicists today think Brans-Dicke theory of gravity best describes our Universe. But the theory is still very much alive today. In fact, interest in the field grew even as it was getting experimentally less and less favored. The idea that we're picking single theories and that they replace each other, I think, just misses this fine structure, says David Weinberger of the University of California, Los Angeles. He and Weinberger will look at inflation next time on inflation. does exactly the kinds of things that Smolin and Zee had been doing, trying to unify the Brans-Dicke and Higgs field. And in fact, there were a bunch of concrete changes-- some of them geopolitical, the ramping up the Vietnam War, worldwide economic crisis, huge changes in policy priorities within the United States. All these things on a huge range of scales are helping to mold what's going to seem natural or, quote/unquote natural, for younger people to consider doing. in turn, these new folks, especially people like Mike Turner and Rocky Kolb, went on to become real institution builders in their own right. So in fact, they were accelerates. Not only had they been trained to think carefully at this new interface, they helped really accelerate the trend. So it goes from who even thought of it to who wouldn't even try that? What counts as natural can shift in a pretty short time scale. And as we've been seeing throughout the whole term and including today, those shifts can be driven as much by things well outside of the physicist's control. the hall from Alan's. And by a quirk of the old building 6, we had the same key. A single key would open the whole hallway. Couldn't get rid of it now. And one time, my parents were visiting. And I basically broke into Alan's office. They couldn't believe me when I described what it was like to try to work with this person. So I actually broke into his office to show them the safety violation, fire code violation, horror show that was the den of entropy. So that's a true story. soon, everyone. Soon, everyone will be able to play together again. Soon. Everyone will be playing together.soon. Everyone. Will be. Playing together again soon.soon,everyone. Everyone, playing together againsoon.soon,. everyone. soon, everyone, will be. playing together once again. soon.everyone. will be Playing Together again.soon! everyone. will. be.playing together soon. soon! Everyone. will play together soon! everyone will.be. playing again soon! soon.