Professor Steven Smith: Let me start today by asking the question, "what is political philosophy?" In one sense, you could say political philosophy is simply a branch or what we call a subfield of the field of political science. Yet in another sense, political philosophy seems to be the oldest and most fundamental part of politicalScience. Its purpose is to lay bare the fundamental problems, the fundamental concepts and categories which frame the study of politics. In this respect it seems to me much less like just a branch of political Science than the foundation of the entire discipline. Political philosophy is the oldest of the social sciences. It can boast a wealth of heavy hitters from Plato and Aristotle to Machiavelli, Hobbes, Hegel, Tocqueville, Nietzsche, and so on. The study of the great books or great thinkers of the past can easily degenerate into a kind of antiquarianism, into a sort of pedantry. These works provide us with the most basic questions that continue to guide our field, says Yale's John Maynard Keynes. This course will be devoted to the study of those "academic scribblers" who have written books that continue to impress and create the forms of authority with which we are familiar. But one thing we should not do, right, is to approach these works as if they provide, somehow, answers to the problems of today. Rather, the great works provide us, so to speak, with a repository of fundamental or permanent questions that political scientists still continue to rely on in their work. Again, we still think in.influences, are usually the slave of some defunct economist. terms of the basic concepts and categories that were created for us long ago. In political philosophy, it is never a sufficient answer to answer a question with a statement "because Plato says so," or "because Nietzsche says so" There are no final authorities in that respect in philosophy because even the greatest thinkers disagree profoundly with one another over their answers. We are called upon first to read and listen, and then to judge "who's right?" "how do we know?" The only way to decide is not to defer to authority, whoever's authority, but to rely on our own powers of reason and judgment. What is justice? What are the goals of a decent society? How should a citizen be educated? Why should I obey the law, and what are the limits, if any, to my obligation? And of course, the all important question, even though political philosophers and political scientists rarely pronounce it, namely, quid sit deus, what is God? Does he exist? And what does that imply for our obligations as human beings and citizens? Those are some of the most basic and fundamental problems of the study of politics, but you might say, where does one enter this debate? The concept of the regime is perhaps the oldest and most fundamental of political ideas. Broadly speaking, a regime indicates a form of government, whether it is ruled by the one, a few, the many, or as more common, some mixture of these three ruling powers. Regimes are necessarily partisan, that is to say they instill certain loyalties and passions in the same way that one may feel partisanship to the New York Yankees or the Boston Red Sox, or to Yale. Fierce loyalty, partisanship: it is inseparable from the character of regime politics. Henry Adams once cynically reflected that politics is simply the "organization of hatreds" This raises the question whether it is possible to transform politics, to replace enmity and factional conflict with friendship. Is such a thing possible? It can't be ruled out, but such a world, I would note--let's just say a world administered by international courts of law, by judges and judicial officials. tribunals--would no longer be a political world. The study of regime politics is in part a study of the distinctive national character types that constitutes a citizen body. You can't understand a regime unless you understand, so to speak, what it stands for, what a people stand for and what they look up to. This raises a further set of questions that we will consider over the term. How are regimes founded, the founding of regimes? What brings them into being and sustains them over time? In its oldest sense, political science simply was a science of statecraft. What are the qualities necessary for sound statesmanship? How does statecraft differ from other kinds of activities? Must a good statesman be a philosopher versed in poetry, mathematics, and metaphysics? Or is statesmanship a purely practical skill requiring judgment based on deliberation and experience? Is a streak of cruelty and a willingness to act immorally necessary for statecraft, as Machiavelli infamously argued? Political philosophy is an imminently practical discipline, a practical field. Its purpose is not simply contemplation alone: it is advice giving. None of the people we will study this semester were cloistered scholars detached from the world. Plato undertook three long and dangerous voyages to Sicily in order to advise the King Dionysius. Machiavelli spent a large part of his career in the foreign service of his native Florence, and wrote as an advisor to the Medici. Hobbes was the tutor to a royal household who followed the King into exile during the English Civil War. The study of regime politics either implicitly or explicitly raises a question that goes beyond the boundary of any given society. A regime constitutes a people's way of life, what they believe makes their life worth living. What has or ought to have a claim on our loyalty and rational consent? What function does the best regime play in political science? How does it guide our actions here and now? The best regime will always favor a certain kind of human being with a certain set of character traits, whether common man or warrior. Aristotle says the good citizen is not the same as the good human being. The philosopher can never be truly loyal to anyone or anything but what is best, he says. The study of political philosophy may be the highest tribute we pay to love, he adds. The best regime embodies a supreme paradox, it would seem, he writes. It is superior in some ways to all actual regimes, but it has no concrete existence anywhere, he argues. The quest for knowledge of the best regime must necessarily be accompanied by eros, or love. see you back, and have a very good but thoughtful September 11^(th). See you back on 9/11/11. I'll see you back in a week or so. Thanks for your support and good wishes. I love you all, and see you on 11/11 /11. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. See you in a month or so, and I'll be back to see you in the U.S.