KOMO goes behind the scenes of a new racecraft that's fast and designed to Perfection. The all new E1 racing series aims to prove the potential of electric power in the Marine industry. The boats can reach 50 knots that's around 93 km per hour so how do they reach those speeds? The key bit here is getting up on the thin bits of the foil and staying above the water to have the speed that's right. It's a challenge being a pilot in the race bird with the boat back on dry land. drawing too much power while and while they're lift and that lifts them up onto the foils. While they're on the foil we can then obviously play around with the lift which is on the left hand side of the of the wheel. The trim on the right hand side and it's we're just altering that by a few points depending on wave conditions. This sport is still in the very early stages the nine teams have the same boat but they're working out how to push the tech. E1 is a brand new racing concept using foiling boats with an electric motor in a format that's never been done before. Every team has a male and a female pilot and it's up to the team to decide which pilot will go first. The most challenging part is the starts getting those right can really affect the race. The course is a very simple Loop but those green boys mark an extra special part of the track and the teams have to choose very wisely when you take that turn you have to take the Long Lap. as we go there's no set plan and it completely depends on where we are during the race and yeah it can change in a matter of minutes [Music] at the end of the day you know the teams really have to work together both Pilots have to be consistent you know One Pilot can be really fast if the other one is slower then it may come down to the wire. Having two very consistent Pilots that can work together is how you're really going to win let's po that champagne [Applause] hope it continues for many years to come. We are proud to be a part of the history of the city. We hope to see it continue for many more years. Thank you for all your support and good wishes. We will continue to support the city in any way we can over the next few years. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, click here for more information on this story and to read the rest of the article.