This morning we're going to carry on talking about Jeremy Bentham and classical utilitarianism. And I'm going to begin by making a few points about the measurement of utility, which we bumped into in a glancing kind of way last time. And then we are going to move from that into talking about utility and distribution in classical utilitarianism. I think you'll start to see why Bentham's argument has so much to say about how we should think about utility across the whole society. utilitarianism became such an ideologically powerful doctrine in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Bentham's principle being maximized, "the greatest happiness of the greatest number" The idea being that if you think of, in this case, a very simple two-person society, it would be a happy society. The idea was to maximize the happiness of a small group of people, rather than a large number of people. That's the idea of utilitarianism, and it's a very powerful one. Anything on this side of the status quo would be an improvement for society. The greatest happiness of the greatest number will have been increased. Now, that's all very abstract, and you think of that as the status status quo, A has that much utility, B has that many utility. But the fact is that it's not as simple as that. It's a very complex issue. And it's very difficult to get to the bottom of it, but it's a good place to start. by way of trying to make it somewhat more concrete, let's notice two features of utility measurement. The first, as I said to you last time, as far as Bentham is concerned, this is a doctrine of what I called objective egoism. The second is that people are self-interested and behave self- interestedly, but not in a self-serving way. This is the doctrine of Bentham's egoism, and it is the basis of his theory of utility. that we can figure out what's likely to motive them regardless of their own interpretation of their actions or behavior. We have our interpretation; remember, Bentham says the rare case-- as with the anatomy and physiology of the human mind, it's the mind that makes the difference in the case of a suicide. We can't know what the person is thinking, but we can try to figure out why they did what they did, and what they were trying to do, and why they acted in the way they did. rare case that you get it right about yourself. And it's the objective scientific calculus that's going to tell us what maximizes people's utility. Now, you might say, "Well, how is that actually going to work?" So there are two steps here. The first one is that he thinks all of us think that we are better than other people. And the second one is, he thinks that he is better than others, and that he can do something about it. utility is quantifiable. Money is going to be the measure of utility in his scheme, and in this case Bentham's thinking of money. It follows from that that utility is reducible to a single index, and that index is money. In this case, money is the index of utility, and it is money that will be measured by Bentham. The index is the amount of money that Bentham has in his bank account at the time of his death, and this is the money that he uses to measure his utility. that means that we could think of these units of utility as having a kind of dollar value. So anytime you think this doctrine is crude or extreme, remember my point that this is a guy who takes every thought to the logical extreme. But if so you get one, if so, you get a very good idea of what he is thinking about, and it's a very interesting one at that. It's not crude, but it's very, very extreme, and that's what makes it so interesting. let's just for simplicity say, say one Standard International Util costs a dollar. And let's suppose you experience two Standard international Utils of pain from coming to class. Then I could make you indifferent between come to class and not coming toclass by paying you two dollars. It could be as simple as paying you a dollar for a Standard InternationalUtil. I could even pay you to not go to class at all if I wanted to. I'm not going to do that to you. get you to come to class if I paid three dollars, and I would not get you toCome to classif I paid a dollar, right? And so that's the second point. In the first instance we say that utility is quantifiable and expressible through money, but then related to utility is related to the cost of the utility. And so, in the second case, the utility of money can be quantifiable but not expressible. And that's what we're trying to get at here. to that, and as indicated in the example I just gave you, we can work with a doctrine of revealed preference. We can vary the price that we charge admission for the course. So let's say we charge--let's imagine there are three of you and one of you experiences two experiences two, and we can charge that price for each of you to experience two. That's how we work with revealed preference, and that's what we can do in this case, too. There's one perverse student in the audience who actually likes coming to the class. So then we would find that if we paid a dollar, one of you would come. One experiences three utils of pain, and one experiences two utILS of pleasure. There's a perverse student who actually enjoys coming to class. If we paid him a dollar he would come, so then we'd find that one would come and one would not, so we'd have to pay a dollar each time. If we increase it to two-fifty, two of you would come, and so we could vary the price to get information about your utility. And we could even influence your behavior without actually changing your preferences, and that's a very important distinction to make. Your enjoyment from coming or not, that's what it's about. It's about enjoyment, not about whether you're going to come or not. That's the difference between coming and not coming, and it's very important. coming to class wouldn't change, but your behavior would change if we varied the price. So that we can influence your behavior by manipulating the incentives without regard to what your underlying preferences are, and we could allow them actually to stay the same. You'd rather be at home asleep, you'd rather go to class than go to the gym. You want to go to school, you want to stay at home, but you don't want to pay for it, so you're going to school. You're not going to work, you're just going to sleep. but if the price is high enough you'll come anyway. When we talk about utilitarianism in Bentham's system, classical utilitarianism, we see that he was right. But what about thinking about society in more general terms? What does Bentham mean by 'society' and 'utilitarianism' in the modern sense of the word? What do we mean by the word 'utility' and what does it mean in a modern society? What is the role of the state in society, and how does it relate to the individual? operates with these numbers that attach to specific actions or policies and that we can make comparisons across individuals. So to put this in the jargon of economists, Bentham allows interpersonal comparisons of utility. We can say that if you take one unit of utility, you can compare it to another unit of it. That's what Bentham was trying to do with his theory of the utility of a unit of power. He said: 'If you take a unit and compare it with another unit, you get the same amount of utility' utility from one person and give it to another person their utility will go up and the first person's utility is going to go down. Okay, so it's a doctrine of interpersonal comparisons of utility. And for those of you who are mathematicians here it might also be worth noting that if you give something to someone and they take it back, their utility goes up. And if they give it back to you, your utility goes down. And it's the same thing with money. that Bentham operates with cardinal scales. These are additive things. You can actually think about these as sort of lumps of pleasure or pain experience that are moved around across people and can be added and subtracted. And so I put up just here to sort of--so you can think about it so you can see what Bentham is trying to get at, which is that pleasure and pain experience can be additive or they can be subtracted, depending on who you're talking to. Bentham's doctrine is concerned with redistributing utility. If you imagine a status quo, each person has six units of utility, you can start asking yourself, "Well, let's imagine if we could redistribute things" What would that mean as far as Bentham's Doctrine is concerned? What I've been trying to do is work my way through this doctrine. It's a long way to go, but it's a start, and it's not very far away from what Bentham intended. given in this first column as a potential departure from the status quo is the utility monster example we talked about last time. If it turns out Leonid has a vastly superior capacity to experience pleasure than anybody else, then we could get a huge increase in total utility by using him as an example. This could be a huge improvement in the way we think about the role of pleasure and pleasure in our daily lives. We could see a massive increase in the amount of pleasure we experience if we used Leonid as a human example. taking a lot from B and C and giving it to Leonid, so that we would say "allow," right? Or we could think of this change from the status quo-- we go to a more inegalitarian society and, again, again the greatest happiness of the greatest number has increased. We have to think about how we want to make the world a better place for all people to live in. We need to make sure that we don't become a society that is more and more like a banana republic. a world where there are eighteen utils and a world here where there were nineteen utils. Or think about this case, we might think of this as a kind of schematization of the Eichmann problem. If the utility that the Aryans gain from practicing genocide and ethnic cleansing against the Jews is greater than the utility of the Jews against the Muslims, then this is a problem for the Jews to deal with as well as for the Muslims. This is the problem that the Jews are trying to solve. the Jews exceed the utilities that the Jews lose, there would be no reason under Bentham's doctrine not to do it. Okay, now there's a certain ambiguity in the phrase, "Maximize the greatest happiness of the greatest number," which Bentham never finally resolves. The ambiguity is whether he's saying just maximize the total, so here the total's bigger than eighteen. Or is he perhaps saying maximize the utility of the majority, the greatest? It's obviously the case that it's preferable, on Bentham’s scheme, to the status quo. happiness of the greatest number, simply meaning the majority? But in that second interpretation you could still get highly inegalitarian distributions being judged superior to the status quo. If you imagine going from here to here we've got a majority here experiencing twelve utils of pleasure, you could get a very different view of happiness from the one we're used to. We're not talking about happiness of the majority here, we're talking about the happiness of a majority of the people who experience it. and here we have a majority of two experiencing seventeen potentially utils of pleasure. So there is some ambiguity there as to just what Bentham meant, but most of the time he is taken as having meant just the crude statement, "Maximize the total amount of utility in the society" He is often taken to have meant just that, but there is more to it than that, as well as the more complex meaning of what he meant by the phrase 'maximize utility in society' And so that nuance between whether we're saying the greatest number means a majority or just the total amount is not something that will detain us any further. Now, you could say, "Okay, so far so good, but isn't all of this a little counterintuitive?" After all, if you compare--let's say, the U.S. has more women in the workforce than any other country in the history of the world. That's a big difference. And so that's what we're trying to figure out. focus on the difference between the status quo and distribution IV here. These people might be on the verge of starvation. Surely giving them a unit of utility is going to be much more enhancing to their happiness than giving them A. Anyone know what the principle is? If you do, please share it with us in the comments below or tweet us @CNNOpinion. We would love to hear from you. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here for more information. behind that idea is? Anyone want to take it? How many of you have done ECON 101, the first econ course? Yeah, so what is the principle that would tell you if you have no food and I give you a loaf of bread, your utility goes up a lot? That's what the principle is. That's the idea behind that idea. That is what the idea is. It's the principle behind the idea of the bread-loaf-and-a-wich. more than if I have ten loaves of bread and I give you a loaf of bread. Prof: Diminishing marginal utility, the principle of diminishing marginal utility of all good things. And this is the idea just encapsulated, to make it a little bit more interesting. Somebody? Okay. Diminish marginal utility. somebody? DiminISHmarginal utility. anybody? Okay, we're going to take a break. We'll be back in a few minutes with the next part of the story. If you already have a Porsche Turbo and somebody gives you a second one, you're going to get less new utility from the second Porsche than you had from the first. It's not that you won't get any new, but you'll get less. And the principle of this is that if you don't have a car, your utility's going to go up a huge amount. More dramatic: If you're not a car owner, you'll have less utility if you get a car. diminishing marginal utility says that this line will get flatter, and flatter. You'll always get more utility from a new increment of the same good, but it'll be less new utility than you got from the previous increment of that same good. That's the concept of diminishing marginal utility, which is the idea that the line will keep getting flatter toward infinity. It's the same concept that says you'll get more Utility from every increment of a good, even if you get less utility from the last one. of diminishing marginal utility. The new utility you get diminishes at the margin. Each new Porsche is less valuable to you than the previous Porsche. Now, is that plausible? Anyone think there's a problem with that idea? Yeah? Student: The idea with shoes. If you're given one shoe you're going to wear it all the time. That's the way it should be, I think. I don't know if anyone else thinks it's a good idea, but I think it would work. to get absolutely no utility, but if you're given two shoes, a right and a left, then maybe you'll get more utility? Prof: Okay, so shoes. If we just kept giving you lots of right shoes, there'd be a problem. Student: Right. Prof: okay, so I think Bentham would have done that. Students: Right, so Bentham did that. Professor: Okay. Students have a right to have a left and a right, so they can't have both at the same time. to say it would have to be pairs of shoes, right? Student: Yeah, I guess. Prof: Okay, but that's a great example to start us off on this. What else? Anything else anyone might find problematic? Yeah, over here. Student: Well, it just seems that if we're going by diminishing.to say that if you're going to diminish something, you should diminish it by diminishing the amount of money you have to spend on it. Professor: Okay. margin utility that if you had everyone literally dirt poor and always starving, if you give them just a little bit of something their happiness would increase so much more because they got that much little. Prof: Just explain that a little more. Student: Well, marginal utility is if you have a little. bit ofsomething for the first time your happiness increases so much. more because the first. time. So if you were to give people very little food, or anything at all, and then you suddenly gave them a. lot of food, they would be happier. little bit they would get really, really happy about it. But by this then also if they're also very wealthy and they got something more they wouldn't really be happy. So it'd be more beneficial to the utility if they only got a little bit so they would be very, very happy with it. "It's not about the money, it's about the quality of the service," he says. "We want to make sure that the customers are happy with what we're giving them" very happy. Prof: That's a very sophisticated observation. I'm just going to put it one side and come back to it in about ten minutes when I start talking about redistribution. Okay. But anything else about--if we're still focusing on one individual, anything else that might be problematic with that individual? Prof: Anything else about that individual that you think might be a problem with that particular individual? Professor: No, I just want to make sure that we're talking about one person. this notion of diminishing marginal utility? Over here? Student: Well, let's say you're C. Just because you're rich doesn't mean you don't want to be more rich, and just because you have a certain amount of money doesn'tmean more money isn't going to make you equally as happy as it did before. Prof: Okay, that's true, but why is it problematic? student: I don't know. It might be thought to suggest that this implies the more money you have the less important money is to you. Student: Does it mean that rich people will care less about money? Teacher: Why is the answer no? Student: They don't. Teacher: So you're right, but notice what that means. It's a tricky question because the first impulse is to say, "Yes, they'll care lessabout money," but the answer is no. It doesn't mean they don't care about money. It just means they won't care as much about it as they used to. That's the way it is. just need more money to get the same amount of happiness. Prof: Exactly. So you got it exactly right to see that money creates some problematic examples for the principle of diminishing marginal utility. It's a very, very serious issue, and it's not going to be solved with more money, it's just going to have to be dealt with in a way that doesn't create problems for people who want to spend more money on their happiness. And that's what we're going to do, I think. of diminishing marginal utility. But the thing that follows from it is that, for Donald Trump to get more utility, you have to give him a huge. amount of new money just for him to get the same amount of. new utility as somebody who only has ten thousand dollars, he says. Trump says he's not trying to get rich, he's just trying to make America great again. He says he doesn't want to give up on America, he just wants to make it better. "The more money you have, actually the moreMoney you will want in order to get the same hit, right? So the way to think about the desire for money it's a bit like sort of a heroin addict needs more, and more and more new heroin," he says. "So the more money we have the more we will want to get more of it, right?" he adds. "It's like a drug addict who needs more heroin to get same hit. Right?" he asks. get the next marginal increment of utility. So we should expect rich people to be greedy by this theory, not to become more and more indifferent to money. Very important assumption and a lot of people get that wrong when they think about the principle of diminishing marginal utility. Are rich people more greedy by the theory, or are rich people just more greedy with their money? We'll have to wait and see, but rich people are more greedy than poor people, we'll find out in time. there any other examples of this doctrine that might make it seem problematic? Yeah, over there. Student: Well, if I had a second Porsche Turbo I would be just really reckless with it and I could do whatever I want. I wouldn't have to protect the first Porsche Turbo as much as I do now. That's a good example of how the doctrine could be applied to a second car. That would be a good way to get rid of the first one. That could be a bad example. That one is a good one. Student: I mean it's like there's more you can do with it, right? Prof: Yeah, so why is that a problem? Student: Well, then wouldn't the second car-- I mean, like, say if you have a little bit and you're given a little amount your utility goes much.much. Much. Much more. Much, much, much more. much more, that's how it works. It's like a second car. That's how a car works. up, but you really want to protect that little bit, but when you get more maybe it encourages you to save money, to not spend more. Prof: Are you saying you wouldn't want the second one? Student: Well, why wouldn't I want the first one? Prof: You would. Student: Why wouldn't you want to have a second one, then? Prof. Student. You would want to be able to have two. Students: I would like to have both. I want the second one? Prof: If you had one and I said, "I'll give you my one, it's right out there," you wouldn't want it? Student: It's not that I wouldn'twant it. Prof: You wouldn't be like Jay Leno, who--how many cars does Jay Lenon have? student: Too too too too many. Professor: If I had one, I'd have a lot of cars. Student: I have too many cars. many. Prof: Because? Student: Because you want to protect that first one. It's not that I wouldn't want it, but maybe the utility for the second. one in some cases would be more than the utility. for the first one so the curve would be thrown off. "I mean, so, I mean, I'm not saying I want it," he says. "But I'm just saying that I want to make sure that I don't have to do it" so you don't lose what little you have. Prof: Okay, so it's a possibility. Any other examples of where this becomes problematic? I mean, think about beer. One beer increases your utility a lot, isn't it going to at some--you know, or the fourteenth? Prof: It's possible. It's not a good idea to drink a lot of beer at one time, but it's possible to do it at other times. It could be a problem. taking an aspirin, isn't it going to, you know? No? Student: What about other values like integrity? Prof: If you have a lot of integrity, a little bit more is still worth an equal amount. Prof: So if you have integrity and you get more, you get some more. If you don't have integrity, you just get more of the same thing. That's the way it works. It's the same with other values. It doesn't have to be the same. integrity is a great example because once you start putting values like that out there it, I think, threatens the idea that it's all reducible to a single index, right? Because you can't--having a little bit of integrity is sort of like being a littlebit pregnant, right?" Eliot says. Once Eliot says that, it's hard to imagine a world without integrity. Eliot: "Once you start Putting values out there ... it,  takes away from the idea of what it means to be a person" Spitzer's integrity is blown it's not like there's some--it's a binary good. You either have it or you don't, right? People either think he's either a hypocrite or he's not, it' a binary thing. Maybe some people are somewhat hypocritical, but it seems likethere's a threshold there, one side. It seems like there’s some kind of threshold there. It's not just one side, it's two sides. It doesn't make sense. or the other. So there might be some goods like integrity that are not easily capture-able in this logic. We should put that out there, but yeah, over here? Student: What about health? It's not quite binary because you can be in medium health, but I think it would be. It would be a good idea to put out there that you can have both health and integrity at the same time, if you're in the right state of health, for example. pretty useful to be healthy and then super healthy, ad infinitum. Professor Ian Shapiro: Health. it's tricky. Actually less so in our day than Bentham's. Although you'll see we will come up against some pretty bizarre cases. If you want to talk to Professor Shapiro, visit his website: http://www.irishshapiro.com/. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Some people are sighted and some people are blind and you could do eye transplants. Arguably the blind person would gain more utility from getting one eye than the sighted person would lose from losing one eye. Should we be transplanting from the sighting to the blind? Should we do it for sighted people or blind people? Do you know someone who would benefit from an eye transplant? If so, please email stephanie.smith@mailonline.co.uk. do that? So that can also give you some ways of proceeding that would make you queasy, right, if you allow the principle of diminishing marginal utility. What about the examples I threw out there, beer and aspirins? They're a bit like the sort of left shoe examples, right? I think that's a bit of a good way of looking at it. I think it's a good idea to look at it as a way of thinking about things. It's a way to think about things that you might not normally think about. don't think those are actually deep problems for Bentham's theory. I think what he would say is, "Well, you'd drink beer and at some point you would sell the beer rather than make yourself paralytically drunk and feel terrible" You'd sell theBeer and use that to buy some. You'd use the money to buy more beer. That's what Bentham would say. I don't think that's a deep problem for his theory. It's just that it's a little bit more complicated than that. other good that would give you increasing utility at a diminishing marginal rate. Every serious economist since the eighteenth century has assumed that the principle of diminishing marginal utility is true, including Jeremy Bentham. And I think if you threw out some of these problematic instances like integrity, I think that what Bentham would have said, or what any any other economist would have done, is true. I think you can't do economics without assuming that the Principle of diminishingmarginal utility istrue. I don't think that that makes you care less about money the richer you get. economist would have said, "Well, yes, there are some things that are not capture-able easily, or easily captured by this idea" "If you want to see how people are going to behave, if you wants to get it right, it's a better idea," he says. "It's a way to get a sense of how people will behave," he adds. "You can't capture it easily, but if you want it right you can try to get an idea of it" assumption than any of the competing assumptions you could make. It's going to get you closer to the truth more of the time than not assuming the principle of diminishing marginal utility is true. So Bentham would have probably said that, I think, if questioned or if somebody had probed him. He would probably have said that if questioned, too, if he had been asked to do so by someone who was interested in the history of science. I think that's what he would have said. with some of these counter examples. So it's the best assumption you can make given that you've got to assume something. But now, and now I want to come back to the sophisticated point that was made in the middle at the back there a few minutes ago, when you make the assumption that there is a point of view that is different from the one that is being made here. That is the point that's being made. And that's the point we're trying to make here. start to think about the utility that people at the bottom of the social order derive from a particular good, versus the utility of those at the top. In Bentham's scheme, remember, we are allowing comparisons across individuals. Let's think about how we can compare people's utility to that of a good, and see how it varies from person-to-person. We can then compare the benefits of different goods for different groups of people, and find out which is better for society. Donald Trump and a homeless woman living out of a left luggage locker in Grand Central Station. Actually there are no lockers in the station. Trump and the homeless woman live in a room on the second floor of a hotel. The hotel is located on the third floor of the Grand Central Building. It is located in the middle of the building, on the right side of the escalator. There is no elevator on the left side, just the right. The left side has a door that leads to a stairwell. at Grand Central but there are at Penn, at Penn Station, okay? And the question is, should we take a dollar from Trump and give it to the bag lady. What? Should we? Yes? No? How many think yes? Okay, yeah, almost everybody. Why? Because by assumption with the principle, why not? Why not? It's a good question. It's an easy one to answer. And it's a great question to ask. And the answer is yes. of diminishing marginal utility we take the dollar from Trump up there, his loss of utility is negligible, but we give it to the woman who's starving down here, and her gain in utility is enormous from that dollar, right? So we should take thedollar from Trump. Let's assume that's the case, and we give the dollar to the starving woman. We should give her the dollar, and she'll gain enormous utility from it. We'll take the dollars from Trump, and he'll lose negligible utility. there's no dead weight loss to the government and all of that for right now. We will just keep it simple. We should take that dollar from Trump and we should give it to the bag lady, and the greatest happiness of the greatest number will have increased, right? But it's not going to happen. It's going to be a long time before we get to that point. It will be a very, very long time until we get there, though, and it will be very difficult. then maybe we should take another dollar, shouldn't we? I mean it worked the first time, so we should. We should take a second dollar from Trump and give it to the bag lady, and a third dollar. And a fourth dollar. When are we going to stop? I don't know. I just want to know when we're going to be able to do this. I want to do it again. I'm tired of it. I can't wait for the next time. to stop? Yeah? Student: > Professor Ian Shapiro: Yeah, we're going to stop at the point of perfect equality, right? Professor Shapiro: We're Going to keep redistributing until they have the same amount. So now you should be able to start to see why classical utilitarianism was a doctrine that was thought that was important in the first place, Professor Shapiro says. He says it's a way of looking at the world, and how it can be improved on and improved on. to be profoundly radical and frightening to rich men, because it has this built-in impetus for downward redistribution. You can say well, there'll be cost, there'd be dead weight loss to the state and so on, but still the underlying logic says take it from Trump and give it to the poor. That's the way it works, and that's how it's going to work in the U.S. as well. It's not going to be easy, but it's not the end of the world, it's just the beginning. the bag lady, right? At the margin that's what you should do. And Bentham completely saw that this was an implication of his doctrine. Now, Bentham was a fairly radical guy. He was a supporter of democracy, which was a radical thing at that time. But he wasn't as egalitarian as we think he was, and he was a little bit more conservative than we thought he was. We're going to have to wait and see how this plays out, but I think it's a good idea. as all that, and he wanted to temper the downward redistribution that flows from his principle, and so he makes a distinction between what he refers to as "absolute" and "practical" equality. He says, Suppose but a commencement made, by the power of a government of any kind, in the name of equality. That would be the beginning of the end of equality, he says. And so he wants to temper that downward redistribution. He wants to make sure that it doesn't happen. design of establishing it (absolute equality, that's redistributing to equality), the effect would be--that, instead of every one's having an equal share in the sum of the objects of general desire-- and in particular the means of subsistence, and the matter of abundance, no one would have any share of it. The effect of establishing absolute equality would be to redistribute to equality, the effect of which would be to redistribute to equity. The result would be that every one would not have an equal share of the objects of general desire. it at all. Before any division of it could be made, the whole would be destroyed; and destroyed, along with it, by those whom, as well as those for the sake of whom, the division had been ordained. He's basically saying, if you want to reduce that to a bumper sticker, that's what he's doing. It's a very, very serious thing. It is a very dangerous thing to do. And it's not just the people who are at risk, it's also the people around them. sticker, he's saying the rich will burn their crops before giving them to the poor, and that is a common argument in politics. It's the sort of reverse of trickle-down, right? Trickle-down is the notion that you allow inequality because you rich will create more wealth for everybody,right? The rich will burning their crops is a way of creating wealth for the poor. The poor will burn crops to create wealth for them. The rich won't burn crops because they don't want to burn them. pie bigger for everybody, and so the greatest amount of utility is increased by allowing inequality. This is the inverse claim. Bentham's saying, "Well yes, in principle absolute equality would maximize the greatest happiness of the greatest number, but in fact if a government set out to do that, the pie would get bigger for everyone" is the opposite of what Bentham was saying, says the economist. He says that if the government wanted to maximize happiness, it would have to make the pie bigger for all. rich would rebel," he says. "This is a claim that is often made in everyday politics. So you'll destroy incentives to work, is the claim that you'll hear when we have arguments about raising taxes in the run up to the fall elections, right? In the transition to democracy in South. Africa, the claim is that the rich would rebel, and that the poor would rebel. And this is the claims that you will hear when you raise taxes, right?" he adds. Africa people said the white farmers will destroy their farms before turning them over to the majority. It turned out not to be true. So those examples put on the table, what sort of force does this claim have? It's really an empirical claim, and we don't really know how much force it has. We don't know if it has any impact on the way the country is run. It's a claim that we can't prove or disprove, but we can say that it's not true. Bentham makes a distinction between absolute and practical equality, and he says, "We should redistribute" Presumably they'll allow some redistributive taxation, but we don't know how much, and a lot of the day-to-day argument of politics turns around how much.much the rich will tolerate before burning their crops. "We don't have to live in absolute equality," Bentham says. "If we want to live together, we must live in practical equality," he adds. "Redistributing beyond practical equality has this perverse counter-trickle-down logic," he says. "That's not going to be acceptable from the standpoint of the principle of utility" "When you allow both interpersonal comparisons of utility and. utility and ... you can get to the point of absolute equality," he adds. "You can get there but not to absolute equality" "It's a very, very difficult thing to get to," he concludes. "I think it's going to take a lot of work to get there" you assume diminishing marginal utility, utilitarianism becomes a very radical doctrine. You can hedge it in to some extent with claims of this sort, but they are themselves controversial and you're going to get into a very messy world of macroeconomic predictions and counter-predictions about whether and when you reach a tipping point, he says. He adds: "You can hedge in to this sort of claim, but you can't hedge it away from the fact that it's going to be controversial" this point of practical equality, or when the gains from downward redistribution are offset by the losses from the shrinking of the pie. Now, some of you might have said, "Well, at the beginning of this course of lectures, Shapiro said, 'Every Enlightenment thinker is committed to postulants' One is. One is the point ofpractical equality, which is a point of. practical equality when the gain from downward. redistribution is offset by a loss of upward redistribution. The other is. the point. of practical. equality, that is, the point when gains from upward redistribution are. offset by losses from shrinking of pie. that we can have a scientific theory of politics, and the other is that individual freedom operationalizes a doctrine of rights is the most important good. Now, having sat through these lectures on Bentham, I can see what he's saying about science. Bentham has this monomaniacal view of science. He's not a scientist, he's a philosopher. He has a view of the world that is very, very different from that of a scientist. It's a very different world. got his objective egoism. He can figure it all out, what will maximize social utility, and run around the world writing constitutions for people. But I'm not seeing a whole lot of room for rights, he says. "He can devise a whole public policy that's going to scientifically maximize the utility of society, but he's not seeing the need for rights," he adds. "I'm not see the need to give people rights. I don't think that's a good thing." in this doctrine. It seems to allow ethnic cleansing, even genocide. Am I just wrong? "How does this respect individual rights?" he asks. "It seems to allowed redistribution from one person to another, all justified on the grounds that this is maximizing the total utility of society. Well, even if it is, how does thisrespect individual rights? Am Ijust wrong?" he says. "I don't think I am," he says, "but I don't know why I'm asking this." Is there some elementary thing I've missed here? There's not much room for rights in Bentham's doctrine. So I'm just wrong that these Enlightenment thinkers were committed to individual rights? It would be a reasonable inference from what I'm said so far. But remember, for Bentham when we try to try to do this, we will fail. We will fail, and we will have to go back to Bentham and ask ourselves why we were trying to do it in the first place. maximize utility in the society, individual motivation is vital. This is a passage I read to you last week, but I'm just repeating it, "The great enemies of public peace are the selfish and dissocial passions-- necessary as they are" "Society is held together only by the sacrifices that men can make," he says. "To be a good person, you must be able to make the sacrifices you need to make to be a better person" "You must have the courage to admit that you are not perfect, but that you can try to improve," he adds. be induced to make of the gratifications they demand: to obtain these sacrifices is the great difficulty, the great task of government. He's saying you have to work with individual motivations. You can't ignore them, and I think that is the point that's behind his distinction between absolute and practical. I think he's making a point about the importance of working with people's individual motivations, and how you can't just ignore them. It's a very, very difficult thing to do. equality. The rich will burn their crops before giving them to the poor. You have to see individuals as the basic generators of utility. In another piece of Bentham's writing which I didn't have you read, but I'll just put it out there, he said: 'You have to take that into account' He also said that the rich should not be allowed to own more land than the poor, and that the poor should be able to own less land. He said this in a piece of writing which he didn't want you to have you to read. because it's where you start to see our old friend the workmanship ideal creeping by the backdoor into utilitarianism. Bentham says, "Law does not say to man, Work and I will reward you but it says: Labour, and by stopping the hand that would take them from you, I will" Bentham said, "Work and I'll reward you" is a form of utilitarianism, not the other way around. He was referring to the law of work, not to the reward of labour. ensure you the fruits of your labour-- its natural and sufficient reward, which without me you cannot preserve. If industry creates, it is law which preserves. If at the first we owe everything to labour; at the second, and every succeeding moment, we owe all to law. So another way. So one more way to say it: We owe all of our lives to the law. We owe our life to our labour. And we owe our future to the future. We are all part of the same process. of thinking about this is, that Bentham's idea of the state is essentially regulatory. It stays the hand of somebody else who would steal your goods, but the government cannot itself create utility. Labor creates utility, and this is why I say that workmanship, that idea that we first confronted, is what we need to get back to in this country. We need to make sure that we have the right to work in a way that is safe, that is fair and that is efficient. when we talked about Locke, comes into utilitarianism by the backdoor, because Bentham's going to say, "Unless you respect individual rights you're not going to be able to maximize utility for the society as a whole" So the state is basically a regulative state, not a state that's actively involved, not like the U.S. in the 19th century. The U.N. is now the world's most powerful body, with a population of more than 100 million. in creating utility for individuals. It will do some redistribution to the point of practical equality, but the basic idea is that the state should be hands-off with respect to the utility creation in the society. It's industry that creates utility--labor, work--so incentives are going to be important going forward. The state should not be in the way of industry creating utility, he says, but it should play a role in the creation of jobs and other benefits for the people of the country. if you're going to maximize utility. So that's the way in which we see that even a classical utilitarian like Bentham is going to resist dispensing with the doctrine of individual rights. Now, there's a problem, though, with his mode of doing this, and the problem arises because the claim is that the individual is not entitled to any rights at all. That's the problem with Bentham's mode of dealing with the issue. It's not that he doesn't believe in individual rights, it's that he just doesn't think that they should be applied to everyone. that the rich will burn their crops before giving them to the poor might not be true. And even if we get to less extreme circumstances like South Africa before and after the transition, when we look at actual debates in contemporary politics in the United States, this is what this is not about. It's not about the rich burning their crops, it's about the poor not burning theirs. This is what the U.S. is about, not South Africa, and it's not just a South African story. we see. Ronald Reagan comes in and says, this is in 1980, "If we cut taxes, the pie will get bigger for all and they'll be actually more revenue," and so utilitarianism says do it. And the Democrats say, "No, they won't," and it's an empirical argument. And you will, and you will. And it's a good thing, too, because it's going to be a long time before we get it back. And we're going to need it. find, if you go back now and look at what happened during the 1980s, perfectly credible economists will line up on both sides because they cut the taxes, but, of course, eight other things happened as well that affect the macro-economy, right? And disentangling how much the tax cuts were is a difficult task, he says. He says it's important to look at the history of tax cuts in the U.S. to see how they affected the economy. responsible for what happened, versus how much many other things that happened were responsible. Or if you look at the current debate we watched and are watching unfold about the economic stimulus. If the economy turns around between now and November, the Democrats will probably do a lot of things to try to boost the economy, says CNN's John Sutter. Sutter: "I think we're going to see a lot more of this in the coming months and years," he says. "I don't think it's going to be pretty." lot better than if it doesn't, but the Republicans will say, "Well, it would have turned around faster if we hadn't had all this taxation" And Paul Krugman will say "well, it wouldn't have turned out so well if we had had more taxation," and so on. And so a lot of the time, the GOP will say that's true, but it's also true that it's not, and that's the way it's going to turn out. problem in debating incentives, once you get into the real world of macroeconomic policy-making, is that you never have the counterfactual. You can't go and rerun history without the stimulus, right, or without the Reagan tax cuts. And (b) the sheer complexity; so many other things happened--the price of the stimulus and tax cuts is so many things happened. It's a very complex issue, and it's a mistake to try to go back and change the past. oil goes up, or commodities collapse, or the dollar, or this, or that, or Chinese revalue, do or don't change the value of their currency. So that when it gets down to it, you're never going to get a definitive answer to the question what is the point of currency reform. The point is to make sure that the world doesn't get into a situation where it has to change its currency in order to get out of a bad situation. That's what currency reform is all about. of practical equality. When have we passed the point of practical equality, to use Bentham's terminology? Are we close to it? Have we gone by it? are we nowhere near it? There have been periods in our history when we've had top marginal tax rates of 90 percent, right? Reagan, for example, had a rate of 90 per cent, and it was the lowest in the world at the time. We're not there yet, but we're getting closer. It's a long way to go. thought a top marginal tax rate of 40 percent was beyond the point of practical equality. But if we think back to what the aspiration of the early Enlightenment was, it was certainty. To use the example, remember, I thought that a 40 percent tax rate was too high, but now I think it's too low. It's not a definitive resolution of those questions, but it's a good starting point for thinking about the future of the tax system in the UK and the rest of the world. read to you from Hobbes, from his Epistle Dedicatory to his Six Lessons to the Professors of Mathematics. "For the things we don't make, we can't know we can only guess about the causes," Hobbes said. We don't really know and there are no answers to Hobbes' questions about the origin of the universe, but we can try to guess at the causes of the world as we know it. "We don't know what causes are. We only know that there are causes," he said. will be--the people who want either policy will be able to find a plausible set of experts to defend their view. So you're getting to this very messy world of macroeconomic prediction, if you want to put some limits on the radical edge of classical utilitarianism. And as a matter of fact, it's very difficult to predict what the outcome of the next economic cycle will be. It's very hard to predict the future of the U.S. economy, but it's possible that things will get worse. of history, that's not how it went. How it went was to rethink the analytical structure of utilitarianism in a way that completely defanged its radical redistributive edge without any reference to these messy macroeconomic considerations. And just how that happened in the transition from utilitarianism to Keynesianism is a matter of history, as well as of economics in general. And that's a story for another day, I'm sure, but it's not a story that needs to be told right now. classical to what we're going to all neoclassical utilitarianism is a subject with which I will begin on Wednesday. See you then for the next installment of this week's Daily Discussion, which will focus on the role of utilitarianism in the development of the modern world. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the first installment of the Daily Discussion. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @jennifer_newton.