Achilles, welcome! I’m the Sibyl of Cumae, prophetess and avid reader of leaves. To clarify, you were just slain in the Trojan War. Sorry about that. It’s normal to feel mixed emotions right now. But you will be immortalized as one of the greatest warriors ever. And you’ll have endless friends and enemies. You’re in good hands with me, Achilles. I love you very much, and I will see you again. distractions down here. It gets a bad rap, but the Underworld is actually a lovely place to “live.” It boasts historic charm and eccentric neighbors with eternal ties to the area. The community even has its own guard dog, Cerberus. Heel, boy! Oh. Sorry, I know. The Underworld gets aBadRap, but it gets a good rap, too. It boastsHistoric charm, eccentric neighbors, and eternal ties. It even hasIts own guarddog, Cerberus, who even has his own guard. that’s a sensitive spot. Anyway, with Cerberus, you get three for the price of one! He’m just not a big fan of anyone leaving. And who would want to leave anyway? This is the Styx— it’'s like the subterranean riviera. But you’ve been here before; it was the source of the plague. It was the cause of all our problems. It’ll be fine. We’re just going to have to wait and see. your almost complete invulnerability, of course! The Underworld also features four other waterways: Acheron, the river of woe; Cocytus, riverof wailing; Lethe, river of oblivion. Now, on your left, you’ll see the Mourning Fields, inhabited by souls tormented by the Underworld’s demons. And Phlegethon, a great source of natural light, will also be on your right, as you enter the Underworld. Elysium is the Underworld’s exclusive VIP section and your permanent home. Here, you'll join the ranks of royalty and heroes. Cadmus over there once slayed a dragon! And Patroclus is around. Quite an attractive place, really. When you’re not in the throes of endless heartbreak. And without further ado: Elysium, the Underworld'sexclusive VIP section. And your Permanent Home. By love.by love. By. love. by love. here somewhere, along with lots of other friends and foes. I'll let you two get reacquainted soon, but our tour wouldn’t be complete without a quick whirl through the heart of Hades: Tartarus. Tisiphone here guards the portal. She's one of the legendary Furies and is particularly passionate about avenging the deaths of her friends and enemies. She’s one of those Furies who’ll be looking out for your best interests. Ixion was once a king. When he didn’t pay his wedding dowry, his father-in-law, Deioneus, stole his horses to get.murder. Tartarus is reserved for a select few who some might call the greatest sinners of all time. She never sleeps. So, if you need anything, just ask! If you want to talk to Ixion, you can call him on the phone at 1-800-273-8255 or visit his website at: http://www.xion.org/. Ixion was banished, but Zeus miraculously took pity on him, and invited him to a Mount Olympian feast. There, however, it soon became clear that the disgraced king was trying to seduce Zeus’s wife, Hera. So, Zeus contrived a plan to have Ixion thrown into a pit of fire by Deioneus. In retaliation, IXion pitched DeioneUS into apit of fire. Even. even. Even if you’re not a king, you can be a king. trap: a fluffy cloud that resembled Hera exactly. When Zeus had proof of Ixion having his way with the cumulus, well, you could say it was all nimbus from there. Oh, and don’t mind Tantalus here. He was part of the trap. That landed Ixions on the flaming wheel. Poor thing. It's a pity he didn't get to see the end of the world. It would have been fun to watch him fall to his death. Some say Tantalus stole ambrosia from Zeus, others that he doubted the omniscience of the gods. Tantalus cooked his own son into a stew to see if they would notice. Naturally, they did. And as eternal punishment, when Tantalus died, he was put to death by the gods as punishment for his actions. He was the first generation of mortals, enjoying privileges like dining with the gods, to be punished for his crimes. He died in a fiery rage, and was buried in a pit of fire. reaches for food, the branches grow taller. And when he stoops to quench his thirst, the water recedes. And here we have the Danaids. At their father’s order, they beheaded their husbands on their wedding night. They must fill this basin with water. But, the trick is, their jars are not filled with water, but with food. They are filled with food, but they are also filled with the blood of their dead husbands. cracked, so it always... just... leaks away. Oh, but don't worry! No leaky appliances for you. From here, you can see the hill where Sisyphus pushes his boulder day after day, only for it to roll back. One of the loveliest vistas on the tour is at the top of the hill. You can see it from here, as well as at the bottom of the mountain, at the base of the Sphinx. The Sphinx is one of the most beautiful sights in the world. down again— all for trying to cheat death. As you can see, Achilles, the Underworld is full of exciting amenities. Here, you don't have to worry about brutal wars or painful cycles of revenge. You can finally just put your feet up and relax. It's a great place to take a break from your daily life. It also has a great view of the city of Athens, which is one of the most beautiful cities in the world. It is also a great spot to take some time off from your regular life and recharge your batteries.