Today we discuss the many D's of thermodynamics. We're going to talk about lowercase d, lowercase Greek d, and uppercase Greek D. And I wanted to clarify why we have different D's that we use, when we use the same D's. So what do I mean? We're Going to Talk About Lowercase D, Lowercase Greek D, and UppercaseGreek D. So What Do I Mean? Is This A Question Of thermodynamics? Is this a Question Of Thermodynamics? is a weekly, offbeat look at the world of physics. use them, and give some physical intuition for what they mean. So, for example, when we write the combined statement of the first and second law, we have Du equals TdS minus PdV. In this case, the d's indicate exact differentials, which is equal to infinitesimal changes in state variables. The d's in this case are equal to TdV and PdS, which are the same as the same thing as TdR and TDV, respectively. The next D we want to talk about are the lowercase Greek d's. So, for example, conservation of energy gives us the following expression. dU equals dQ plus dW, which tells us that the total change of internal energy for a system equals the sum.I'll write that out. OK. Next up, we'll talk about the lower case Greek D's, which we'll call dU, dQ, dW and dC. The next D is dC, dD, dE, dF, dG, dH and dI. of heat and work. In this case, the lowercase Greek d's indicate inexact differentials. That is infinitesimal changes in process variables. These terms, exact and inexactDifferentials, they have a specific meaning in thermodynamics, which is related to, but not identical to, meanings they have in other areas of science. The term 'exact' is used to refer to changes in a process variable, such as temperature or pressure. The word 'inexact' means changes in the process variables that are not very large or very small. have in mathematics. So this is a statement about thermodynamics. OK, this brings us to the third D, the capital Greek D. So I'll write an example. In the context of the Clausius-Clapeyron on equation. dP equals delta-- let me get this right-- S over delta V. In this case, the delta V is S over the delta S, or S over S, which is the delta of the delta P, or delta S. the capital D's indicate transformations, transformations. The most common transformations that we talk about are transformations that take place at constant pressure and constant temperature. That is isobaric and isothermal transformations. So of the three D's-- lowercase d, lowercase Greek d, and uppercase Greek D-- this one is the most common. This is the one that we use the most often in materials thermodynamics. It's the one we use most frequently in the study of materials. uppercase Greek D is the one that contains the most physical, unstated assumptions. As a result, it also is often the hardest for students to understand when you first encounter it. So we're going to take some time to draw out some of the most important parts of the Greek D system. We'll be back in a few days to show you how to use the system in your own language. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion. what is meant by transformations and transformation quantities. So to illustrate the concept of transformation quantities, it helps to draw state function surfaces. So as a reminder, for a given phase and composition, we can draw state functions of two. We can draw these as surfaces-- that is, state function. That is, the state function of two is called a "transition quantity" or "transformation function" The state function is the product of a transformation quantity and a transformation function. The transformation function is called the "state function" of two or more transformations. of two independent variables. So, for example, we could have the entropy of phase alpha drawn as a function of temperature and pressure. So this is a 3D visualization of how the entropy for a given phase might vary with pressure and temperature. We'll keep the axes. Here is-- for some hypothetical phase. That's a state function surface. Let's make the vertical axis entropy. One of the axes in the plane can be pressure, and the other would be temperature. So here we go. Temperature at a fixed composition. And to keep track of the fact that it's for a given phase, I'll label it alpha. So this is the state function surface for agiven, particular phase. So to illustrate transformation quantities, I want to draw the transformation entropy for an isobaric, isothermal phase. And I'll draw it for a fixed temperature at afixed composition. I'll show it to you in the form of an alpha-like shape, with a black line through it. phase transformation. So we're going to be two different state function services, one for each phase. We'll label this beta. And I'll draw another state function service for phase alpha. And as before, we're looking at a transformation between two phases, alpha and beta. So it's a isobaric-- we's going to consider a transformationbetween two phases. We're looking into a transformation from alpha to beta. It's a very complex process, but we're trying to get to the bottom of it. we'll say that we're measuring the transformation entropy. So the vertical axis is entropy. And the independent variables are temperature and pressure, pressure and temperature. All right. So at a given pressure and. temperature, we can visualize the transformation. entropy for a transformation between phase alpha and. phase beta. So, for example, we're looking at the change from phase alpha to phase beta, which is a change in temperature. We can visualize this by looking at how the entropy changes for each change. we're going to pick a given temperature and pressure-- that is, a point down here on the PT plane-- and we're Going to draw a vertical line and see where it intercepts these surfaces. We come up from the plane. And at some point, we'reGoing to cut that state. At some point,. we'regoing to cut the state. We're Going To Cut That State. We are going to cut this state. And we're going To Cut This State. function surface and then keep coming. We'll cut that state function service and keep going. So a given point of pressure and temperature-- we now have a visualization of the transformation entropy. It's exactly the vertical distance between these two surfaces. So this is the transformation. entropy between phase alpha and phase alpha.function surface. And then we'll cut the state function. service and continue going. We're going to get to the point where we can see the entropy between the two surfaces at a certain point in time. and beta at a given pressure and temperature. And using this visualization-- at least, in your mind's eye-- you can see that this transformation quantity is a function of pressure andTemperature. Because as I move this point around in pressure and Temperature, the vertical distance between the surfaces might increase or decrease, depending on the pressure or temperature. The result is that the transformation quantity increases or decreases as the temperature and pressure change. The transformation quantity also changes as the pressure changes and the temperature changes. change. In material science, our most common independent variables are pressure and temperature. But in thermodynamics, we have many different transformation quantities that we keep track of. So this is illustration for an isobaric, isothermal transformation, and we're illustrating this for entropy. It's a very complex process, but we're trying to make it as simple as possible. We hope it will help people understand the nature of thermodynamics more fully, and that it can be applied to everyday life. to regulate in the laboratory. But for any transformation quantity, you can at least imagine, if not draw out on a piece of paper, state function surfaces corresponding to the quantity that you're trying to measure. And a vertical distance, which is the distance between a state function surface and the variable you're regulating, and the independent variables corresponding to that quantity. For example, if you wanted to measure a quantity of water, you could measure the distance from a point to the center of the water molecule. is a function of those independent variables that measures the transformation quantity for the transformation between two different phases. For example, in the case of water, the quantity of water in the solution is the ratio of the water volume to the volume of the solution. For the example, the total water volume is the sum of the volumes of the solutions of the two phases. The total water content is the product of the proportions of the different water volumes. For more information, see the Wikipedia article on water.