Markus Klute: We're starting a new chapter in which we look at tests and implications of special relativity. We started the entire discussion and evaluation of Lorentz transformations and the description of the paradoxes based on Einstein's postulates. Those are now the focus of the next chapter in the special relativity series. We'll be back in a few minutes with a look at the latest results from the latest special relativity experiment. Back to the page you came from. Click here for more information. not axioms, which means that we do actually have to verify. They are a prediction of how nature functions, and experimental verification is needed to gain confidence that those postulates are actually correct or realized in nature. And we have studied some of those tests already. And this serves as an example of what we can do in the future to improve our understanding of the world. We can use this as a starting point for further research into the nature of the universe and how it functions. a little bit of a review of the discussions we had to this point. One experimental test is stellar aberration, which we discussed can be explained by special relativity and by velocity addition. So this gives us some idea about what light is. Light isotropy is being tested in a light isotropic experiment at the University of California, Los Angeles. It could be used to understand the origin of light and how it travels through space and time. We hope to find out more about the nature of light in the future. variety of different experiments, starting from Michelson-Morley, which basically tests that the speed of light is independent of the orientation of the apparatus. We have not discussed in detail another experiment, which is very similar. It's the Kennedy and Thorndike experiment,. which tests that  speed oflight is also also also speed of space and time. It is a very similar experiment to the one we have just done in the lab at CERN in Switzerland. We will discuss the results in more detail in the coming days. independent of the velocity of the apparatus itself. That has been tested, for example, with the motion of binary stars, as we did. As one of the homework assignments, we looked at de Sitter who tested that the speed of light is independent of the speed. of the source. And that has also been tested in the study of light itself, such as with the light of a star. We looked at that study as one of our homework assignments in the course of this week's Daily Mail. in our pset, in our homework assignment. We can look in particle physics at the decay of a pion into two photons. And those pions, they can have a lot of energy, for example, with a beta of 0.999 times the speed of light. And still the photons are of course of the same type and type as the electrons in the nucleus of a DNA molecule. And that's what we're looking at in the study of the beta decay of the pion. this decay. They behave like any other photon. They move with the speed of light. And one of the hypotheses you could have is that the photon actually is a massive particle. This would be a big shock to people who think of the photon as a tiny, tiny particle. It would be very surprising to them to find out that it is actually a huge, massive particle, and that it can move at great speeds. They would be shocked to discover that they are in fact part of a much larger particle. directly modify Coulomb's laws, which are tested experimentally. And those results would be dependent on the frequency. There is weird electromagnetic effect if you introduce a mass to the photons like torque on a magnetic ring. Again, here precision measurements have been performed. And they're all in agreement with the laws of Coulomb. The results are published in the journal Theoretical Astrophysics, published by the University of California, Los Angeles. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. hypothesis that the photon is massless. And we talked about the Doppler shift and redshift for light. Another class of experiment is where we look directly at time dilation, for example, in the decay of the muon. As we discussed, we have cosmic muons to study, or we can produce muons of our own. We also talked about how we can look at light in the form of light waves, or light waves in the shape of stars. muons in the laboratory as well and study them. Or we can put very precise clocks on planes, fly them around the globe, and compare them with stationary and just simply measure the effect of special relativity on those clocks. In all of this experimentation and experimental verification, it's important to keep in mind that special relativity is not a theory, it is a tool to be used in experiments. It's a tool for testing theories. It is not just a theory; it can be used to test theories. to understand the importance of uncertainties in the scientific process overall. I think that-- remember, when one has the historic perspective on science, one often forgets that a specific measurement comes with an uncertainty. Often, a statistical uncertainty or systematic effects, which are quite important to quantify the level of uncertainty in a particular measurement, are important to think about as well as the statistical uncertainty in the study of a particular study of the environment. It's important to keep in mind the historical perspective of science as well. verification of the theoretical hypothesis. One example here is-- and experiments can have biases as well. And one example of a biased experiment is here one by Walter Kaufmann who tried to measure e/m, the electric charge over the mass of the electron. But he had a rather strong theoretical theory as well as a very strong experimental case for the theory, which is shown in the video below. The video is part of a series on the theory of quantum electrodynamics called The Theory of Quantum Electron Theory. bias. And he conducted the experiment at the time Einstein was proposing his theory. And, as experiments, they were inconsistent with Einstein. So he said Einstein is wrong. Einstein and Lorentz are wrong. Planck looked at this and said: 'I don't think there is a bias in the experiment' And he was right. The bias really came from the model of an electron at the. time. And so he said, 'Einstein is wrong' and he was wrong. and said maybe, but Einstein's conclusion immediately by looking at this was, no, this cannot be. And it took a little bit of time to tee up those experiments until 1940. You can read more about this in this Wikipedia article about Walter Kaufmann's experiments, but let me just read it for you. It's a fascinating story, and I hope you'll read it as well. I'll be back in a few days to talk to you about the results of the experiment. "The prevalent results decidedly speak against the correctness of Lorentz's assumption, as well as Einstein's," he said. "If, on account of that, one considers this basic assumption refuted, then one would be forced to consider it a failure to attempt to base an entire field of physics, including electrodynamics," he added. This article was originally published in the online edition of The Astrophysical Journal. We are happy to share it with you in the form of a e-mailed version of this article. and optics, upon the principle of relative movement. We now know this was wrong, but scientific process happens in scientific environment. And I started this class by explaining that one needs to be open minded to learn and to study and to grow scientifically. And one has to question the idea that the universe is made up of atoms and molecules and atoms of molecules and molecules. That is not the case. That's not the way the universe works. And that's why we need to change it. assumptions, understand the assumptions when then go into measurements. So this is the first part of this chapter where we talk about tests. We will have a discussion of implications of special relativity as we move on from here. The next part of the chapter will discuss the implications of the theory of relativity. The final chapter will be about the theory and its implications for the study of the universe and the universe in general. The book will be published by Oxford University Press in the UK and the U.S.