[Music] okay one of the things that we're trying to figure out is which one of these is one to do right so we know that we wanted to raise our axis efficiently as possible once the minimize of deadweight loss. We also [Music] [Applause] their payroll taxes these attaches these attaches are one of them. We're going to try to do this as efficiently as we can. We want to make sure that we don't lose too much weight. We don't want to lose too many pounds. our wages and these are used to fund social programs so this would be things like social security insurance so we've got our taxes. So so these are taxes on corporate incomes and all the money that they're making and where wealth taxes access people so this could be things that we could do to help people in need. So we've had our taxes and we've also had our wealth taxes. We've also got our wages and we have our taxes, and we're going to have more of them. like state-level property taxes the state taxes and I and then we have our consumption tax good services. "Sales and watched by taxes is one of three different kinds of tax we're gonna have aggressive so with our regressive tax as well," he says. "We're going to have aggressive and regressive taxes," he adds. "It's going to be a very aggressive and aggressive tax system. It's gonna be very different from what we've had in the past." "We'll have aggressive taxes," the mayor says, "and we'll have a very different tax system" people earn more income base they are attacked a smaller amount of smaller percentage of the rounding. People pay a small person their income tax as their income goes up so only if their income going down so here we see people paying a small percentage of their income so people pay a smaller person their Income Tax as their Income goes up. People paid a small amount of their Income tax when their income went up and a smaller percentage when their Income went down so people paid a smaller people their income Tax when their incomes went down. they're going to pay a larger percentage of their income tax with the 4-channel it's the same so here you see people pay the same percentage whether progressive its detect ops as progressive people pay lark there and so it's not the dollar amount it's gonna be obvious that everyone will pay more with the four channels. "It's not a dollar amount. It's gonna to be obvious," he says. "People are going to be able to see what their tax bill is and what they're paying" is must and a larger dollar amount in taxes their income goes up it's nothing down it's the percent of their income that you're spending that's what determines put the tax is regressive. "What we see here is taxes is it generally speaking these payroll taxes are our assumption," he says. "It's a tax on the wealthy," he adds, "but it's also a taxes on the middle class and the poor" "The tax is must," the congressman says, "is a must" taxes redress property tax can be kind of course non-progressive can depend upon how many things that is your taxi in the race and things like that. So when we talk about like sales taxes being regressive what we need to learn that is that people are going to spend. We need to learning that is what people are actually going to do in this country. We're going to go out and buy things. We want to make sure that we're spending money in a way that is fair and just. different amounts of their anymore so we say there's a little half of the sales tax be regressive. It's the same thing right it's a five percent point two five percent or whatever. How can it be a regressive tax because if you have somebody that has income let's say $100,000, that's a lot of money. That's a huge amount of money that can't be spent on something like a sales tax. So it's not a tax that's regressive, it's just a way to get people to spend their money. twenty thousand dollars they're going to consume say 15,000 right and so they're gonna have this sales tax. They're gonna pay sales tax on basically let's say three fourths of their income because they're spending $15,000. The reason that we call the sales that's a regressive tax even though rich people buy more stuff I'm going to pay more and sales tax is regressive. It's a tax on the rich and it's a taxes on the poor. dollar amounts as a percent of their income it's actually usually profit or loss. Let's look at some important things here that were looking at tax especially when it comes to these progressive taxes and that's going to be these tax rates. There's two important concepts here one is the tax rate and the other is the amount of the tax that you pay. The tax rate is one percent of your income. The amount of your tax is two percent. The percentage of your taxes is one per cent of your earnings. marvel happens [Music] so this marginal tax rate is the percentage change in taxes any tax paid from some changing our average tax rate beer is just going to be tax paid so there's my tax rate's tell us how much additional tax event played based upon our so they so they can be taxed more or less depending on the tax rate we are paying. So this marginalTax Rate is the Percentage Change in Taxes Any Tax Paid from some Changing Our Average Tax Rate Beer is just Going to be Tax Paid so There's My tax Rate's. go coming back to that they have passed out here we've got these marginal tax rates here with you guys. Let's just do these means you play thirteen I'll just do it with singles here. If this looks like here's our income here're our tax rates and we have. We have. And we have a lot more to go on. We've got a lot of things to talk about. We're going to be here for a long time. We'll be here to talk to you. a ten percent tax rate for our first eight thousand seven hundred and forty four but let's let's just round it up it's just holiday seven hundred okay so here's our first 8700 is taxes eight ten percent and then all of the income earned from 8700 up to let's say eight hundred and eight hundred. Let's call it the holiday tax rate. We're going to have a tax rate of ten percent for the first eight and a half years of our lives. That's what we're looking at. just call it thirty six thousand as tax at this rate of 15% all of the income earned above 30 is now up to your district all at 86,000 taxed at this 25% rate. All the income from 86 tiles up until where's McCall highest authorities so we have these so we can show them to the public. All of the money earned up to where's highest authorities is up to you district. The tax rate is now 15%. The rate is 15% and the rate is 25%. The tax is now at 15%. marginal tax rates and say okay look as we earn a dollar from it some amount of that dollar is going to be paid in tax. But that percentage that you're paying tax changes so let's assume that we made for $90,000 you're single and we wanted to know how much tax you were paying. We wanted to find out how much of that tax was going to go to you and how much was going back to the government. We asked you to tell us what percentage of your income was going towards your tax bill. much you pay so that's how I come here and in essence what you've done is you've got different amounts of here and of these dollars in here we're gonna take 10% these dollars. These dollars are going to take 25 these dollars, and so on. So that's what I do. I try to make sure that you're getting the best value for your money. I don't want to make you feel like you're paying too much or too little. I want you to feel like your money is worth more than it is. you're going to take 30 so if you're at $8,000 you go out and earn another hundred dollars you'regoing to pay $10 and times. If you're making eighty six thousand dollars you need to have you earn another 100 dollars. You're going out and earning another hundred $100 dollars you'll pay $33. You'll have to spend $33 to get the same amount of money you would spend if you were making $6,000 or $7,000. You will have to work 30 hours a week to earn the money. The difference here between 86 and 36 has been to thousands with $50,000 we've got 4,000 yes this guy is easy the decimal point four thousand five so 12,500 plus we're going to pay 18,000 submit an $85 your taxes on $90,000 and we can figure out what our average tax rate is. So our tax over there is going to be this 18 and now once again there's no 20 point there'sNo.67 so we canfigure out what your tax where I'll be to pay 10% on your first fifteen cents for these dollars. 20 percent tax rate right but that's our average tax rate because if we look at the average the tax rate for this guy our marginal numbers are looking at this kind of step fashion but our averages are trying to doing this. So we need an average basically and so you can see here I mean this kind. of determines or at least a lot of people believe that marginal tax is higher than it actually is. So you've got some dollars times 225 you have some numbers times 33 so we need a average basically. rates determine whether you're gonna work because if you do additional work here you say they say we wanted you to do some overtime so this goes to ninety one thousand. You're gonna earn an extra one thousand dollars in income what you're going to pay it's generally going to be more than you're willing to pay for it. If you do extra work here, they say they want you to work more hours, so they pay you more overtime. You get paid more overtime, so you get paid extra hours. to keep $667 if you're here. If you're at say seven thousand and they say would you like to work overtime you say yes and you earn an additional thousand eight dollars. You're only going to pay tempers so you're going to paid $100 keep 900 of those dollars whereas you're only paying $100 to keep $100 of that money. You can keep the rest of the money if you work overtime and you get paid for it. You get paid $667 for working overtime. here don't beat 607 of those dollars so does that make people everyone agrees the answer is yes we just don't know what the number is. It's probably different for different people so at one point in time Sweden had a marginal tax rate it was 102 percent so what do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments below or post a video on our Facebook page @CNNSweden and @CNN iReport. We will feature the best of the best in a weekly Newsquiz. does that that if you had $50,000 and then you earn $10,000 there is your went from 50,000 to 60,000. Not only did they take all 10,000 what what they do they take more right so you're earning fifty pounds and say hey would you like $10k worth of goods? You're going to get more than 50 pounds. You're getting more than $100,000 of goods. So you're going from $50k to $60k in just a few hours. overtime and you're like sure and so they say okay the tax rate is 150 percent. We're gonna take all what they didn't come that you learned from your overtime. Plus we're going to take some of the money that you have before you even started working the overtime year. It's a lot of money that's going to be taken away from you, but it's worth it in the long run. It just shows you what kind of people you can be and how much you can do. for obvious reasons why what did you do then people stopped working Sunday so we're looking at these taxes it's interesting it's also interesting that we want to know do we tax people or to be tax household so let me show you an example because the units that were that were tax-free were also tax-gouged. For obvious reasons. why what do you do when you're off on Sunday and you're not working on Monday and Tuesday and Wednesday and Thursday and Friday? What did you doing then? Why were you on Sunday. taxed and can have all kinds of different applications [Music] that's hot let's look at a tax that looks like this. Let's soon on the first 20,000 20% from 20,00 so let't look at their income right Donald makes $8,000. Elena makes $20,000 bill makes $50,000 Hilary makes $ 50,000 if you're a woman. If you are a man, if you have a penis, you have to pay a tax of $1,500. we tax them individually okay Donald your first 20,000 taxes ten percent your money from 20 to 50 stops the 20 percent yourmoney about 50 stops at 30% we do the warmer that we just did if we look at this on an individual tax basis McDonald's gonna hold. McDonald's will hold. Donald Trump says McDonald's 'will hold' his $1.5 billion in tax cuts for the wealthy and corporations. The White House says the tax cuts will benefit the middle class and the working class. 17,000 Orlando will go to top Bill and Hillary will both oh eight thousand each so our total BAM attacks if we put this way 19,000 if we tax the household this goes back to this idea we discussed the horizontal language all right we want to treat people that way. 17,000lando will go for the top. Bill and Clinton will bothOh eight thousands each. so ourTotal BAM Attacks will be 19,00 if weTax the household 18,500 Orlando will be the top and 18,000 Hillary will be top. are in similar circumstances if we tax them as a family they're both a 20-3. If they're married and they're not they're paying 16,000 these people are paying 23,000. This is what you may have heard about this when you were growing up in the U.S. in the 1980s and 1990s. It was called the 'war on women' and 'the war on women's rights' It was sparked by the '60s and '70s, when women were told they had to work hard to support their families. your refund their tax that's called the marriage the tax code penalize you for being there because if you're two individuals together they're shacked up and you're not married you're here you're paying twenty three thousand dollars of taxes. That's the American penalize people for being married if we tax them in the individual out of the last fund said well we don't want to have a marriage under the tax people individually they both have the same family income 16,000 remember the idea of marriage. horizontal equity you want to treat people in similar circumstances the same those people are being treated. decide why do we have this front why are we having these different taxes. why is the why are these numbers larger than these numbers was because of the progressive nature of the tax system. You want to make sure that people are treated in the same way as they would be if they were in similar situations. You don't want people to be treated differently because of their circumstances. You have to treat them the same as you would be treated if you were in their shoes. task here's bills there's Donald's. When you add the spouse when you add milena she's got here this is twenty thousand. But what's true about this twenty thousand dollars as opposed to this 20 thousand dollars this one's taxed at 10% this one’s taxed at 12%. What fixes do you need to make your life better? Tell us in the comments below or on Twitter @CNNOpinion. Back to the page you came from. Visit CNN.com/Opinions. want to penalize people for being married does that make sense right I mean society should not encourage people to do just shack up right exactly make sense of maybe that for at least generally we've got what we're done matter so we know we don't want this that's not the not the way it's supposed to be. "We don't know what the future holds for us but we know that what we've done matters," he says. "What we do matters and what we do is important" answer is is that there is no answer you cannot devise but these are just kind of illustrates some of the problems that you have in developing the taxes. Do you want to make you want. to penalize marriage generally all right so I'll have a system like this well. Well, it's not a perfect system, but it's a good one for the time being. It's a step in the right direction, and I think it's going to work out well for the future. they're making the statement but because of the differences well that doesn't seem fair because if these people don't get married that's one of the things that they tax individualist and you've got hostels that make the same. There is no solution the only solution would be anyone so. The only solution is for people to get married and live together in a harmonious environment. That's the way to go. The way to get along is to live together. The best way to live harmoniously is to marry. when we're looking at fiscal policy Keynes's and we are looking at things wide changes and taxes or changes in government spending. When we'reLooking at government we can have for the government of course the revenue for them the taxes so we can say a budget deficit this is. This is what a deficit is. We can also look at things like spending changes and tax changes. We're looking to things like things like tax changes and government spending changes. And this is what we can look at when we're talking about a deficit. when they're spent is greater than government brothers when they can also have a bunch of surplus this would be even government spending last thing or so here's government spending evil and if you look at the national debt that's just some eight of all these government debt assistants are. When they's spent isgreater than governmentBrothers when they're spending isgreatest than government Brothers when they are spending.when they are spent is greater thangovernmentBrothers. when they were spending is greatest than the government brothers. when the government was spending it would be greater then the government brother when it was spent. possible just a doll and we saw for our country so we have all the deficits and surpluses that we packs and some of you maybe want to add all that up that adds up to 17 trillion dollars deficit in any given year is not 17 trillions dollars whatever. We have all of these deficits and Surpluses and deficits that we pack and we have to add them all up. It's not a 17 trillion dollar deficit, it's a 17 billion dollar deficit. That's what we're talking about. was in this year spec's 383 three point eight trillion dollars when we spent almost three point nine those caught 329 Troy and we had parameters seeds. We have revenue three point three trouble nice we have seven under six hundred billion dollars and we can engage in types of types of engagement and we can do it in a variety of ways. It's a very exciting time for us and we're looking forward to what the future has in store for us. We're going to be able to do a lot of things in the next few years. policies here too we're under the change and your demand as we can have learn called spam canary fiscal policies. We can have contractionary order restrictions physical follows so if our expansionary fiscal policy here we're seeing the decrease in taxes or an increase in government spending and if you want us to change our policies we can do so. We're in the process of changing our policies here too. We'll let you know what we come up with in the coming days and weeks. have a deficit the deficit is going to get larger or if you have a surplus what would happen in the surplus it'll get smaller by contraction fiscal policies. The exact opposite here you're looking to say increases in taxes or decreases in government spending so that if you've got a deficit you're going to have a larger deficit. If you've had a surplus, you'll have a smaller surplus. The opposite here is the opposite here: You'll have to increase taxes or decrease government spending. deficit or if you have a surplus and interestingly enough these surpluses and with these deficits we can go out and engage the fiscal policy that makes these guys change on purpose we can have it's called discretionary fiscal policy. "We can engage the Fiscal policy that make these guyschange on purpose," he says. "And we can do it in a way that's very different from what we've seen in the past," he adds. "It's a very different way of looking at the world" change times more government spending leather or making them rise Falls as opposed to passing just go balls where these guys change. "We mean let's go all the way back to our business side here is real GDP or I saw GDP doing something kind of like this and we didn't see it," he said. "Let's go back to the business side and see what's going on in the economy. We don't see this kind of thing in the business world," he added. "I mean, we're talking about real GDP here. We're not talking about GDP in terms of what's happening in the world." know it's happening here between time t1 and t2 what's occurring here real GDP is falling what do we call it up they call me recession. So we know between this time period we've got a reception what's happening to employment goes down. We're seeing unemployment go up so employments go down. So employments are going down and unemployment is going up. So what's going on here? We know it's going to happen for a period of time. And we're seeing it happen. going down what's happening to tax revenue it goes to sourcing tactics if unemployment is going up and so there's more people not working. More people needing the welfare this for more people we need food stamps etc. What's happening together and spend it's so tears pair of us. It's so sad. We need to work together to get out of this mess we're in. We can't do it on our own, we need each other's help. We're in this together, we can't go it alone. keeping everything else constant what should happen to the deficit between Taiwan and it goes up deficit it's gonna get larger. If we had a surplus if I can spot and do that on its own you don't have to do anything. So ladies between time t2 t3 it's the deficit. Between time t1 t1 and time t4 t4 it's a surplus. So if we have a surplus we don't need to change anything. We just need to keep the deficit constant. exact opposite right there you got an expansion the economies grow employments increasing other one is going down well if employments going up the taxes are going if unemployment going down and we're standing government spending going down. So here it's a tariff pair is keeping everything else constant you're going to see more jobs and more tax revenue and less government spending. That's what we're looking for. We're not looking for a tax hike. We want to see a tax cut. We don't want a tax increase. We just want more jobs. seeing the devil your small or if you have a surplus this is where we happens call automatic stabilizers come into play. These are things that change government spending automatic so these things automatically increase taxes or was change tax that automatically change taxes and/or so examples would be things that would be like a tax increase or a hike in the minimum wage or an increase in the gas tax or a tax hike on the wealthy. These things are called automatic stabilizer and they are used to make government spending more efficient. like food stamps Wow because by the time you know you're in a recession and then you go out and say what should we do about this let's help people. We'll have a program where we give them money on welfare we'll give them food stamps or whatever but my government won't do that. I don't think that's the way to deal with a recession. I think it's better to try to get people out of poverty by helping them get out of the recession. time actually implement the policy but time an action starts taking effect you clip me over here all right it could be like we don't need a I just took too long. That's why I call automatic stabilizers they automatically begin to kick in. They automatically start increasing government spending. It's like an automatic stabilizer for the economy. It automatically begins to kick-in and increase government spending, he says. He says it's a way of making sure the economy doesn't fall into a recession. on the progressive income tax does the exact same thing because if people's income is $50,000 right and then for some reason it falls to say $20,000 if you have progressive taxes they're going to pay their tax burden. Their average tax rate is going to automatic certainly when you've got progressive taxes. If you have no progressive taxes, your tax burden is not as high as it would be if you didn't have them. The average tax rates are going to be lower than if you don't have progressive tax. got the expansion apart you're going from time here t2 to t3 people theoretically don't need food stamps and Welfare right so spending on these guys is automatically reduced. You're automatically seeing reductions in government spending automatically the progressive income taxes hey as people are going from 20,000 to 50,000, you're automatically going to see reductions in the government spending as a result of the expansion of the welfare state. That's what's going on here. It's a big change in the way we look at the welfare system. to say seventy thousand dollars in income the marginal tax rates are going to get higher the average tax rates going up. We're automatically kind of taking money out to ensure that the Comcast pulled over you so you've got in essence three different beauties and it is came to. It's a little bit of a different way of looking at the tax code, but it's the same thing. It is the same tax code. It just has a different number of brackets and rates for different income levels. a beautiful fiscal policy we have this new classical view of fiscal policy and we have those called the supply side now. What we'll see on Wednesday and what these guys actually do is what we'll hear on Wednesday. We'll see what they actually do and how they do it. It's going to be very interesting to see what happens in the next few days. It will be a very interesting week. It'll be very exciting to see how they go about it. We will find out what happens.