[Music] because your success is my number one priority tell your neighbor our success is his number onepriority look at your neighbor and say oursuccess is hisNumber one priority that's good good job. i'm hoping everybody gets an a in this class you can do it. I hope you all get an a. I'm hoping you all do a good job on your test. I want you to do a great job. I love you all. Thank you for all your hard work. yes you can you don't believe me watch me watchme so marketing let's talk about marketing some more marketing so i told you what we're going to talk about now i'm going to tell you and then i'mGoing to Tell you what i'm Going to Tell You. Yes you can. Watch me. I'm that good. I'll tell you what I told you is that good when i'm done. I will tell you when i've done it. When i've been successful. When I've had success. is that a good approach so this way you don't need to ask me three times i'm just gonna tell you three times it's better that way right hope is not a plan i have a plan for your success all right hang in there marketing so write this down. So write it down. It's a good idea to write down what you want to say to people. You don't have to say it three times to get them to listen to you. You just have to tell them three times. marketing marketing that's capital n a you guys do it okay come on stay with me here no sleeping no facebooking who's facebooking now anybody no text messaging all right no periscoping marketing is about creating so marketing isabout four things creating communicating delivering and exchanging value so marketing are four things that make up a marketing campaign. Marketing is about four things: creating, communicating, delivering, exchanging value and delivering value. So that's what marketing is all about for us right now. is about creating communicating delivering and exchanging value that's in chapter one so who can tell me what marketing is somebody good what's your name genius chingus go ahead tell us what is marketing i don't know but i know it's about creating right excellent good job so marketing is marketing is Marketing is Marketing. Marketing is about creating communicating delivering and exchanging value. marketing is about creating right excellent good job so marketing is marketing. Marketing is about creating right excellent good job. Value is a function it's a function of the price the quality and the benefits so let's make sure that we don't think that value means low price so.about creating communicating delivering and exchanging value value what is value value is a. function of price quality and benefits so value is. a function, not a price, so don't believe that value is low price or low quality so. don't confuse value with low price and low quality and low benefits so. do not confuse value for low quality or low benefits. for something to be of a good value it doesn't need to be a low price. It could be a high price but it's a very high quality and it has a lot of benefits. Do you agree who could explain that further good? Tell us your name albert alvin on Twitter @albertalvin or on Facebook @albertoalvin. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. A 55-inch samsung 4k high-definition led monitor that has smart capability and 3d for 2500 you might very well consider that to be a good value now. If you purchase a 55- inch s Samsung 4k High definition led monitor for 2500, you could be looking at a value of $3,000 or $4,000. A 25-inch Samsung LED display for 2500 looks like a great value for $1,500 or $2,500. A 35-inch LED display with smart capability for 2500 appears to be about the same price. A 55-inches s Samsung LED monitor with smart capabilities for 2500 seems to be around the same amount of money. you're saying wait coach hold on a second i know that i could go to walmart and get a large flat panel led monitor for only 5.99 so i could get a flat panel monitor 50 inch at walmart or 55 inch of walmart for 600. why would i pay that much for a monitor? i know i could. get a 50 inch monitor for $5.99 and a 55 inch for $600 but i'm not going to do that. i don't want to spend that much on a monitor. 2500 isn't that a better value so what alvin is suggesting that it is a good value at twenty five hundred dollars because it's 4k it's high definition 4k not 1080p that's so 2008 you're so 2000 late that's the old technology 1080p we're rocking 4k now 4k. You're going to get 4k technology and 3d capability and smart capability so it's going to be a smart tv. So it's a goodvalue at 2500 but again it's not the lowest price value does not. mean low price questions about that so value does not mean low price so that's a good example anybody have another example of where something might be very expensive but not the lowest price yes go ahead tell us your name theresa bad um i mean would you consider that? Yes, I would like to talk to you about your experience of having to buy a house for less than £100,000. Yes, that would be a great example of what I would consider to be a good price. clothing yes go ahead like so like i find people saying like buying a pair of jeans and zara is expensive because there's like 65 but they last longer than buying these at all. maybe unless so teresa is saying you could buy a pair. of jeans at old navy.clothingYes go ahead. Like so like I find people say like buying. a pairof jeans and Zara isexpensive because there’s like 65. but they’re like 65 years old. They’ve been around for a long time. Maybe unless so Teresa is. saying you can buy a. pair of trousers at old Navy. for 20 or you could buy actually i've done this you could buying for 300 a pair of torn jeans. A pair of jeans for twenty dollars at old navy or you can buy a pair for three hundred. You could buy a torn jeans for 20 dollars at Old Navy or a pair at diesel for 300. You can buy torn jeans at diesel or old navy for 20 dollars or at diesel for 300. You can buy a pair of torn jeans for 20 dollars or you can buy a pair of torn jeans for three hundred. dollar jeans that are already torn for 300 at the diesel store. 300 for a pair of diesel jeans considered to be a good value so quality now the way that we communicate quality because we said that. "You gotta love that guys that are Already torn for $300 at the Diesel store so why is that a good price?" he asks. "We said that $300 for a couple of jeans that is already torn is a pretty good value. So that's what we're trying to say." marketing is about creating communicating delivering and exchanging value the way that we communicate the value is through the brand. All products in a given category have the same generic functionality so for example cars all cars provide the same. The brand is what's wrapped around the product so all products in  a given category have thesame generic functionality. For example, all cars in a category provide the same generic functionality. For more information on how to create a brand for your product, visit www.marketing.com. generic functionality which is transportation am i right how many people agree with that raise your hand yes so cars provide the same generic functionality transportation what makes one car different from another is the brand. Every car is wrapped in a brand every car is ripped wrapped in. The brand is the thing that makes a car a car and makes it different from other cars. It's the brand that makes it unique and different from the rest of the car. It is what makes the difference between a Ford Taurus and a Toyota Highlander. a different brand give me some names of cars what are some car brands let's see go ahead raise your hand teresa said toyota going forward toyota that's their tagline. The problem is a few years ago is their call went forward whether you wanted to or not so they had to change the name of the brand. A different brand. Give me some name of cars. What are somecar brands. Let's seeGo ahead raise our hand. What's your favorite car brand? i think they kind of exceeded their brand promise that's not what people had expected go ahead what else so we have toyota infinity mercedes-benz audi bmw chevy lamborghini jaguar range rover tesla g porsche. so all of those all those brands is what makes each of those products unique. go ahead. what else? The list goes on to include the likes of Audi, Bentley, Chevy, Lamborghini, Porsche and Lexus. each of those cars unique so what makes one car unique from the other is the brand. We're going to talk more about perceptual maps where our brand is positioned in the marketplace relative to our competitors. That's one of the things that companies spend a lot of money on, and that's why they spend so much money on cars. We'll talk more on that in the next few weeks, and we'll also talk about how we can improve the quality of the images we show. studying in research is the perceptions that consumers have of their brand so you could look at um let's say the level of quality versus the price. i want to understand whether or not customers or potential customers or i'll use the word target market which is discussed in the research. I want to know if I can attract customers to my brand or if I need to change my brand to appeal to a different target market. I don't want to change who I am just to attract people to a brand. The target market is who we want to buy our product or service. The target audience is usually a subset of the target market. A target market could be for example all men that's not the same as the target audience. It could be all women or it could be just a certain group of men. It can be any group of people that you want to reach with your advertising campaign. It doesn't have to be all men or all women but it can be all different groups of people. our target market who we want to buy our product or service. Our target audience might be grouped by age so we're going to have a different commercial for example for men that are between 18 and 29 and those that are from 30 to 39. Those that are 40 to 49 does that make sense so you want to have an ad that's going to resonate with your target audience. Usually you're not going to be able to. have a commercial that’s going to resonate with everybody in yourtarget audience or. more specifically with your target market so he said all men. So when you're showing a commercial do you think that those men that are seeing the commercial between the ages of 18 and 29 want to see somebody in the commercial who's 60 or 65 that's probably not something that's going to appeal to them? He said yes, that's what he was trying to do. He said he wanted to make sure he appealed to all men, not just those who were 18 to 29 years old. that's going to resonate with them right unless maybe if it's coach no. If it's bruce willis or sylvester stallone or hulk hogan maybe they might um they might still find the commercial of interest and we will be able to get it. That would be a good thing. That's a good sign. That could be good news for us. That might be a sign that they might find it of interest. It could be a positive sign. their attention their interest create desire and ultimately action so you guys know who hulk hogan is you do what about john cenaYeah you know what they say about john Cena right he's no good so cena sucks right yes no you guys don't think so okay what about hulk Hogan? You do what? You know who Hulk Hogan is. You do. You know what he is? Hulk Hogan. Hulkogan is a superhero. Hulk Hogan, the Hulk. The Hulk. Hulk. um what about out of nowhere who's that you don't know who's out of Everywhere. That's his famous move. What you guys are not wrestling fans youdon't know randy orton that's his thing no rko yes out of wherever. What about hello you don's know who? You don't. know who?" "What about hello?" "I don't even know who Randy orton is. I don't think I've ever heard of him before." "What you guys aren't wrestling fans?" "Oh my God. I'm so sorry. I just don't understand it" that is oh you guys are not too you haven't been to madison square garden if you were there i would have seen you. It's like better than a broadway show they have fireworks on the stage and everything is amazing. So the brand is what distinguishes one product from another and that's what we're trying to do with our product. We want to create a brand that stands out from the rest of the pack. We don't want to be the same as everyone else. another we could look at that through market research to understand the perceptions that consumers have for our brand importantly relative to other brands. Not just where we are on the perceptual map the value of perceptual mapping of doing that type of market research is that we could. better understand consumers' perceptions of our brand and how they perceive us, the company says. The company says it has a long-standing relationship with consumers in the U.S. and will continue to work with them in the future. see where we're positioned in the market based on certain dimensions quality price innovation relative to our competitors. Remember it's the perception it's not a question of whether or not our product is expensive or whether it's a high quality. The issue is what is the perception of the product, says the CEO of a major U.S. clothing brand. The company has been in business for more than 30 years and has sold more than 100 million products. It is the world's largest clothing brand, with sales of more than $1 billion a year. target market the people that we want to buy our product. What is the perception do they perceive our product as being high quality. Do they perceive it as being innovative? It's important to know that because in headquarters for us just to be sitting there talking amongst ourselves saying yes our product is high quality well that's interesting. If our target market doesn't think it's high quality then we have a huge problem. How can we solve that problem if we find out that the target market isn't satisfied with our product? actually believes that our product is a low quality versus a high quality do you think go ahead tell us your name chanel go ahead get someone famous so advertise chanels is saying advertise. So when we talk about creating and communicating communicating is really code for advertising we're gonna do it. We're gonna get people to tell us their name and get them to get famous so that we can advertise. We'll get people telling us their names and getting people to do things for us so we can get famous. advertise so we could change the perceptions that the consumers have through marketing communications chanel said a good example would be advertising so the message the key message in our advertising is going to talk about quality. Although we worked so hard to make our product a high quality we found out that the target market perceives our product as being a low quality so instead of going home crying what we do is what chanels said is develop a compelling advertising campaign to communicate that our product is of ahigh quality. include pillars of support we need to have when we advertise. We need to provide proof points we get not enough just to say our product is a high quality. We have to support that we have to provided proof. We get not just to just say our products are high quality, we need proof points to prove that they are. It's not enough to say they are high-quality, we must provide proof that we are. We must have proof points of our product being high quality to be able to advertise. in our commercials in our print ads on our website so think of marketing another way to think about marketing because right now this is what we're going to talk about the entire semester. i'm trying to give you an overview of what marketing is so we said that that was part of what we were talking about. We said that in our commercials, in our Print ads on the website and in our website. So think of Marketing another way of thinking about marketing. That's what we are going to be talking about this semester. marketing is about communicating you know creating then communicating so does that make sense so the order is important so when we say marketing marketing is about creating communicating delivering and exchanging value so from 30 000 feet if you will that's a broad overview of what marketing is another way of looking at it. We hope this gives you an idea of what it is like to be in the business world of marketing and what it means to be a part of the business community in the U.S. and around the world. thing that we could say about marketing is that marketing includes five activities. The first thing is to identify an unmet need that consumers have so marketing when we talk about marketing the first activity is to identified we need to identify. We need to determine a need that is not being met in the market so it's a needs that's not been met. So marketing we can describe marketing as being comprised of several activities. So the first marketing activity is to identify identify anunmet need so marketing is comprised of several activities. being met so what would be a good example how about shampoo i know you're thinking what could this guy possibly know about shampoo. i know right but an unmet need is a shampoo that is safe for hair. that's what that's dry or that that's curly oily that's perm. That's a shampoo for curly oily hair that's a safe shampoo for dry oily hair. A shampoo that's safe for dry hair that is dry and that's oily is a safe hair shampoo. so the way we identify the need is how guess guess guess oh you're not they're not good at guessing that's not good for exam day you got to be good guessers supply and demand right. The way we're going to determine the needs is through marketing research we'regoing to be going to do marketing research to find out what needs we have. We're not going to be able to tell you exactly what the needs are. We'll have to do a lot of research to figure out what we need. do marketing research that's how we're going to identify what the needs are the first step is type is to conduct marketing research. We can do qualitative research like focus groups where we have 12 people in a room and with a moderator we ask them a series of questions. Do marketing research to find out what your company needs to be successful. Do you have a story of your own to share? Send it to us at tips@dailymail.co.uk and we'll feature it in next week's column. like what are some of the problems that they have when cooking or baking and what do you think they're going to say food sticks to the pot. Remember when we do focus groups there's only 10 or 12 people in each. There's only ten or 12 in each focus group so there's no way of knowing what's going to be on the agenda. Food sticks to pots and pans, so remember when you're in a focus group, don't be afraid to ask people what they think about cooking. focus group when we do focus groups we do four focus groups at a time so we do two focus groups in two different cities but we still only have 48 people that participated that's not a lot that's qualitative research. We don't have anything statistically significant all we have all we've done is focus groups. We do not have any statistically significant results from our focus groups so we don't do any research on that. We have done focus groups on a number of different topics. We've done focus group research on a lot of different subjects. We haven't done any research that's statistically significant. is the input of 48 people that cost fifty thousand dollars that's a real number 50 thousand dollars to have a lot of experience in marketing Fifty thousand dollars you wanna do focus groups see me after class okay so and with your checkbook all right so it's fifty thousand thousand dollars. That's what focus groups are for. It's for people who want to know more about marketing. It is for people that want to get more information about marketing and want to learn more about their customers. That is the focus of focus groups. dollars that's tremendously valuable to do focus groups. We're going to get a tremendous amount of insight from those for example who bake those who cook those who um who use tablets or smart tvs whatever it is that we're researching. It's very helpful to do that because what what what we're doing it's very important to get people's opinions. We want to make sure that we get the right people to do the research. We don't want to end up with the wrong people doing the wrong things. that's going to do is inform our quantitative research a form of quantitative research is what we're doing this semester which is a questionnaire. Our goal in industry is to get a representative random sample of how many a million people so in the united states if you want to know more about the U.S. economy. That's what our goal is to do in industry. That’s what we’re trying to do this semester. We’ve got a lot of work to do. we're going to research the needs and wants of people that bake and cook how many people do we need to have complete the questionnaire what do you think million now there's about 350 million people that live in the united states how many of them do we needs to. How many of you want to be a baker or cook? Tell us in the comments below or email us at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. For more information, visit www.bakingandcook.com. complete that questionnaire now if 350 million people complete the questionnaire that's called the what census a census is when a hundred percent of the population participates in the research only the government does. "They're really the only one that could afford to do that what we're trying to do," he says of the U.S. Census Bureau. "It's a huge undertaking. It's a lot of work, but it's worth it," he adds. "We're going to get it done." "What you want me to.do is get a representative random sample from that population so it doesn't need to be 350 million," he says. "What do you think a quarter of what's the number how many is that?" he asks. "How many does it need to. be 349 million 300 million 200 million what do you want to do?" he adds. "That's what I'm trying to do. That's the way I want to get the information out there" do the math so what we're saying is 85 million i think it has to be a balance sample like from every type of person that we take somebody up out of this group and from different states maybe and let me do this research with these people absolutely so. Do the math: 85 million. i think that's the number of people in the U.S. who would be interested in being a part of the project. If you would like to be part of it, you can sign up for a spot on the project at CNN iReport.com. we have to have males and females people of different age groups peoples in their 20s 30s 40s 50s 60s. People of different ethnicities people ofdifferent religions so how many people do we need to participate so there's no definite answer. A thousand can be statistically significant a thousand to fifteen hundred but in most categories in the united a thousand is a good number to start with in most areas of the United States. i'll tell you from my experience about a thousand people so if you have a representative random sample that's going to include people of  different genders people of different age groups. For marketing research we need something that's statistically significant in the united states in most categories it really doesn't need to be more than 1500 and how much.states it doesn’t need toBe more than that so it definitely doesn't needs to be a million people all right so for marketingResearch we needSomething that’s statistically significant. in the United States in most Categories. It really doesn t need to be more than1500 and how much. is that going to cost a hundred and fifty thousand dollars to do more intercept in multiple cities and get approximately 1500 respondents now when we do focus groups we also do multiple rounds of focus groups because each round is iterative so we learn from the first round of focus group. Is that. going tocost a hundred  and fifty thousand  dollars todo more intercept in multiple cities and get approximately 1500 respondents now? Now we do multiple rounds of focus groups because each round is iterative. focus groups and then we incorporate that in the next round before we do the quantitative research so we could do certainly qualitative research. i recommend that do the focus groups then we're going to do quantitative research before that now both of those focus groups and questionnaires are qualitative and quantitative and we'll incorporate that into our next round of research. We'll do that before we go into the quantitative part of the study. We're doing that now so that we can get a better idea of what we're looking for. quantitative research as i describe that. quantitative research is the study of how data is used to make sense of the world. i.e. how data can be used to understand the world in a way that makes sense to a person. i will use the term ‘quantitative’ in this article to refer to the data that I have collected in my research. I will also use the word ‘research’ to describe the way I use data to make a point about the world around me.