the Lord Byron George Gordon Lord Byron very interesting very outgoing very flamboyant personality he stood out I mean if you can't tell by looking at that picture you know he was a lot different than a lot of people his back history and such isn't necessarily testable stuff but he was very interesting. The Lord Byron was a very interesting man. He stood out. He had a very outgoing. very fl Ambitionant personality. He was a much different person than most people. look I mean it just really shows you how against the grain he was um you know we even saw Wordsworth even though he seemed very dignified such he was against the Grain with regards to his beliefs in his practices in in the literary world and so we see. We see Wordsworth. He was against. the grain with regards. his beliefs. in his practice in in in his literary world. So we see him as a person who was very different from the rest of us. We even saw him. this kind of era of rebelliousness and such they say that you know they call him the most colorful figure of his day you know he was born with a clubfoot which caused him some embarrassment early on but he was able to overcome it so he wasn't one to be ashamed of his clubfoot. He was born in the U.S. and grew up in New Jersey. He played for the New Jersey Nets and the New York Knicks. He is survived by his wife and three children. sit back on his on his limits he was able to still push it and he was accomplished in many activities and sports. The literary celebrity down at the bottom had spoken that he was a you know kind of born into not necessarily nobility like a monarch or anything. He was a kind of a guy who was born into, you know, he was not a prince or anything, but he was born with a lot of qualities that made him a very interesting person to be around. He had a great sense of humor. but he was born into his title he didn't do anything to achieve it okay Hinda and he was an individual that you know probably was a bit of a celebrity to some degree. He had the money he was wanting it he it said that he got in trouble. Hinda: "He was born in his title. He didn't doing anything to achieved it okay" "Hinda" is a weekly, offbeat look at life in the UK. Visit Hinda's website at www.hinda.co.uk. because he had a lot of love affairs going on he kind of ran out his welcome and all of a sudden he becomes a literary relevance. People actually think wow you actually contribute something instead of you're famous for being famous kind of like some people we might be. We might be more famous than we think we are. We're not as famous as we think. We may be a little bit more famous. We don't know if we're that famous or not. We just know that we're not that famous. able to mention you know celebrity wise and so then he finally gets some fame get some popularity and he does a lot of good with it. We see on besides kind of self exiling himself from England what things weren't going to also he leads and he travels and travels and so on. It's great to see him get some fame and he's doing a good job with it, he's a great role model for young people. It'll be great to watch him grow and get some more fame. stays with the Shelley's that talks about Mary Shelley and Percy shot Mary Shelley wrote Frankenstein. We'll talk about Percy Shelley later this unit but you know so he travelled around I mean one of the most interesting features in this is one how he died really young just because he was so young and he had so much to live for and so much he wanted to do and so many people wanted to know about him. He was a very interesting man. He travelled around the world. He had a lot to tell people and had so many stories to tell. from whoo but when he died what was he doing all he was down in Greece training their soldiers helping them for their rebellion. This is an individual who was not Greek okay but he was there because he was championing their cause and he supported them and so he died in a way that was very fitting for the time he was in. He was a man of his time and he was very proud of his Greek heritage and his Greek roots. He died a man who was proud and proud of who he was and he did it in a very fitting way. was helping them fight and preparing them for revolution and prepare them for the battle and so we have this individual armed you know who was a celebrity of his era probably more so than a lot of the individuals that we read and you can see when it talks about him, that he was armed and ready to fight. "You can see that he is armed and he is prepared to fight," says the author of the book, which is published by Harper Collins. "He is armed. He is ready to battle," adds the author. about that he was you know his life as well as his literary accomplishments you know were um you know a mother laughter by you know PO on 8th annual Hawthorne Dostoyevsky. Herman Melville you know all these famous literary works of you know later in the 1800s then you know in the 1900s. Later in the1800s then in the early 1900s then again in the late 1800s. You know in that time there were a lot of people who wrote about Melville. know and on a very very key an integral person there is a term called Byronic hero. If you flip to 848 really quick a Byronichero is kind of associated to him okay with his name Byron and such but this is an individual who if you look at his face you can see that he is very much alive and very much a part of the community. He is a very, very important person in the community and a very integral part of who we are as a nation. the bold points you know is rebellious feels alienated about something. You know is a very bold and very dangerous individual okay if you look in the right-hand page and I want you to read this page when you have time. you know people like James Dean you know those those people who are very dangerous and bold and dangerous. The author of this article is a friend of James Dean's and has known him for many years. For more information on James Dean, visit his website: http://www.james Dean.com. people who have who lived and played hard and you know we're brilliant at whatever they did but you know they they died young. "It was kind of like a tragic type thing people said in the last handful of years Heath Ledger um you know it would," he said. "You know they were brilliant atwhatever they did" "They died young" he said of Ledger and other stars who died young in recent years. "I think it would be the same for us," he added. been something similar he was a bold person he was rebellious you know in nature and such and you know he had a you know kind of a tragic end there. "A lot of times when the tragedy is somebody who is young and had some sort of accomplishments," he says. "It's a tragedy that happens to people who are young and have some kind of accomplishments" "He had a ... tragic end," he adds. "I'm not going to get into all the details of his life. I'm just going to say that he was young and he had some accomplishments" literary or you know in the world to some degree that those individuals are you know Byronic to some extent. So we see those qualities and characteristics portrayed in that individual back to his reading on a 8:45 from childe Harold's Pilgrimage gate. "I'm very happy to be back on," he says. "It's been a long time" The play is set to run through the end of the year in New York and the start of the new year in London. that this is to suggest the characters inner nobility and his quest for meaning sick of society held in barks on a series of journeys across Europe only to encounter more disillusionment in the wake of the Napoleonic war. So Napoleon you see the root word in there but this is not what the book is about. The book is supposed to be about Napoleon's journey across Europe and his search for meaning in the aftermath of the war. This is a work of fiction and not based on any events. particular piece is very short look at the title of it okay the right below the subtitle and this is from a larger work but it's called apostrophe to the ocean and if you remember apostrophes that's when you are directing a statement toward something that cannot reciprocate it remember it. The title of the piece is "Apostrophes to the Ocean" and the work is called "Aproposrophe To The Ocean" It's a short piece but it is a very short piece. when we did the poems and such Oh moon Oh sleep you know things of that nature you don't expect to be to have a conversation you're just talking to that individual or thing okay or idea. I guess it could be like sleep on it so this one is so thisOne is. When we do the poems we do them in such a way that it's like you're having a conversation with that individual. You don't expects to be having a conversations with that person or thing. When you do they're like, "Oh moon, Oh sleep" directed towards the ocean okay our childe Harold's Pilgrimage ' to the ocean. from childe Harold's Pilgrimage by George Gordon Lord Byron. "There is a pleasure in the pathless woods there is a rapture on the lonely shore. There is society where none intrudes by the sea" "The sea is the most beautiful place in the world" "There are no words for it" "It is a place of peace and tranquility" deep sea and music in its roar I love not man less but nature more from these our interviews in which I steal from all I may be or have been before to mingle with universe and feel what I can narak spread cannot all conceal. roll on thou deep, roll on Thou deep, I love thee more than I love man less. I love you more than man less, and I love nature more. I will never forget you, my friend. I'll always love you. in dark blue ocean roll ten thousand fleets sweep over the in vain men marks the earth with ruin his control stops with the shore upon the watery plain the wrecks are all thy deed nor doth remain a shadow of man's ravage save his own when for a moment for the world is at war with him. In vain men mark the world with ruin, and when the war is over, the wreckage is all that is left is the wreckage of the men who fought for it. like a drop of rain he sinks into thy depths with bubbling groan without a grave uh knelled on coffin and unknown his steps are not upon my paths my fields are not a spoil for him thou dust arise and shake him from thee the vile strength he wields. Like a drop. of rain, he sinks. into Thy depths with bubbles of groan, without agrave. uh knelling on coffin, and unknown he steps are. not on my paths, my fields aren't a spoil, and I am not a spoils for him. for Earth's destruction thou dust all despise spurning him from thy bosom to the skies and send His Tim shivering in thy playful spray and howling to his gods were haply lies his petty hope in some near port or Bey and dashes him again to earth there let him go. For earth's destruction thy dust all despised spurns him from thine bosom and sends him to the sky. For Earth's Destruction thou dust, all despise him, send him to earth. lay the armaments which Thunder strike the walls of rock build cities bidding nations quake and monarchs tremble in their capitals. The okhla by Athens whose huge ribs make their clay creator the vain titled take of Lord of thee and arbiter of war. These are thy toys and as they are thy armaments as well as as the weapons of war they are the toys of the gods. The god of war is the lord of war and the master of the armies of the world. The God of War is the god of the army. the snowy flake they melt into thy yeast of waves which Mar alike the armadas pride or spoils of Trafalgar by shores our empires changed in all save thee. Assyria Greece Rome Carthage what are they thy waters wash them power while they were free and many a tyrant since since. The sea is the source of all our power, the sea is our source of power. The seas are the Source of All our Power. The Sea is the Source Of All Our Power, the Sea is our Source. their Shores obey the stranger slave or savage their decay has dried up realms to deserts not so thou unchangeable save to thy wild waves play time writes no wrinkle on banaz your brow such as creations. Don beheld Val ro list now thou glorious mirror where the Almighty's form where the Lord's form is. Their Shores obeys the strangerslave or savage. Their decay has dry up realms. Not so thee unchangeability save to thee wild waves. Play time writes no wrinkle on banaz's brow. glasses itself in tempest s' in all time calm or convulsed in breeze or Gale or storm icing the pole or in the torrid clime dark heaving boundless endless and sublime. The image of eternity the throne of the invisible even from out the slime the monsters of the deep. Even from out of the slime they come, the monster of thedeep. The Throne of the Invisible. The Monsters of the Deep. The Image of eternity The Throne Of The invisible. The Monster of The Deep. are made each zone obeys thee thou goest forth dread fathomless alone and I have loved the ocean. My joy of youthful sports was on thy breasts to be born like thy bubbles onward from a boy I want and with thy breakers they to me were a delight. The sea was a delight to me. The ocean was my joy to me and my joy of youth was on its breasts. The water was my delight. It was a pleasure to me, the sea was my happiness. The seas were my joy. and if the freshening sea made them a terror twas a pleasing fear for I was as it were a child of thee and trusted to thy billows far and near. I laid my hand upon thy mane as I do hear from childe Harold's Pilgrimage ' the ocean he he says in the book. The book is called "Harold and the Sea" and is published by Hodder & Stoughton at £16.99. For more information on the book, visit www.hodderandstoughton.com. is addressing the ocean the water about how big and how timeless start you know he mentioned on that page and we'll get there you know about the ships like okhla vaya fans you know Leviathan is BC in Atlantis remember the cartoon movie Atlantis the Leviathan was the thing. "We're going to get to the bottom of it," he says. "It's going to be a long way down. We're not going to go to the top of it. We'll get to it." that protects it so big monstrous thing and so these ships that are like okhla vaya thens are really just like toys and if you think about it I mean just the sheer size of that water and those waves what they can do you know there are aircraft carriers. That protects it.that protect it sobig monstrous thing. and so big and powerful. That's what makes these ships so powerful. And so big. and powerful that they're like toys to play with. that are like cities floating cities with tens of thousands of people. I imagine I don't know definitely thousands of sailors okay but you know they've land and they move around and they have food and things like that on there. I mean it's a self-sustaining city in the sense that it has its own water supply and its own air supply and all that kind of stuff. I don’t know definitely Thousands of sailors. okay but they've landed and they moved around and I imagine they have their own water supplies and all of that. essence and a storm can just mess that thing all up if there's a hurricane coming that ship heads the other way tries to get around it. "It would turn it into like a toy in a bathtub when you guys used to have you know a little," he says. "A storm canjust mess thatthing all up" "A hurricane can just Mess that thing up," he adds. "And it would just mess it all up." "A Storm Can Just Mess Thatthing Up" airs on PBS stations in the U.S. on Sundays at 8 p.m. ET. toy they used to you know it's small in the grand scheme of things that big the biggest boat ever made is still pretty small look what happens to youknow Titanic with nature and such that was the biggest Boat ever constructed and it didn't even make it through. It's a pretty small thing in the big scheme of everything but it's still a pretty big thing in terms of the history of the world. It was the first time the world has seen such a thing in its history. The Titanic was the largest boat ever constructed. its first voyage you know the 100-year anniversary is coming up here next month of the sinking maybe not the there rerelease in the movie and I'm accessed off 3ds so that's just for you a little bit of extra stuff for today. The apostrophe on page 845 um but the apostrophe in the book is the same as the one on the movie. It's just a little extra stuff to make you feel better about the movie that's coming out in a few weeks. you know he's very pleased with the ocean he loves the ocean you know talking about you know there is a you know pleasure and rapture in this and I love man the less but I love nature more but ILove nature more and think back we've talked about, you know. You know there's something about the ocean that makes you want to go out there and explore it. I love the ocean, I really do. I'm very happy to be in the ocean. I just love the water. this a lot in this particular unit about all of these nature elements okay nature and the nightmares and kids all those things that influence writing and here we have another individual as to why this particular piece is a good representation of that of that era. um man. This is a lot of the stuff that we talk about a lot. uh man. It's a lot about nature elements and kids and all of those things. okay nature. and nightmares and children. All of that stuff that influenceWriting. marks the earth I like this line ten twelve run there man marks the earth with ruin his control stops with the shore so on earth man can just ruin and war and all of this stuff but and outside a pollution now and all the that stuff you know. I like the line ten 12 run there. Man marks the Earth with ruin. His control stops at the shore. So on earthman can just ruined and war. But and outside  pollution now. You know, outside apollution now and  all of that stuff and all that stuff. I love this line. the man's ruined it stops at the shore okay because whether it's a million years ago a thousand years ago or two years ago we can go out you know thirty feet into the water and look straight out to the water. And it's the same view that we would have had a long time ago. It's a beautiful thing to be able to go out there and look out and see the same thing that we did a long, long, time ago, and it's still the same. have had a million years ago okay yes we can look at oil platforms now for looking in the exact rights okay man ceases to be able to control that okay. There are people would say you know we've spent more time at the bottom of the ocean or less. okay there are people who would say we've spend more time in the ocean than we have in the last million years or so. okay. We can't control that. We're not in control of that. we're in charge of what we're doing, we're just trying to do it. time at the body the bottom of the ocean you know then we have in space meaning that we've explored space more than we have the the fathoms of the Ocean. There are worlds down there that you know it's you know they're mountain range. We've explored more space than we've ever explored the ocean and that's here on earth there are worlds below us. We're going to find out more about them in the next few days. We'll be on the ground in New York for a meeting of the Astronaut Council. is bigger than Mount Everest underwater underwater were you aware of that I mean that's just the scope and size of what's out there okay and just a little boat out there I could do a lot of damage okay. "A lot ofdamage could be thrust upon that and really I really can't explain it," he says. "I really don't know how to explain it" he adds. "It's just a really scary thing to think about. I mean I can't really explain it." that's kind of what is talking about the the rest of this about the shoe size of it the the ships and man and how nature Trump's all of that. I like the line forty four time writes no wrinkle on diners your brow so like with humans and a human and a shoe size. That's what I'm talking about. that's what's talking. about. the other part of it about the shoes size, it the ship and man. and hownature Trump's and how Nature Trump's. lot of it even animals and such that people age and you can tell their age by looking at them with the ocean. It just keeps going thousand years from now they're still unless we have some huge crazy something happens blows up we're going to have you know waves. It's still going to be a long time before we see any major changes in the way the ocean behaves. It will just keep going on and on for a very, very long time to come. It is a very exciting time to be alive. coming in and the sound will be identical in conclusion at the very end. At the end he comes back from talking about all of the size in his love for nature and sums it back that you know and I have loved the ocean so just in case you forgot throughout these. He says he loves the ocean and that he has "loved the ocean" since he was a child. He adds that he's always loved nature and has always been a fan of the ocean. He also says he has always loved the sound of the water. short two pages to whom he was speaking or addressing we see once again that it is nature and don't forget what an apostrophe is okay. remember I told you when we learned it that's hey you're going to need to remember this and people tend to forget for some. "I'm going to tell you something that's going to happen to you," he says, "and you're not going to be able to tell me what it is. I'm just going to say it." strange reason even though it's extremely easy to uh to spot okay. Strange reason why people think it's a bad thing to be a woman in a bikini. Strangest reason is that it's very easy to spot a man in a suit in the middle of the night. Stranger reason is because people think he's a man. He's not a man, he's just a woman, and he wants to be seen as a woman. It's very hard to spot the difference.