In order to be successful whenever you're drawing blood or starting IVs you really have to know a couple things. I want to go over the veins that I love to use whenever I'm drawing blood. Orion common in this video. Orion is a common vein used by nurses to draw blood and start IVs. Orion also common in IVs for blood transfusions and other types of transfusions. Orion's veins are common in transfusions for blood and other forms of transfusion. Orion Orion is common in intravenous and blood transfusion procedures. Orion has a common veins that he uses when drawing blood and starting intravenous procedures. number one you need to know the name of the vein that you're going to use and its location along with what can that vein actually handle for instance some veins can only handle about a 20 or a 22 gauge IV cannula versus some of them can handle 18 gages 16 gages so you really want to know which veins can do that now what means do I love to use whenever I'm drawing blood or starting IVs okay number one which I think the consensus is probably the same for this is the median cubital vein this is. here in a moment you're gonna see a large vein right in the bend of the arm and it's perfect for drawing blood. I also like to use accessories cephalic vein along with the median vein of the forearm and of course those hand mains the dorsal venous network so we have our tourniquet on up here on the top of the arms. I want to show you these veins so first I'm going to showYou the media cubital vein and it is located right here. blood draws and it arises out of your cephalic vein which is right here now this is our patient's left arm. On the right arm it's going to be the opposite but we have the cep Halic vein right here and then over through here you can't see it as you can in this picture. The blood draws come from a vein in the patient's right arm. The vein is called a cepHalic vein and it's located in the middle of the body. well as the bacilli and where the cephalic in the basilic start to connect as here at this median cubital vein now this main like I said great for blood draws you can use it for IVs. The problem with it though is that it's in the band of this band of the  bacilli as well as the cephalics. It's a good vein to use for blood draw and IVs but it's not great for other procedures. arm so as the patient is eating moving around getting up it's going to cause them a lot of pain and it can infiltrate and mess up the vein. Unless it's like last resort you can't find any other veins on this arm or the patient needs like a vein. So unless it's a last resort, it's not a good idea to use this arm unless you have no other veins in that area. If you have any questions, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. CT PE protocol with an 18 gauge in one of those large veins you can go there use it and then just take it out and go somewhere else. I like to keep that available from blood next is accessory cephalic vein hence its name it comes coming off. It's a good place to start but I don't like to use it too much because it can get in the way of other veins. It can be a good spot to start, but it can also be a bad place to finish. of that cephalic vein up through here now this is really one of my favorite veins to start IVs in number one it doesn't really roll it's easy to stabilize you're not gonna stick the needle in there and it rolls to the side don't you just love and that? I love that. I love it. I just love it! I love this vein. It's one of the best veins for IVs. It doesn't roll and it's a great place to start an IV. happens no not really and it's a relatively large vein so we can easily hold an 18 gauge now the thing is whenever you do use this for IVs because it starts up in here don't go in this Bend of this arm go down because it comes down and is a relatively big vein. It's a little bit of a shock when you first start using it but it's not too bad. It doesn't take long to learn how to use it and how to get it to work. you can just stick your IV right there and the patient can move their arm bend it they're not going to have problems so this is really a good vein. Another vein I like to use is located on the forearm so we don't have a bend of an arm. You can also use a vein that is on the inside of the arm so you don't need to use it on the outside of the forearm. It's a good place to start an IV and it's a great place to end the IV. causing the patient and issues and it is the median vein of the forum also called the anti brachial vein. It is this vein right here it comes out of the palm of the hand now as you can tell this vein is not as big as the accessory. The median vein is also known as the "anti brachia vein" and it comes from the middle of the arm. It's a vein that comes from below the elbow and is called the "pro-brachial" vein. This vein is the one that is causing the patient the problems. cephalic and that media cubital vein so whenever you go to stick this for like an IV you want to probably pick like a 20 or 22 gage instead of an 18 gauge. I have seen a limited amount of 18 gages in this fame because you know everyone's Anatomy. "cephalic" is the name of a type of blood vessel used in the heart. It's used to treat heart failure, stroke, and other conditions that affect the cardiovascular system. It was developed in the 1950s and 1960s. is different some people have bigger veins there so you want to think about that another thing is that this these veins can run deep on patients who have a lot of sub-q fat on their forearms so you might be able to see the vein but whenever you go you have to be aware of the fact that you are going to have a different vein in your arm. It can take up to a week for the vein to develop. It is possible to see a vein in a patient's arm for up to two weeks. to stick it you don't immediately get that blood roll because the veins a little bit deeper so keep that in mind and that also is true for these veins up here on the bend of the arm as well and lastly the veins of the hand. The dorsal venous is the dorsal vein that runs along the inside of the forearm. It is the vein that is responsible for most of the blood vessels in the arm and hand. It's also the vein responsible for blood vessels on the inside and outside of the elbow. network and these veins are great for drawing blood starting IVs but some things you want to remember okay first of all these veins like how this patient has their hand open if you go to stick a needle in this vein with the hand in this position this vein is just gonna roll see how that rolls like that. What you'd want to do is you Want to stabilize it so have them make like this like this and look that keeps that vein nice and still why you go with the needle to draw blood. .cannula now I have a whole video on how to prevent rolling veins if you need some more tips on that. Another thing to remember is that these veins sometimes they're really superficial on people like here they're nice and engorged and healthy-looking so they'll be great for an IV. Now I'm off to do some more IVs. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter @MailOnlineTravel. or drawing blood however on some patients who have a lot of sub-q fat on the hands they're hard to get to they're super small or like very fragile and they blow easy so always look at that look at the health of the vein before you try to stick. "You can't just go in there and start drawing blood. You have to go in and try to find a vein," says Dr. John. "It's a very difficult thing to do. It's very difficult to get into a vein" When choosing a vein when you're starting an IV there are some things you want to keep in mind. You want to ask yourself okay what's this patient here for. Are they just here for like a short stay because they need a. needle now or are they going to be here for a long time? You need to know your patient's history before you start an IV. It's important to know the history of the patient before you begin an IV, as well as how long they've been there. quick procedure or they're just here for observation. They're gonna be hospitalized because they need treatment. Maybe they need some blood products or they's gonna have to get some vest can't type drugs like potassium. Think oh my son just to name a few so you want to select which one is best for you. You want to make sure it's the right one for your patient. You don't want to have to choose between two or three. It can be very difficult to decide which is best. your site and your sizing your needle appropriately because for instance vancomycin is really hard on the veins and you want to use a large vein rather than a small vein next ask the patient where they prefer that you draw blood or start an IV because patients tend to be experts on where they know that you're going to be successful at getting that IV or drawing blood in. Some patients love to have IVs or blood rolls in their hands while some prefer that media cubital vein that's the only place they want blood drawn. very very limited and where you can even get IV access and I've seen IVs and creative places like in the feet and the little fingers on the arms up in the neck anywhere you can get them. So always keep that in mind and if that does happen and if you can't get to the hospital, you're going to have to find a way to get to a hospital that can get you to the emergency room. That's what I've done. I've been to a lot of hospitals. your patient is thinking lots of fluids IV drugs things like that. You want to get with the physician you want to ask hey is this patient a candidate for a central line because I may benefit the patient a little bit better okay so those are some tips on how to get the best care for your patient. You can get more information from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NAIDS) on its website. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. choosing veins when starting IVs or drawing blood thank you so much for watching and don't forget to subscribe to our channel for more videos. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNLive and @CNNOpinion on our Facebook page and on our YouTube channel. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.