JUDY HOYT: Hopefully everybody's recovered from their Thanksgiving feast. And looks like people are sleeping in today. What I'm showing up here is the schedule to orient us. This is lecture 22. We'll talk about silicides, and then we'll move on to the next lecture, which will be about the use of chemicals in agriculture. And then, we'll go on to talk about the uses of these chemicals in the environment. And so on and so on. device contacts, and I've added in a new material this year on novel gate materials. And part of this is covered-- the first two topics are covered in chapter 11. And then we have one more lecture, which is on strained silicon and silicon germanium growth and processing. and then then the final lecture is on graphene and other graphene-based materials, which will be discussed in the second half of this year's conference. The conference will be held in San Francisco, California, from September 26 to October 2. next week we have two class periods scheduled. There'll be four speakers in each. And those will be the oral reports and the student reports given on Tuesday and Thursday. And in fact, I have a slightly better version of this schedule, I think, in this Excel file, and this Excelfile file. And this is the one that I've been using for the last few weeks. It's a slightly different version of the schedule, but it's the same thing. I think it's better than this. is posted up on the web, by the way. So on December 7th, we have these four speakers. We're going to hear short presentations, about 16 minutes each, from these four students on everything from high k going to diffusion and gallium arsenide. And then on the Thursday of the same week, we'll hear from the same four students again, on high k again, and we'll see what they have to say about high k and diffusion and Gallium Arsenide. ninth, we have these four students scheduled. And I just want to remind people, if you're doing an oral report, you're expected to provide handouts, the same type of handout that I use during lecture. And if you need help in making Xerox copies, contact my assistant. Her contact information is on the bottom of the page. If you want to talk to me about anything else, please contact me at [email protected] and I'll get back to you. Make sure you get to her early enough. Don't give her the job the same day, that morning, but maybe the day before would be good. And also, if you're doing a written report they are due on Thursday, December 9 in class. If you. are doing a write-up, please send it to your teacher the next day. If. you are writing a report, please submit it to the teacher the following day. Send it to her the next. day. have any questions about the final project, just please email me or contact me after class. The notes for today's lecture are given in handout 36. Let's go on and start-- we can start today's Lecture. And please email us or contact us after class if you have any questions or concerns about the project. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to go to the lecture page for the lecture notes for this week's class. today we want to talk about a couple of devices. The formation of silicides. I've referred to silicides a number of times in the course, but we really haven't gotten a chance to talk to them. Now we'll find out what they are. How we make contact, and how we use them to make contact. We'll talk about silicides and how they're used to make contacts with other animals. We want to hear from you about how you use silicides, and what you use them for. how we make the structures and make good, electrical contacts and the device. And as I mentioned, I've added a new module this year on novel gate materials. And we started some of that last time. So far, we've talked about how to get these insulating and doped regions inside inside a device. But now we're working on how to make them insulating, doped inside the device, too. And that's the next phase of the project, I think. the device. We've talked about oxidation, implantation, diffusion, thin film deposition, and how we etch structures. But at this point in the device fabrication of the seam laws flow, we need some way to make a good electrical contact. And I put 'good electrical contact' in quotes because it's somewhat of a subjective thing. We need to be able to make some kind of electrical contact with the material. But we don't know how to do it yet, so we're still working on it. The contact itself is still generally considered part of the frontend because you're contacting the silicon. And then we'll see in this lecture what we mean by good electrical contact-- two doped regions. And so this lecture is kind of the first link to the backend technology course.nebulous.com: What do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments below or post a video on our Facebook page, Twitter or Instagram account. We'll feature the best in our weekly Newsquiz. beyond, that everything is in the 6.773, which is the backend technology. This is just a schematic I've shown a couple of different times to point out to you what I mean by the contact. You're familiar with this by now. We have the silicon source and the silicon heavily involved in the design of the device. It's a very, very complex system, and it's a lot of work to get it to work. But we're very proud of what we've done. doped drain. Here's the gate material. And I need some way of making a contact between this electrical connection here, this metal line, and the silicon itself. And you can see that can consist of several different materials. In this particular picture, these sort of dark regions contacting the silicon are the dark regions of the drain material. The drain material is called a doped drain and can be made from a variety of materials. It can also be made of a number of different materials, such as silicon. are going to be made of silicide. And we'll talk today about how you fabricate those silicides. Let me also-- I want to talk about local interconnect. Sometimes the contacts themselves are also used for something called local Interconnect. And I should point out here, this is an example of local InterConnect. It's a type of interconnect that can be used in a number of different ways. It can also be used to make other types of connections, such as fiber-optics. a local interconnect where I've got a contact region that is being used to interconnect, say, from one layer to the next, or locally from one part of the device to a neighboring device, but not across the whole chip. These are called global interconnects because these wires go potentially across the entire chip up here. But this is a local Interconnect. It only extends over a very small distance. In fact, on slide number two of your handout, we've got an example of a local interConnect and what it might consist of. This is just the circuit schematic. you have taken electrical engineering courses, you know this is a bipolar transistor with a base and the emitter. And you see in this circuit schematic that theEmitter of this transistor is connected by a wire to a resistor, r. Well, this is the Emitter region of the bipolar transistor. This little arrow represents the emitters region. And the base of the transistor is a resistor. The emitter is connected to the base through a wire, r, and the base is a resistive. is the circuit schematic. And below is the actual implementation of this circuit in silicon. And in fact, if you recognize that this is an NPN device, and this little n region right here is the emitter-- this is the P-type base as shown here in red. And this is a very simple circuit that can be used in a variety of ways, and it's very simple to make. It's a very, very simple device to make, but it's not easy to make in the first place. the N-type collector. And what you see here is this emitter region has a metal contact to it. And it is connected locally to this P-type tube region, which is, in fact, a resistor. This is a resistor because the current can flow from this metal contact here through the current of the N- type collector through the P- type tube region to the emitter. And that's where the current is flowing through the resistor. And this is what we see in this picture. P-type region-- it has a certain sheet resistance, or a certain resistance-- and out this other end. So this is an example of using a very short metal wire. Might even end up being silicide or something. A very short wire locally on the chip to do interconnect from, for example, a chip that's being used in a medical device or a drug that's going to be used in the military. It's a very small piece of metal that can be used to do that. say, one neighboring device-- in this case a transistor-- to another neighboring device, a resistor. So that's what we mean by local interconnect. Talk a little bit about historically about how contacts were made. And this is shown on slide 3. In the early days, if this was the drain, it was known as the "drain" or the " drain" or "drip" in the name of the device. It was a way to make a connection between two neighboring devices. or the source of a transistor, a MOSFET, people simply used aluminum, which was the metal of choice, directly on silicon to make both the contacts and the interconnect material. So it was convenient. You could contact the silicon with aluminum, and then you could run wires along the chip. It was a convenient way to get around the problem of how to make a transistor that could be used in a variety of ways, including using different materials for different types of transistors. The advantages of aluminum has a low resistivity. It's the second lowest of all the metal candidates, copper being the lowest. And it has very good adhesion to silicon and to silicon dioxide. It is a very stable metal, and it makes good electrical. And that could interconnect the various devices. It could be used in a variety of different ways, including in the Internet of Things, for example, to send data to other parts of the world, such as the cloud. contact to heavily doped silicon. aluminum tends to reduce any native oxide present on silicon. You know if you take a silicon wafer and you do an HF dip, you'll get rid of anynative oxide. If you do a HF dip on a wafer that's been doped with aluminum, the aluminum reduces the amount of native oxide on the wafer. It reduces the risk of the oxide being exposed to light and heat, which can be harmful to the device's structure. If you let it sit for a few minutes, an hour or so, you grow a thin, natural native oxide, SiO2, at room temperature on silicon. May only be about 10 angstroms thick, but it's still there. The nice thing about aluminum is that it tends to be more transparent than other metals. It's also more conductive, so it can be used in a variety of ways. It can also be used to make new materials, such as solar cells. reduce or eat up that oxide on the silicon, and it forms a very thin layer of Al2O3. But this layer is quite thin, and the aluminum itself can diffuse right through it. So this enables you to form a very good electrical contact without having an intervening layer of oxide. Some metals you might put down and they won't eat through the silicon native oxide, the SiO2. And then they'll just be sitting there, and you won't get a good contact. So it was a convenient and a good material for people to use for many years. Slide 4 just shows you some of the basic properties of interconnect materials just so you get oriented. Here is aluminum on the top. Again, one of the most popular forMany years. The material was made of aluminum, which was a popular material in the U.S. for years. It was also made of magnesium, which is a common material in interconnects. It is also used in a variety of other interconnecting materials. resistivity is listed in the second column, somewhere around 2.7 to 3 micro ohm centimeter for the resistivity. And the last column shows the melting point. So it is a low melting point material. The only other metal of consequence that has a lower resistivity is copper, which is shown here, the third one. Copper has a much high melting point and has other difficulties associated with its integration. Copper, if it gets into silicon, can be a deep level. it can cause lifetime problems. Copper oxidizes very readily, even at room temperature. So you need to protect it, if you're all aware of that. And copper is more difficult to deposit than aluminum. But copper is the material of choice for today's interconnect. I think I brought a wafer with me, I think it was a copper wafer. I don't know if you've seen it, but it's a very, very small piece of copper. It's like a very thin piece of glass. It looks like it's made of glass, and it's very thin. The modern interconnect material is copper. A few places are still using aluminum. Copper was introduced in research in the 1970s. The material is used to connect chips to each other. It's also used in computer chips to connect them to other chips. It is used in chips that connect to other computers to connect with each other to make them more efficient and efficient. The technology is called interconnecting dielectrics, or IECs, and it's used in computers, phones and tablets. the mid 80s and in production about 10 years past that. On slide 4, I'm showing some basic physics that you may or may not be familiar with. But you need to understand the basics of it in order to understand what we mean by a good electrical. Contact their Contact their website for more information on how to get your hands on an iMac or PC with iMac Pro for less than $1,000. For more information, visit iMacPro.com. contacts can, to a semiconductor, can be sort of divided into roughly two classes. There's an ohmic contact and a Schottky contact. And if you just look at the current, this little schematic shows the current that flows in the device, so through the device. A Schottki contact is shown here. And it's shown here in a very simple way. It's just a little bit of the way that the current flows through the semiconductor. It doesn't have to be very complicated. device, as a function of the voltage that you apply. Schottky contact is a rectifier. It is when you apply a large voltage in one direction, the reverse direction, not much current flows. So that's not a very useful way to make a contact to a device. If you apply high voltage in the opposite direction, you can make contact with the device in the other direction. That's a good way to do it, but it's not very practical. It's a lot of work to do in one go. a small voltage in the other direction, you get a little current, and then you apply above a certain threshold voltage, and youget a lot of current. It's basically a diode. And the current transport is by this sort of thermionic or thermal emission over this barrier. So this is the way that the current is transported. And it's a very, very complex process. It takes a long time to get it to work. But it's very exciting, and I'm looking forward to seeing how it works. is not considered desirable for making a good contact. An ohmic contact on the other side, or a tunneling contact, occurs when you can actually tunnel right through this barrier. The depletion region is very thin. And the barrier is so thin that you canactually tunnelright through it. And it's very difficult to make a contact with the depletion region, which is the part of the barrier that is most susceptible to tunneling. It's very, very thin, and you can't actually tunnel through it at all. if you do make high doping right near the metal, you can reduce this depletion layer width. And it enables this tunneling. And so if you look at the current voltage characteristics-- so current plotted on the y-axis, voltage on the x-axis-- you see it's very symmetrical, and you get you get the tunneling effect. It's very similar to what you get in a nuclear reactor. It can be done in a very small amount of material. It doesn't have to be a lot of material to do it. a very, very high current for a very small voltage in either direction. So this is considered desirable. This is what we want. We want that ohmic contact. And it tends to happen, particularly with aluminum and most metals, if you make the surface doping very high. A concept that is very exciting for us to think about and to work out how we can make it happen in the future. It's a very exciting time for us and we're looking forward to seeing what the future holds. The resistance of a given contact in ohms is just the voltage divided by the current flowing through that contact. And you can calculate it by rho sub C, which typically has units of ohm centimeters squared or ohm micron squared. So if someone tells you, oh I've made a contact. It has a certain specific contact resistivity, 10 to the -7 ohm centimeter squared, then you can design your contact area as you need to to get the right contact resistance. going to have a higher resistance. And this is a problem if I'm scaling devices. If I'm packing more and more devices on the chip, it means I want to make the total area occupied by every device smaller. But if I leave the contact resistivity the same, I don't do anything different about how I make the contact, then the area of the contact is going down to get more of these devices on a chip. That means the resistance is going to go up. up as devices are scaled. This is a problem as we scale, unless we scale roh sub c. And we'll see some specific numbers on this. Unless we do something to make better contacts as we Scale devices, just because of this geometric factor. As I make the area the size of the world, this will get worse and worse as devices get bigger and bigger. And it will get even worse if we don't do something about it now. It will get so bad that it will be impossible to get around it. current goes through smaller, the resistance of that contact goes up. So the second type of contact-- again, this is one that's not generally considered desirable, but we need to understand a little bit of the physics of it-- is a Schottky contact. And the energy band diagram for that is a bit more complex than what you see on the surface of the moon. It's a little more complicated than you might think, but it's a key part of our understanding of how the universe works. A Schottky contact is governed by thermionic emission. So it's a thermionic process emitting carriers over this barrier. And we know from the Richardson equation we can write thermionic emissions current density.is shown here, where the metal is on the left and the semiconductors are on the right. And a Schottki contact is a contact between a metal and a semiconductor. It's a contact where the semiconductor is in front of the metal and the metal in the background. J as being proportional to the temperature squared, some constant a star. But most importantly, it goes exponentially like the barrier height. So it's e to the minus q phi B over kT. The barrier height is just the band bending. It's this barrier between the Fermi level in and the star level in the universe. And it's the reason why the universe is so big and so far away from Earth. It is so far from the Earth that we can see it from space. the semiconductor and the Fermi level in the metal. So that's going to tend to be a property of the doping in the semiconductor. So if we take this equation. this current equation, which we know, the current voltage characteristic is current voltage. The current voltage is the characteristic of the current in a semiconductor, and it's the same in a metal. That's the way it works in semiconductors, and that's why it's so important to understand. exponential in the applied voltage. And we just use the definition of roh sub C, you can calculate, as shown on the bottom here of slide 7, what the specific contact resistivity should look like for a Schottky barrier. And you see it goes exponentially, like the barrier height. So we can use that to calculate the resistance of the barrier, and we can then apply the voltage to the barrier to make it more or less conductive. We can then use this to make the barrier more or Less Conductive. if we change that barrier height, we can change rho sub C. So what we do in practice is we look at that equation and we try to get into a different regime. Instead of being in the regime where we're dominated by tunneling over this barrier by thermionic emission, we're in a new regime. We're trying to get to a state where we don't have to tunnel over the barrier to reach the other side. That's where the new regime comes in. rather, excuse me, over the barrier, if we make the barrier distance really narrow, really small, you know from your quantum mechanics classes that you can actually get quantum mechanical tunneling through the barrier. So here on slide 8, what I've shown is a tunneling contact. It's a Schottky contact, and it's a very, very narrow contact. And if you make it really, really, narrow, you can get it to go through. And that's what we've done here. in the limit of very, very high doping. So we form these-- you see we still have this barrier, phi B. But the distance, the depletion layer thickness in the semiconductor, is very,very small. And that happens when you make the doping high. So in fact, for a tunneling, for the tunneling to work, you need a very high level of doping. That's what we're trying to do with this new material. It's a new type of semiconductor. contact, if you go back to your quantum mechanics, you know if you have a certain barrier height, phi B, and a Certain barrier thickness, that the tunneling current is exponentially dependent on those two quantities. It looks something like this. So how do I make the depletion layer? Well, I have to make a depletion layer. So, I make a layer that has a certain thickness and a certain height. And then I put a layer on top of that. And that layer is called a tunneling layer. And it looks like this: thickness small in the semiconductor when I put a metal contact to it? Well, again, if you're going back to some of your basic electrostatics, XD is inversely proportional to the doping, or the square root of the doping. So all I need to do to make XD small is to make the metal contact very thin. That's what I've done here. I've made the contact very small. It's a very thin contact. I can make it very thin by using a very small metal contact. to pump up this doping very high, the doping in the semiconductor. So when the doping is high enough, XD will become small. And then when XD gets less than about, say, 2 nanometers or so in this equation, you get a very large tunneling current, basically. So what people people people do is they try to make the current as large as possible, so that it can be passed through the semiconducting material, for example, to create a device. do in practice is you dope very heavily above, say, above mid 10 of the 19th, you get quantum mechanical tunneling. And that's really what's dominating. So for low contact resistivity, to get this number down, I need a small barrier. So you would choose a particular metal. And you can see, again, it depends exponentially on the barrier height and inversely exponential on the doping. So if you put these numbers and in here you get an equation like what's shown at the bottom of page 8 here. that gives you a relatively small barrier height, phi B. And you need, most importantly, very high doping. So you need to pump up the doping as high as possible. And then you will get an IV characteristic that is essentially ohmic. So here I'm just doing a simple calculation, and that's what I've done here. That's how I got to be able to do what I do. And that's why I'm able to compete in the Olympics. on slide 9. Here's an example if we use the expression for the specific contact resistivity at very high doping levels where we have tunneling dominate. So we can write that expression that I just showed on the prior page saying that rho C is rhoC zero, some pre-exponential, some type of resistance. On slide 10, we can see that the same expression can be used for the resistance at very low doping levels, such as at low levels of doping, where tunneling dominates. times the exponential dependence on phi B and D, and where this exponential multiplier C1 is given by this number, 7 times 10 to the 10th. So now let's say I assume I have a metal semiconductor contact where the barrier height is 0.6 electron volts. And rho C zero, and rho B zero, which is the same as rho D zero. And so on and so on, until I get to the point where I have the right barrier height. this number, is about 10 to the minus 7 ohm-- that's ohm centimeter squared for an aluminum and silicon contact. So the question is if I change the doping from 1e19 to 1e20 by a factor of 10, how much does rho C increase? The answer is that it increases the rho by about 10 times. That's about 10,000 times more than the amount of doping that's needed to get the same effect in the first place. go down? Just to give us an example of how much you benefit yourself. And again, this is an exponential relationship. So you expect a big change. So in this case, the first case, I have a doping of 10 to the 19th. You plug in all these numbers. You can see the difference. It's huge. And it's a huge difference. And that's what we're trying to achieve here. We want to get to the top of the mountain. We're not there yet. put in the square root of 10 of 19 down here and you get a RHO C of about 6 times 10 to the -2 ohm centimeter squared. It's a pretty big number, as it turns out. If you plug in a standard size of a contact on a silicon you get the same RHO as a silicon contact. The RHO of a silicon Contact is about 1.5 times the size of the silicon contact on the surface of the contact. It is the same as 1.6 times the length of a single silicon contact, or 1.7 times the surface area of that contact. At 10 of a 20, you get about 6 times 10 to the -6 ohm centimeter squared. So that's about a factor of 9,000 lower. So it changed by 10. That's a10 to the 19.chip. At 10 of the same sort of thing, and you do the math, and now you get. about 6. times 10, and that's a 10 to a 19. chip. At a 20 of that sort, it's about 6,000 times 10. almost four orders of magnitude, the contact resistivity, just by upping the doping by a factor of 10. So that's dramatic difference. So this tells you, you need to have-- if you're going to get reasonable contacts in silicon technology, unless you want huge contacts, he says. "You need to be able to make a huge difference in the resistivity of the material," he says, "and that's what we're trying to do here" "It's a very, very exciting time for silicon technology," he adds, "because it's going to become more and more popular" devices where the whole chip is dominated by contacts, which is ridiculous. You won't be able to get enough devices on your chip. You're going to have to get the doping in the source drain regions high, at least 10 to the 20 or higher. This number itself is still a number itself that is still too high. It's still going to be hard to get a chip with enough contacts on it to work. It will take a long time to get to a chip that can handle all of the contacts. considered a little bit on the too-high of a side for a contact resistance. But it's just interesting to look at these numbers. And in fact, I've taken on the next slide figure 11-7 from your text. And you can see that these numbers are in pretty good agreement with the other figures in the table. But you can also see that the numbers are pretty much in line with each other, as well as with other numbers in the chart. And that's a good thing. what people have measured. Here on slide 10-- I took this from your text that shows the contact resistivity in ohm centimeter squared as a function of doping here. And you can see the doping up on this scale here for two different metal systems. One is the aluminum contact, the other is the copper contact. And we can see how doping affects the resistivity of two different metals. We can see that the aluminum is much more resistant to doping than the copper is. And the copper, on the other hand, is much less. to N-type silicon, and the other is platinum silicide to N- type silicon. And the theoretical curve is shown here with the solid line. There you can see there's reasonable agreement. The data is the bullets that people have measured, like these open squares are for aluminum contacting N- Type silicon, for example. It's a very complex system, but there's a reasonable agreement that it's a good mixture of different materials, and it's not just one type of material. Notice here this is a log-log scale. So we're getting an exponential dependence in the heavily doped regime. So again, as doping is increasing to the left on this x-axis-- so here's a doping of 10 of a 19th. And we see a number of orders of magnitude. Basically force of magnitude drop as they go from 10 to 19 to 10 to the 20. So you say, OK, that's not a big deal. The problem is we know we know. that there are electrical solubility limits. We cannot just arbitrarily keep increasing doping. We're trying to find ways to do it. But you know if you do an implant and you do a certain anneal, you get doping up to a certain value. Maybe depending on the doping, maybe in the future it could be a lot more than we think. We don't know what the limit is yet, but we're looking for ways to get closer to it, he says. the low 20s. Maybe 2 to 4 times 10 to the negative. Beyond that, it's very hard to go much further. The problem is that rho C is not really scaling because of the doping electrical solubility limit. So the contact passivity doesn't scale as we shrink technology. And it's a very, very difficult problem to solve. It's very difficult to get rid of the problem of doping electricalsolubility. It is a very hard problem to overcome. this is a major problem. People are looking for new methods, new materials, whatever, some way of getting the doping up, or a new method of making contact. That's kind of a fundamental issue. In fact, here on slide 11, I show that this is really one of the concerns. This is really a major issue, and it's going to get worse and worse over the next few years. It's a very serious problem, and I think we're going to have to deal with it. This is a table that I took, table 71a, from the 2003 international technology roadmap for semiconductors. I've shown this before, but we hadn't gotten to this contact stage. And just to remind you, in the upper right corner, this is what the MOSFET looks like. And these black regions are the contact regions of the device. And in the middle of the table is the contact region of the transistor, which is called a transistors or transistors. are going to be silicides, either cobalt silicides or nickel silicide. They're a contact between a metal and a heavily doped semiconductor, which is silicon. And if you look at some of the requirements here on the ITRS roadmap, here we are. We'll talk more about that. But the point is they're a Contact between aMetal and a Metal and a Semiconductor. And we'll talk about that more in the coming days and weeks. are in, let's say a year ago, 2003. Look at the maximum contact resistive. This right here is represented what we call rho C. In 2003, they wanted to have about 2 times 10 to the -7th ohm centimeter square. And you notice it's about 1.5 times the current size of the human body. It's a very, very complex system. It takes a long time to get it to work, but once it does, it's a miracle. sort of a light orange color, which means, according to our key, that there is an interim solution on how to get to this is known. But if you go to 2004, you want to lower it according to ITRS about 1.6 times 10 to -7. That's all in yellow, and it's a good place to start, we think. We'll let you know how it goes in the next few days. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. which means their manufacturable solutions are known. They haven't yet been integrated. And when we get to 2008 in the red, to get down to about 0.8 times 10 to -7 ohm centimeter squared, there aren't any known solutions that are manufacturable. So we're coming up against the red brick. We're going to have to find a way to get around it, and it's going to take a long time, but we're getting closer to it. wall here because the device scaling and the need to make the contact size smaller means that we need to drop rho C at this rate. And it's just nobody knows yet how to make a contact that has 0.8 times 10 to the -7 ohm centimeter squared for the wall. "It's just not possible," says the team at the University of California, San Diego. "We need to be able to make contact that is at least 0.7 times 10" specific resistivity. So it's the contacts that are really hurting us. Look at the sheet resistance you might be concerned about. Well, how about the resistance of the metal itself? Resistance of the electrons flowing through the metal is not a real big problem. When you look at the contact contact. specific resistivity, it's really the contact that is hurting us, not the sheet. The contact resistance is really the real problem, and it is the contact contacts that we are really worried about. It's the contact Contact Specific resistivity that is really hurt us. silicide sheet resistance in ohms per square, it needs to be in this range of 6 to 10 ohms each square. That's not a problem. None of that-- that's all in white, which means people know how to do that. The real problem is making these really good low resistivity sheets, which is where the real challenge is for manufacturers to find the right ratio. The answer is to make the sheet resistivity as low as possible, and to do it in a way that doesn't look like a sheet. contacts to the silicon. I just want to show an example of how-- so you get a feel for how the numbers work of how one does a contact resistance calculation. This is shown on slide 12 of your handouts. Again, this is a cross-section of a MOSFET, and it's a very different type of circuit. It's a different kind of circuit that's used for different types of devices, such as a microcontroller or a microprocessor. It can be very different from one to the other. view of a MOSFET. So on the left, you can imagine this region as being the heavily doped source. In the middle shown in orange is the gate. And this is the heavilydoped drain. And these black regions are metal. Could be silicide, but there's a metal region. And there's also a metal drain in the middle of the device. And the black regions could be silicides, but the metal drain is also metal. And so on and so on. I'm showing the dimension of the contact, so the region over which the metal is in contact with the silicon, in this dimension is 0.2 microns wide. OK, now into the page, or into the board, we're assuming that it's 1 micron. And in fact, this is a cross-section view of the metal and silicon contact area. I'm showing that the region of contact between the two is about 0.1 micron wide. And I'm assuming that the surface of the board is about the same size. of the device. If you were to look down on the device, a top view, this is what you would see. This would be your source contact region. Here's your gate in the orange. And here's the drain. And again, the region over which we have to make the metal. This is what we would see if we were to take a look at the device from the top. It would look like the device would be in the top of the screen, with the source and drain regions. contact is assumed to be 0.2 microns in this direction in width and 1 micron in the other direction. So the area of this contact clearly, if the current is going to go flow through it, the area is Going to be0.2 times 1 square microns, or 0. 2 micron squared. If the current was going to flow through this area, it would have to be at least 0.3 times the width of the contact. This would be a diameter of 0.4 microns. So that's the area. Assuming we go back to ITRS, assuming we are here roughly in 2002 and the contact resistivity is about times 10 to -7 ohm centimeter squared, then can calculate the resistance of just the drain contact. Then we can get a better idea of how much water is in the system. We can get an idea of the amount of water that is inside the water system. And then we can work out how much of that water is coming out of the water. itself. The resistance is just that rho C divided by the area of that contact. And you get 100 ohms. So the resistance of the current just to flow through this contact is 100 Ohms on the drain side. It's going to be 100 ohm on the source side, as well. It is going to take a long time to get the power to work properly, but it's worth it in the long run, says the company. It says it will be able to provide power for up to 10 years. well. So that's 200 ohms right there, just to give you a rough idea. And this is equivalent to the ITRS 2003 requirement. So we're talking about 200ohms of the total resistance of the device just being due to the contacts because of the size. And that's a reasonably safe amount. It's not a lot, but it's better than nothing, and it's a lot better than a lot of people think it would be, so we're happy with it. large resistance. So we'll see that the contact resistance actually does dominate. Again, what you could say was, well we'll just make the contact wider, which you can do, but that means your chip ends up being larger. You can't put as many devices on the chip. So there's a lot of work to be done to make the chip smaller and more resistant. But we're getting closer to the point where we'll be able to do that," he said. "We'll see how far we can go in the future." fundamental trade-off here, unless we can get this rho C number down. And that's exactly why this number is dropping with time. People want it to drop because they want to be able to continue to scale the area of the device. It's a problem, though. On slide 13, I'm talking about how we're going to get the number down to a more reasonable level. We're not there yet, but we're working on it, and we'll get there. This is a classic structure to actually measure contact resistance. It's called a Kelvin structure. I took this particular picture out of your textbook, and showed you a structure. If you are studying contacts or if you ever make devices, you always want to know, what is my contact resistance? And this is aClassic structure to measure contact resistant. It’s called a. Kelvin structure, and I showed it to you in your textbook. I’m showing you a Structure to measure Contact Resistance. figure 11-35. There's a reference to it in your textbook, a paper that an article that talks about it in much more detail on how it's actually made. On the left-hand side is showing the mask layout in order to make one of these structures. And what you do is to make a structure that looks like the shape of a circle or a pentagon, for example. And then you add a layer of material to the top of the circle to make it look like a circle. you have these dark regions here that are funny shaped are considered to be the N plus region that you want to contact. So that would be called the n plus diffusion, has this particular shape. The dashed lines represent the metal. So That would be the metal level. So you have to contact that region to get to the other side of the body. You have to go to the opposite side to get the other body. So this is called the 'n plus diffusion' and that is the 'metal level' this is going to take at least three masks to powder. And these little square regions with the X's going through them are the contacts. So that's the region where one layer contacts the layer above it or below it. So this is sort of a planar view. If you want to see more of this, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and click through the gallery for more photos and videos. For more information on the project, visit the project's website. want more of a bird's-eye view of actually how it looks, you can look on the right-hand side. And these L-shaped brackets are made of metal. So there's one here and one here. And basically you perform a four-point kind of measurement. What you're doing is this little region here and this region here. It's basically a measurement of the area around the head of the machine. And it's a very, very small part of the body. that is square in the center that has a dimension of L in one dimension by L in the other. The current then comes through on this leg. So the current flows through the diffusion. Then it flows up through the square, and the current then flows into the center of the square. The square is an L by L squared, so this is a "L by L" by "L" by L square. This is the current that goes through the center, and then the current goes into the centre of the center. the square contact. And then it flows out through probe number two on the metal. So you put an ammeter here. You put anAmmeter between probes 2 and 3, and you measure that current that's flowing through that square contact and then you put a volt meter between probes. And that's how you measure the current that is flowing through the square contact, and then the volt meter is used to measure how much current is flowing out of the metal and into the surrounding space. 1 and 4 and you measure the voltage drop across that face. And then you just divide V divided by I, whatever you measure-- the measured voltage between 1 and 4, divided by the current flowing between 2 and 3. And that is your resistance. and that's going to be the resistance. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 68, 69, 70, 72, 73, 74, 75, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 94,. 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 110. equivalent to rho C divided by the area of the contact, L squared. So this is a very common way to do it. You might say, well, why do you go to the effort of having separate probes? Why don't you just measure the current and the voltage on the device? And the answer is that it's very, very simple. It's a very simple way to measure the voltage and current on a device. It doesn't need to be very complicated. same probe points? And the reason you do this is because you don't want to have extra contact resistance, say, of your probes going down. And there's always a voltage drop there. So the probes through which you force the current are separate from the probesThrough which you measure the current. And the probe points through which the current is measured are separate. So you can use the same probe points to measure different voltages, for example, or voltages in different parts of the system. the voltage. So that, therefore, you're only measuring, really, the voltage drop across this the contact face, the square face. So it's a very common structure, the Kelvin structure, you'll find on a lot of test masks and test circuits that people use to measure the contact resistivity. Here's an example of a Kelvin structure that you can use to test resistivity on a test circuit or a test mask. The Kelvin structure is a common structure and can be found on a number of test circuits and test masks. example shown on slide 11 using a cross-bridge Kelvin structure. You find that you get a current of 10 microamps through the contact, so that's I23. When you measure a voltage drop of about 320 microvolts. What is the specific voltage drop? See slide 11 for more information on the I23 device. For more information, see slide 11: The I23 Device and its Applications. The I 23 Device and Its Applications is published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Royal Institute of Electrical and Electronics. contact resistivity? So you just divide the voltage drop divided by the current. And that gives you a resistance number. In fact, that's 32 ohms. And by definition, that’s equal to rho C divided. by the area of the contact. So you can solve for rhoC here just by. just by looking at the surface of the device and dividing it by the surface area. That gives you the resistance number, which is equal to 32 ohm. multiplying 32 ohms by the area of the contact. And you get 3.2 times 10 to -7 ohm centimeter squared. It's pretty close to the ITRS requirements. Still a little bit high. But it's still about a factor of 2 too high. It just gives you an idea. Typically you typically you get 1.5 times 2 times 3 times 4 times 5 times 6 times 7 times 8 times 9 times 10 times 11 times 12 times 13 times 14 times 15 times 16 times 16 tens of thousands of pounds. use several different dimensions. So you either use a 1 by 1, a 5 by 5, and a 10 by 10 square. And you make sure you get the same specific contact resistivity number over all of those because sometimes you can have current crowding effects. When I drew it, I used a 1-by-1, 5-By-5, and 10- By-10 square. So I had to make sure I had the same resistivity for all of them. in this picture here on page 13, I said the current is uniformly going through that face. So you can imagine a flow of water uniformly flowing with the same flux all across the face. That may or may not be true, depending on the series resistance of this N. It may also be true that the water is flowing uniformly through the whole of the face, but that may or might not be the case as well. It's all a matter of perception, of course, but it's a good way to think about it. plus diffusion and things like that. So you want to use different areas. And for different size areas, you should get the same number. If you don't, then you probably have current crowding effects, and you need a more sophisticated two-dimensional model. So that's a typical way that people would use it, and that's the typical way people would do it. It's not a perfect model, but it's a good one to start with, and it can be used for a lot of things. measure their contact resistance. So that sort of introduces the whole idea of scaling and why we want to do this. I want to bring up some other requirements. We said it's good, it's important, to make a low-resistance contact. But there are other requirements besides that. So clearly we clearly we need to be able to scale this project up and down the world. We need to make sure that we are able to do it in a way that is safe and effective. need to have a high doping concentration at the interface that's going to allow the electrical tunneling to take place. You need to be-- the interface has to be free of contaminants, as I mentioned. You want to get rid of the native oxide. So you preferably use a metal, and you want to use a high-doping metal like zinc or iron or cobalt or nickel. The interface needs to be clear of contaminants to be able to conduct electrical impulses. It's a very complex process, and it takes a long time. that will kind of eat away, if there is any little native oxide, that will eat it away. You don't want a lot of excess carbon or other things at the interface because that's going to cause an increase in your contact resistance. And you clearly don't wants residues. You want to make sure you don't have any residues at all in the material you're working with, because that will also eat away at the surface of the material and make it more difficult to work with. don't want nitride or oxide there. That's one thing to get low-contact resistance. The second thing you want is good thermal stability. You don't want the contact structure to change or degrade in some way during the process. After all, there will be subsequent thermal processing. Once you make those, you can start using them in a variety of ways, including solar panels and other solar cells, and they can be used for solar cells as well as solar panels for solar panels. contacts, you still have to make all that multi-level metal. And those multi- level metal schemes involve annealing steps or deposition steps that could be in the range of 400 to 500 degrees. So you don't want anything weird happening down in your contact when you heat the thing. And in the contact, you have to be careful not to damage the contact when it's heated up to 400 degrees or more. So that's a big concern for a contact maker. particular, you're also very concerned about junction leakage. Remember, this electrical metal, this metal, is making electrical contact to a PN junction. This is an N plus P junction. So you want it to be-- ultimately, this Nplus P junction to have good junction characteristics and low leakage in the electrical metal. You don't want to have an electrical metal that is making contact with an electrical junction that is not designed to make electrical contact with that junction. You want to make sure that that contact is made in a good way. the silicon underneath the contact. So here on slide 15, I'm showing an example of a figure I took out of a text where something very bad has happened, which is called spiking of the metal. And you can see what's happened. The metal is shown here. This is the metal that is spiking, and it's called aluminum. It's a very dangerous metal. It can kill you if you get it in the wrong place. And that's what's happening in this case. And this is my N plus drain or source. And this chip has been heated up. And the aluminum has actually spiked through the junction. So it's actually touching now the P-type silicon. It's essentially shorted out this PN junction. And it's created a lot of voids. And that's what's going to happen with the next generation of chips. That's what we're going to be looking at in the next few years. We're looking forward to it. Aluminum has a finite solubility for silicon. The silicon actually gets sucked into the aluminum and causes this spiking effect. This is one reason why, if you have a very deep junction that's many microns deep-- well, it would never spike because it never gets that deep. But now the junctions are very shallow, they're 0.1 micron or less. So in the old days, this is the way people made contacts. Today if you do this with any kind of reasonably shallow junction, when you go to heat the thing up to do the final forming gas anneal, you're going to spike the junction. Here's an example on slide 16 of what happens in some extreme cases of junction spiking. What we're actually looking at is a junction that has been damaged or destroyed by the heat from the annealing process. We don't want to damage the device, we want to protect the device from the heat of the final formation gas. You can see the way the aluminum has spiked into the silicon. In fact, if you look in plan view at a tilt angle of about 45 degrees, this is a contact region. And around.at-- what I showed you here in the prior slide, is a cross-section view. You can see how the aluminum is spiked into. the silicon, and how the silicon has spiked. into the aluminum, and so on. The result is a material that can be used in a variety of ways. it is oxide. These are 5 by 5 micron holes. So they're fairly large. These were annealed by rapid thermal processing. And then the aluminum layer was removed just to see what happened. And in fact, this was annealing for 10 minutes at 425. So this was aluminum directly in and out of the reactor. It's a very interesting process. It takes a long time to get the reaction that you want. But it's worth the effort. It really is. contact with silicon at 10 minutes at 425. You can see it's created all these voids because there's a solubility of silicon in aluminum. Silicon from the substrate has actually gone up into the aluminum. It leaves behind voids, which end up being filled by the overlying aluminum. And it ends up being a much better solution than the traditional method of coating the surface with a layer of silicon. It's a much more stable solution. It doesn't take as much time to get the same effect. when you etch the aluminum off, you see all these holes. And if you do RTP at a lower temperature here, 350 for ten seconds, you don't see nearly as many spikes, nearly as much holes. But 350 for 10 seconds is really too low for any backend processing. So you have to do it at a higher temperature, which is what we're doing here. We're doing it at 350 for five or six seconds. And then we'll do it again at the same temperature. this is why you never put aluminum directly in contact with silicon unless you're making a really deep junction, like a micron-deep junction, you have some kind of device. But in MOSFETs today, the typical source drain junctions are 0.1 microns. So this is sort of a classic case of 'this is a very, very bad thing to do to a device,' he says. "It's a really, really bad idea to put aluminum in contact" with silicon, he adds. junction spiking. There are a couple of different solutions people have come up with over the years. One of them is shown here on slide 17, although it's not perfect. People had the idea of, well, don't use pure aluminum. Use an alloy of aluminum with 1% to 2% silicon. It's not a perfect solution, but it's a better one than what we have now. It would be better than using pure aluminum, but not as good as it could be. The silicon is soluble in the aluminum. If you put silicon in the metal itself, so when you sputter, you don't sputter pure aluminum. You sputter an alloy of aluminum and silicon. Then you think, well, OK, it won't suck up any silicon from the metal. It won't be able to do it. It's not going to work. It doesn't work. You can't make it work. There's no way to get it working. You have to make it in a different way. substrate because it's already in equilibrium. It's already got all the silicon it needs, the aluminum eutectic. So it's not a problem. But it's still a bit of an issue is that the silicon itself can actually precipitate out of the aluminum as an example. It has to be heated, and then cooled to a very low temperature before it can be used in the device. It can't be heated to a high temperature because it would cause the material to melt. they remove the aluminum film. And you get these little silica precipitates, which can increase the specific contact resistance, especially in N-type silicon. So it's making an aluminum 1% silicon contact to silicon, which was, again, after pure aluminum, people did the aluminum 1%, silicon solution. Was a solution maybe maybe a solution to the problem of how to get rid of aluminum in silicon? I don't know if there's a solution, but that's what we're trying to figure out. in the 1980s or so, but again, it's still not something that people typically do because you're going to get a higher contact resistance. And you can still get spiking. It's not a perfect solution. But that was one solution that people did use at one point. The way people used to use it is not the way people now use it. It was a different way of dealing with it. But it was a way to deal with it, and it was used for a long time. A barrier layer forms a barrier between this aluminum and the silicon. The barrier has a very low specific contact resistivity. So it still makes a good contact, but it doesn't have the same level of resistivity as a normal layer. It's a good way to keep the material in contact with the surface of the device, but not too close to the surface that it can be damaged by it. It can also be used to protect the material from UV light, for example. It is a very effective way to prevent damage to the material. allow the aluminum or the silicon to talk to each other. So you cannot get this void formation. You can't get the spiking. Typical barrier layers might be a thin layer of titanium, say 1,000 angstroms of titanium is often used, or use sputter tie tungsten or maybe tie. tie tengsten ormaybe tie. tengststen or tie tie.tie tungsten or maybe ties. tie tie tngsten or ties.tie. tie. silicide. So in between the heavily doped silicon, you now have an inter layer of this material that forms a barrier. So this prevents the chemical interdiffusion between the silicon and the aluminum. Generally has low stress. You pick a material that has good adhesion so it doesn't peel off. It has to be strong enough to withstand high temperatures and high pressure. It can't be too strong or too weak. It must be able to withstand a lot of stress and high temperatures. And of course, good electrical conductivity and low contact resistance silicon aluminum. So that's to satisfy all of these things. And these materials, titanium and tungsten, have reasonable contact resistivity. They are still not low enough to meet a lot of the ITRS requirements in the future, but today they're not too low to meet today's requirements. But they're still good enough to satisfy some of the needs of the time, and that's what we're trying to do. good enough. Oh, this is just-- on slide 19, I took from a different textbook. This is a figure from Mayer and Lau. I had mentioned Mayer--Lau textbook at the very beginning of this course. So you have a reference to it. And this was just an example of in the book. And it was in a different section of the book, so you have to go back and look at it again to see what it is. It was in the same section as the book that you're reading. his book how he's saying titanium may work as a sacrificial barrier. May or may not exactly work this way, but it's one potential methodology. You can imagine having a thin layer of titanium with aluminum on top. When you heat the structure, you may get formation of TiAl3 for the barrier. It's a potential methodology that could be used in the future to create a barrier in a way that is more resistant to corrosion. It could also be used as a way to create new materials. some time and portion. And then you heat it a little bit longer and all the titanium is consumed. So the idea is you put down enough titanium that you're not going to end up with an aluminum incursion. So here at this point in D, you can start to get the aluminum incursions. And that's what we're trying to do with the titanium in this case. We want to make sure that we have enough titanium in there that we don't need to add any more. up with a spiking problem. 1,000 angstroms of titanium seems to be adequate barrier layer. But again, it depends on your backend thermal budget. Slide 20 is just another example saying that depending on the situation, the barrier layer can be different for different types of gas. And typically, if you want to anneal a typical forming gas anneals, 450 or so, 1,00 angstromS of titanium is adequate. But it depends. on the back end of the process. Barrier layer that you choose, you have to be careful. Ti-tungsten or Ti-nitride are very often-- they're polycrystalline, basically. And what can happen if you're not careful is the aluminum can actually diffuse through the long grain boundaries and can still make a difference. It's a very, very complex process. It takes a long time to get it right, but it's worth it in the long run. It makes a huge difference in the performance of the device. its way to the silicon and end up causing problems. So people often, when they deposit these material, they sometimes sputter them in an ambient that has some impurity. Could be nitrogen, is one of the most common. Sometimes people actually do sputter Ti-tungsten, and then they expose it to the ambient, and it can cause problems. It can cause damage to the material if it is exposed to too much nitrogen or other impurities. It could also cause problems if the material is exposed too long to silicon. air for a period, a few minutes or half an hour. Then they put the aluminum on top. The idea is that these either nitrogen or oxygen impurities are going to end up being very high concentration in these grain boundaries. This is called a stuffed barrier. By stuffing the air, they can create a very high level of oxygen and nitrogen in the air. This creates a high concentration of these impurities in the grain boundaries, which can be removed by melting the grain and adding the aluminum. grain boundaries, it helps prevent the aluminum from diffusing down in and getting to the silicon. You're going to put aluminum on top here. You need to try to prevent the incursion of the aluminum. So how do you do the grain boundaries? We do a heat treatment. We do the heat treatment and then we put the silicon on top of it. We then put the aluminum on the top of the silicon and we do theheat treatment. And then we try to stop the aluminum getting into the silicon, so that the silicon doesn't get melted. sputtering of the barrier layer is actually very important. What ambient you use will determine whether it's a good barrier layer or a poor barrier layer and how long it's going to stand up. So a lot of it's quasi empirical, just testing of what works. On this page 21, we look at how to create a barrier layer that doesn't break down when it's exposed to the elements. We also look at some of the techniques that have been used to create barrier layers in the past. I'm showing a classic process that was developed a number of years ago called the salicide process. And this is something you need to be familiar with. Salicide stands for-- the sal comes from self-aligned silicide process, and you'll see when we go through it what we mean by self- aligned. I'll be back next week with a look at the next step in the process, which will be a step-by-step guide to the next stage of the process. So we start here with our naked device ready to be contacted. We don't have any contacts. We just have N plus source and drain. And you have a heavily doped polysilicon layer. We then form our oxide spacers. So you know how to form sidewall spacers now. You deposit them into the device and then you're ready to go. You're ready for the next step, which is to make the device talk back to you. You can do this by sending an e-mail to [email protected] a conformal layer of SiO2, say low temperature oxide, and then you etch it back anisotropically. So you end up with these little stringers on the edges, which we call sidewalls. OK, those are critical. So they're going to form sort of a blocking region, which will be critical in the next generation of nanomaterials. That's what we're working on now. We're looking at a range of different materials, but this is the first time we're doing it in this way. the salicide process. We then deposit metal, M, over everything. So you can do some kind of PBD deposition. And here's your titanium layer that goes everywhere, obviously across the whole wafer. And then you do a magic anneal at the right temperature. And this anneals is such that wherever in the wafer that metal is deposited, it stays there for the duration of the process. The process is known as PBD depositing, which is a type of deposition. the metal, the titanium, is contacting the silicon, you form a metal silicide, say TiSi2. So it only forms where it's in contact with silicon, which is right here, this dark region, and on top of the gate. Everywhere else you have still remaining some unreacted metal. Now, a key to the processes that you dip it in some solution-- sometimes it's HF, sometimes sulfuric-- that removes unreacting metal but that removes the metal. that does not etch the silicide itself. So we've created a material, a titanium di silicide or a metal disilicide, that because of the virtue of its chemical structure, it now stands up to the etch, which will remove the unreacted metal. So the reason it's called self-aligned, you notice that you notice it's self- aligned, and that's why it's a self-destructive material. That's why we call it self-aligning. I did not have to do any photolithography to pattern this metal. The metal was deposited over the entire chip. It was reacted with the silicon, and then it was just etched off in a blanket etch. So there's no photoresist step here to patternThis metal. That's why it's so different from other metals. It's not a pattern, it's just a pattern. It doesn't need to be patterned, it just needs to be etched off. self-aligned because wherever there's exposed silicon, you will end up with a metal contact, a line to that exposed silicon. So this was a really great invention. You would save yourself an alignment tolerance. So it's very good alignment. You form a low, low line to the surface of the silicon. It's a really good way to get the right shape of the material. It doesn't require a lot of work to get it in the right place. It is a very, very good invention. resistance contact to the source drain and to the gate simultaneously. So this kind of a salicide process was a big breakthrough in CMOS technology, say around the 80s or so. Slide 22, I just took from a different text. It has a slightly different type of drawing. Maybe it's maybe it's the same as the one on the bottom of the page. I don't know. It's just a different kind of drawing, I'm not sure what it is. easier to understand. They have a little different notation. It's the exact same process. You have an N plus source and drain. You form your spacers. You react the metal. It does not react. Hopefully it does not creep up the sidewall, which is a problem. It is the basic salicide process. There is no difference between the two processes. They are both the same. The only difference is that the process is a little bit more complicated and takes a little more time. problem. You then selectively remove the unreacted metal form, put your dielectric down everywhere else, and put in your metal contacts. So that's a basic metal contact scheme that people use today. What do people use? Which materials are commonly used? Well, some of them are shown here on slide. Some of the materials are shown in the slide below, such as zinc, lead, nickel, magnesium, copper, nickel and zinc. They are used in a variety of different ways. The first one that was used historically was Ti-silicide. It was very good because it has a low resistivity phase. There's a little difficulty, though. As people get older, they don't want to use it as much as they used to. It's not as good as it used to be, but it's better than nothing at the end of the day. It has a better resistivity than Ti-Silicide, but not as high as it once was. It also has a lower resistivity. make the polysilicon gate length shorter, it's harder and harder to get this particular phase to form. This is called the narrow line effect or the narrow width effect. Ti-silicide also has a tendency to agglomerate when it's very thin at higher annealing temperature. So it's important to make sure the gate length is not too short to prevent this from occurring in the first place. For more information on Ti-Silicide click here. it's not that thermally stable. Industry moved a number of years ago primarily from Ti-silicide, although some people may still use it, to cobalt bisilicide. It does not have that narrow line effect, but it gives you a slightly different look. It's not as strong as Ti-Silicide but it's still a good alternative to it. It gives you the same effect but a slightly more subtle one, so it's not quite as strong. It doesn't have the same narrow-line effect but it does give you a more subtle effect. higher resistivity. It's a little more sensitive to surface contaminants. Cobalt has a little less lateral encroachment over the oxide spacer. The beauty of Ti is, again, the titanium eats its way through things, through oxides, sort of reduce oxides. So cobalt, you have to have a really clean interface. You have to be able to get rid of all of the contaminants on the surface of the material. You need to have an extremely clean interface with cobalt. Cobalt was used and is still used in some processes. The latest silicide that people are exploring in research and development-- and at some point will probably be in production-- is nickel silicide. Nickel silicide has the lowest silicon consumption. In order to make it, you need to use a lot of cobalt. So cobalt has to be used to make the silicide, and it has to have a high level of nickel in it. And the nickel has a low level of silicon in it, so it doesn't need as much silicon. do this, you need to consume some of the silicon. And you don't want to consume very much of that shallow junction. So nickel is good because of that. It can be formed at very low temperatures. And it doesn't have very bad narrow line. It doesn't need to be very thick or very thin. It's a good material to work with. It has a very low temperature and doesn't require a lot of power. It is a very good material for the production of semiconductors. effect for silicide in the gate. Big problem with nickel is you have to be careful of your thermal budget. And watch out for nickel. Nickel is a very fast diffuser, remember, in silicon. nickel is also a deep level. So nickel contamination of equipment and of the wafers is a big problem. It's very hard to get rid of nickel from silicon. It is very difficult to remove from silicon and other materials. It can be very difficult for people to do this. an issue. And people need to deal with this. But nickel silicide is becoming more and more prevalent in research and development. I mentioned there was a problem with this encroachment over the spacer. And this is illustrated on slide 24. On the left-hand side, I'm showing the case of a nickel-silicide-emitting device. It was used to kill an animal in a lab, but it was too dangerous to use it in the real world. It's a problem that needs to be addressed. a cobalt disilicide formation where it's the metal that diffuses. So you can imagine that you have this metal that's deposited everywhere. And you're going to form a reaction between the metal and the silicon. The question is, how does the reaction occur? Does the metal diffuse in and meet the silicon down at this interface or vice versa? Well, it depends on the particular type of silicide. In the case of cobalt Disilicide, the metal diffuses through the silicide into this interface here and then reacts. so you get silicide reaction or formation at the bottom here. The silicon is what's the fast diffuser through the Ti-silicide. It diffuses up and meets the metal. So if you do it long enough and if you have a short enough spacer, you. less likely to have creep up. The titanium disilicide is made from titanium dioxide, which is a form of silicon dioxide. It has a high melting point of around 2,000 degrees Fahrenheit. It is used in a range of products, including the latest iPhones and iPads. can see the disilicide can creep and grow up from the source and drain down from the gate. And eventually you may actually bridge. And then you have a big problem because then your gate is electrically shorted to your source and drains and then your device is dead. So you have to be very careful with what you put in there. It's a very, very dangerous thing to do to a device that is supposed to be a security device. It can be very dangerous to put anything in there that is not supposed to. titanium disilicide has a little more tendency to do this than the cobalt disilicides. This is part of the reason people went to cobalt despite, the fact, it has a slightly higher resistivity. Slide 25 is just kind of an illustration of some of the kinetics of what's happening when you use cobalt and titanium together in the same solution. It's a little bit of a mix of the two, but cobalt is the better choice. you have titanium on silicon that's reacting. Here we have a certain thickness of Ti-silicide that's already formed. People do model this. There are silicide models in SUPREM-IV. Not necessarily perfectly accurate, but what people model is the diffusion of the silicon from the bulk through the titanium disilicide up. That's what we're trying to do in this case. It's not perfect, but it's a good starting point for us to work from. We'll see how it goes from there. here to this top interface and form a new layer of titanium disilicide. So this is what might happen in an inert ambient. Now, if you do the anneal in a nitriding ambient, so in an ambient that has nitrogen, at the same time, you're forming Ti-silicide at this interface. The titanium is fairly reactive. You can be reacting in form Ti-nitrite up here at the top interface. This would be in a nitrogen ambient, you can get simultaneous formation of Ti-Silicide down here and then Ti- Nitride on top of the titanium. reactive, so it's not unusual to try to form a Ti-nitride to prevent it from oxidizing. Slide 26 shows you some of the different uses of silicide in silicon technology. And I've actually updated it. I added a fourth one. So silicide are used, as you can see, to strap down a device. And they are also used in the production of semiconductors, such as solar cells, which are used to make solar cells and solar panels. the poly. And the reason you do that is you're trying to reduce the resistance of the gate. So you form a little silicide during the salicide process. Strap the junctions. Well, what does that mean? Again, you're going to reduction the sheet resistance of this junction by forming a. silicide. The poly. and the poly. the poly is used in a variety of products, including computer monitors, televisions, computers, phones, and more. thin layer. It also forms a barrier layer, as we mentioned. It can be used as a local interconnect. Here the silicide has actually been formed above this oxide. So some silicon must have been deposited prior to that. And finally, it can be use as a gate material. And it can also be used to form a layer of superconducting material, such as a superconductor or superconductive material, for example, or a superconductivity material for superconductors. at the end, I've added a few slides that show you that people are actually using silicides as metal gates. This is a table here shown on slide 26 of some of the common silicides and some of their important properties. So here you notice for Ti-silicide there are two. For Ti-Silicide there were two different types of silicides that were used in the production of Ti- silicide. For the Ti- Silicide, there was one type of silicide that was used and one that was not. phases. There is a phase called the C49 phase. That forms at low temperatures. So if you were anneal the titanium and react it with silicon, say around 600-- you get a resistivity of about 60 to 70 micro ohm centimeter. That's too high for the film resistivity for most applications. So people typically do a low temperatureAnneal to form the C 49 phase. They then etch off all the unreacted titanium. They put it back in the RTA and they pop it up to 800 or 900 to do a high temperature anneals. form the C54 phase, which has a much lower sheet resistance. Nice thing about Ti-silicide, it's reasonably stable, maybe up to about 800, 900 degrees, something like that. It does consume a fair amount of silicon. So it consumes 2.2 or 2.3 or so nanometers of silicon per every nanometer of Ti-Silicide. It's a fairly stable material, too, up to around 800 to 900 degrees. That's a pretty good temperature. of metal that's consumed. Depending on how thick of a silicide you're trying to form, you may eat into your junction. If you have a very shallow junction, you have to watch out. You don't want to eat in too far. So cobalt disilicide is another example here. You may have to eat into the junction of your silicide to get it to form a thick enough layer to be used as a metalicide. But depending on the thickness of the silicide, you could eat into it too much. The modern silicide that I mentioned here is this nickel silicide, NiSi. It's formed at very low temperatures, 450 or 500 degrees. And it's got a somewhat higher resistivity. This is the temperature at which it's formed. It consumes a little bit less than the case of titanium. The modern silicides are made of nickel, cobalt and cobalt-nickel alloy. They are made from nickel, nickel-cadmium alloy and nickel-titanium alloy. has a low consumption, only 1.8 nanometers of silicon consumed per nanometer of metal. One thing about this, though, if you look at the stability temperature-- look at this column here called stable on silicon. Be very careful. People have listed nickel silicide as being stable up to about 650. It's a very dangerous substance. It can kill you. It is very dangerous. It has a very low consumption. It’s a very, very dangerous product. It kills you. It may not even be stable that high. Maybe 600 or so. So unlike some of these others, which you can heat up Ti-silicide or platinum, you can't. You cannot do that with nickel silicide. So if you're using a Nickel silicide process, you're probably not going to be able to get a very high temperature for a long period of time. It could be a few days or even a few weeks before you get the results you want. It's a very, very complex process. going to be limited to a lower backend temperature. But you can get reasonably low sheet resistance. Slide 27, I just want to show you an example. And we'll go through these calculations at the end of the lecture. But I want to go on and do the gate material. We're going to go through the calculations. We'll go on to the next slide and do a gate material analysis. We will go through all of this in the lecture at the beginning of the next week. work first. But what this is is a cross section of a MOSFET. And we've seen this cross-section a number of times now in our class. We now have enough ammunition that we can actually go sit down and calculate all these resistances or estimate them given a geometry of work first. It's a very exciting time for us. We're looking forward to seeing what the future holds for us in the space of years to come. It will be exciting to see how far we can go in the future. a particular device. So the resistance that we really, when we scale the channel length, what we're really trying to scale is the channel resistance, R chan. OK, that's fine. We make the channel shorter, we can reduce that resistance. But the problem is, what happens to-- if we don't do that, then the resistance goes up. And that's where we're trying to figure out a way to reduce the resistance, so that we can make the device smaller. do something to all these other parasitic resistances, the net resistance of the device is really not going to go down by very much. So there are three resistances we really want to be able to think about. One is this little resistor right here, which is the resistance associated with the device. The other two resistances are the resistances associated with different types of batteries. And the third is the resistance associated with a different type of power supply, such as an AC or DC supply. with the source drain extension. It has a certain sheet resistance. It's doped to a certain level, it's usually very shallow. So this resistance of theSource drain extension is one resistance we have to calculate. The second one is the resistance of this resistance to the drain extension, which is usually a very shallow junction depth. This resistance is one of the reasons why it's so difficult to calculate the drain resistance. The other reason is that it has to be a certain junction depth, which can be very shallow as well. region here, R, that-- and generally, this region has been silicided. You notice the source drain extension is under the spacer by definition. So the current has to flow strictly through the silicon. So it will have a certain higher resistivity. In this case, this area is the source of the current that is flowing through the device. The current is coming from the source spacer, which is in the center of the device, not the top of it. It's the source that is causing the current to flow. is blue. So it's going to have a lower resistivity. It's got a metal on top of it. So that's the second resistor we need to calculate. The third one is the resistance of the contact itself. so it's the contact resistance from the current flowing through. It is also the resistance that the current is flowing through when it is connected to the device. It can also be used to measure the temperature of the device, for example, or to measure how hot it is. the silicon up into the metal. And that would calculate if we know the area and the specific contact resistivity. So all three of these-- the source drain extension resistance, the silicide resistance, and the contact resistance-- all three are going to add up to give us different contributions depending on where we are in the world. And so that's what we're trying to do here in the lab. We're trying not to go too far away from where we're already at. We want to make sure that we're at the right place. on the geometry. I'm going to hold off for now because I want to make sure we cover the novel gate material aspects. But we'll come back to this. And you should be able to sit down at this point and do a calculation of this. I want you to go through the calculation and see if you can do it. If you can, then you can play the game. If not, you can go back to the beginning and do the calculation again. And if you're not able to do it, you should go back and do it again. and calculate all three of these things and see what they look like for modern technology. Let's go on for now to slide-- there's one more-- by the way, I sort of didn't tell you the whole truth. I said there are three resistors, this one,. this one, and this one. And this one is the most powerful of the bunch. And that's the one that's going to be used in the next generation of computers. And it's the only one that will be able to do that. one. There is another resistance called the spreading resistance. And that's actually pictured-- it cannot be calculated by hand, but it's there. It's not quite that simple. These back-of-the-envelope calculations are terrific because you can do them in five minutes in class or in 10 minutes in your office or whatever. But it's not as easy as you think. It can take up to 10 minutes to do a whole series of calculations on the same subject. actually pictured on page 28 here, just to give you an idea. This first was discussed by Ming and Lynch back in the late 80s. But what it is is you have this channel region that's very, very thin. Typically the channel where the electrons are the holes are traversing is the thinest channel in the universe. This is the channel that's being used by quantum computers to send information. It's a very complex process. It takes a long time for the electrons to travel through this thin channel. across and they're going across the gate length, that's maybe only 30 angstroms thick. So that's where the current is all flowing in the channel. It's a very, very high density of carriers. The current then spreads out as it goes into the source drain extension. This is such an important part of the power grid, it's very rare to see this kind of activity in such a large part of a power grid. It really is a very exciting time for the industry. old paper. It's before they had source drain extensions. But you can imagine it then spreads out here into this region over certain distance. And how far it spreads out and exactly how it spread out depends on the doping and the geometry of the structure. It is a very two-dimensional structure. And it's a very 2D structure, so you can see it spreading out over a very long distance. But how far and how far depends on doping and how the structure is designed. problem. You can't calculate it by hand. So this that's called the RSP here in this little diagram where he wrote down the different resistances. So our spreading is one that generally has to be computed either by a two-dimensional simulator or you have to get it out of test. It's one of the most difficult problems in the world of computer science. It is a very difficult problem to solve. It can be very difficult to calculate by hand, and it can be extremely difficult to test. devices or some kind of test structures. It's not something you can simply calculate by hand. But it is a major contributor-- it can be a major contribution to the total series resistance. So it's something we need to be concerned about. But I just want to point out, so far, it's not a big deal, I'm not worried about it, I just say it's important to keep an eye on it, and keep an ear to the ground, and make sure it doesn't change. those three resistances we can calculate by hand, that gives you the minimum series resistance of the device. There will always be a little extra, which is spreading resistance, which you have to simulate in a two-dimensional simulator. That's how we make contacts. I just wanted to go on and on and go on with this story. It's a great story, and I just want to keep going on with it. I don't want to stop. I want to continue. spend most of the remaining time of the lecture and talk about something else that's come up in the last three or four years, which is related directly to the contacts. It turns out we can also use silicides not only for the contacts, but we can fully fully use them for contacts, as well as the contacts themselves. We can also fully use silicide for contacts as well, and we can use it for contacts in other ways as well. It's a very exciting time for us. silicide the gate and use it for the gate. And I think I showed you this slide last time, page 29. It was taken directly from the last lecture. I just wanted to remind you that there are some new gate materials that are coming along. This is the more advanced version of the slide that I showed last time. It's on page 29, and it's on the right side of the page. It shows how to use the new gate material to make a gate. classical older technology, the traditional technology. This is a photo from an Intel device. It's a somewhat older photo now. This was published back in about five years ago in 2000. And what it shows is what we've just exactly been talking about. Here's the polysilicon gate. These are the are the old Intel devices. They're the ones we're talking about here. We're not talking about the new Intel devices, we're just talking about old Intel technology. sidewall spacers. You know how to form them. And this is the silicide in the source. You can see it looks very dark because it's been silicide. And the silicides in the drain. So that was the salicide processed just by the gate. And that's the Silicide that's been formed on the gate and the Silicides that have been added to the source and the drain to create the Silica. So, that was. the salicides processed just from the gate to the drain and the silica that has been created on the source to make the Source Silicide and the Drain Silicide. the process exactly what we just talked about. That's the classical type of structure. We talked last time, though, that polysilicon can only be doped so high. Maybe you can get it to 10 to the 20. But that's not enough carriers to prevent it from being used in a way that could be harmful to the human body. We'll have to wait and see what happens with the next generation of nanomaterials, which could be much more versatile. We're looking forward to the day when they can be used in all manner of products. depletion of the polysilicon at very high gate biases. So people are concerned. They want to get rid of poly as the gate material. It doesn't have enough carriers. Polysilicon may only have maybe 5 times 10 to the 20 electrons per cubic. And you get apolysilicon depletion effect. It's a big problem for the semiconductor industry, and it's going to get bigger and bigger as the years go on, says Dr. Michael Bociurki. "They would like to replace the poly with a gate, with a metal gate. A metal has 10 to the 23rd.centimeter. So it's three orders of magnitude higher carriers," he says. "So it's not going to get depleted. So they want to remove the semiconductor from the gate," he adds. "But poly is poly. They want to replace it with a semiconductor." "They want to take it out of the gate and put it in a new part of the chip," he concludes. an extremely easy material to integrate. People know how to etch it. It's not reactive with SiO2. That's not the case for metals. So here's an example. Last time, I went through a process called the replacement gate process where we showed they actually used poly. They dug into it and found out it was poly. It was an extremely easy process to do, and it was an example of how it can be done in a variety of ways, including using poly. it out at the very end of the process. They etched out the poly, and they replaced it with a high-K material like hafnium dioxide and a Ti-nitride gate. So this was an example of something published about six months ago. So people are thinking of replacing poly, but it's not as easy as they'd like to think. It's a long way off, but we're getting closer to the day when we'll be able to use it in a variety of ways. got a lot of complex process integration. An easier process integration that people are considering is rather than digging the poly out. Whenever you etch out the poly, you always expose the very sensitive oxide silicon interface. So that's typically, from an integration point of view, digging out thepoly. That's typically not the best way to do it, from a process integration point-of-view. It's a very, very difficult process to do, but you can do it if you have the right equipment. poly is not that desirable. They said, well, why don't we just take the polysilicon and fully react it with a metal. Put enough metal there, instead of, in this case, they only put a very thin amount of metal, so it is not a very desirable product. It is a silicide. It's a very good product. But it's not very desirable. It doesn't have the same properties as a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) product. only reacts to form maybe several hundred angstroms of silicide. People are saying, all right, we'll put enough metal on top of that, make it really thick metal, so that it reacts. And it reacted at a high enough temperature for long enough time that the metal reaction takes place. That's what happened in this case. It was a very, very complex reaction. It took a long time to get it to work. It's a really, really complex reaction, and it took a lot of time to make it work. throughout the entire poly. And you get a silicide all the way down to the gate interface. And here's an example of nickel silicide, fully silicided gate that was published about six months ago by annealing at 450 degrees and using a thick enough layer of nickel. So not only do you get the silicide in the poly, you also get the gate as well. You get a Silicide in every part of the poly. You also get a gate in every aspect of the gate, including the interface. are silicides being used in the source and drain, but they're also being used fully in the gate. Now, this is different from the salicide process. One reason would be is the gate's usually reasonably tall. The gate may be 1,000 angstroms tall, something like that. So you need to use silicides in both places. It's a different process, but it's the same process. It just takes a bit of time to get used to it. put enough metal down that you can silicide all the way through 1,000 angstroms. Now, on the source and drain, you don't want to be siliciding down 1, thousand angstrom's. So if you're going to do a FUSI process for the engine, you need to have enough metal for the whole process. The junction depth is about 1,00 angstromS, so you need enough metal to do the entire process. For more information, go to www.fusi.org. gate, you actually need to have two different siliciding steps. You need to cover them and protect them then, and then open up the gate and use a thick amount of metal to try to fully silicide the gate. So it's a little-- it's still tricky. It's not as simple as using the old fashioned salicide process where the thickness that you silicide on the gate was the same as the thickness you went in the source and drain. That's not how it works. and drain. It's different from that. But it's not quite as complicated as completely replacing the gate in the etch-out process. In fact, I've got here-- showing here you on slide 30 some fairly recent results from the last couple of years of how people have made nickel silicide FUSI. And that's what we're going to show you on the next slide. And it's going to be a little bit different than what we've shown you before. FUSI is the acronym for fully silicided gate. How they've made this-- and this particular article came out two years ago from AMD. And what they're showing here is a method to form this. And so they do the standard transistor fabrication or flow here. So this is their polymer fabrication. This is their transistors. And this is the way they make it. And it's called a FUSI gate. It's an acronym for Fully Silicided Gate. gate. And here they've actually formed a little bit of silicide in the source and drain and a littlebit on top of the gate. So they did the standard salicide process at this point. Now they have to do a plan arising step. So to get from here to the gate, they had to go through a series of steps. They had to use a mixture of water and chemicals to create the silicide. And then they went through a process to get it into the gate and out. here, what they had to do is they had a metal and maybe some other harder material-- no, sorry. They had to put, yeah, contact material, and then maybe a dielectric over the entire thing. And then CNP it down so it's planarized because you know they're going to use it in a way that's going to be very, very difficult to get to in the future. It's a very difficult process to get it to work in the first place. to get deposition everywhere. So they planarized it. And they expose, then-- in the plane rising process, they expose the polysilicon gate. And then they can then put down metal here, and a thick layer of metal, and react it all the way to the interface. So here they have this. The process is called plane rising. It's a process of depositing material on top of another material to get it to form a structure. The material is then exposed in a process known as planarization. very thick region where the entire gate has been silicided. And you notice during this last process here on the right, there's no siliciding happening down in the source and drain because that's all been protected during this process. So it's certainly easier than the replacement gate scheme that showed up in the first place, but it's not as easy as it first appeared to be, as you can see from the pictures. It's a lot of work, but we're getting better at it. last time. And it also avoids the PVD damage to the gate oxide. If I'm going to etch this gate out and I have to deposit a metal by PVD, your PVD processes can be very energetic. You often use some kind of sputtering where you have ions. And you often use a process that uses ions to create the oxide. It's a very, very complex process, but it's very safe and it doesn't damage the metal. It doesn't cause the metal to corrode or anything like that. can cause damage to the gate oxide. This doesn't have that at all because when you deposit the nickel, the nickel is going on up here. And then it diffuses in a siliciding process to get down to the bottom. Here's an example of an electron micrograph of one of the compounds used in the material. The material is made from nickel, cobalt, nickel-cadmium, nickel oxide, and nickel-titanium. It is also known as nickel-metal hydride (NmH) or nickel-tin oxide (TnO) those devices. This gate has been fully silicided. So this is all nickel silicide. This very thin white layer is the gate oxide, very thin. And this layer here is the silicon channel. This is an SOI device. They've made a very short channel device, only something between 35 and 40 nanometers. It's a very ultra-thin body device, or reasonably thin body device. this is just another image here on slide 31, another image of that gate. an SOI, it's only 25 nanometers thick. And they have oxide and nitride spacers on either side. The point they were trying to make with this was that the nickel did not diffuse in to the silicon. Of course, it is a little hard to tell from this. The nice thing is that the SOI is only 25nanometers thick, so it's not very heavy. It's also not very hot, so there's no need to worry about overheating. about it, if you zoom in on the gate oxide-- so this is the gate dielectric, which is shown here by this amorphous material. It's about 2.1 nanometers thick. This is the metal gate now it's nickel silicide. It went down and it stopped at the gate stopped, reacting with the gate. And this is. the silicon channel region. People were concerned that the nickel might diffuse in and react with the oxide. But according to this particular temperature and time that they. did, they get a reasonably smooth interface. Remember, you can care about that because it's going to be the channel. So you don't want to get any nickel into that channel. This is, on slide 32, that, that is, that's what we're trying to do with this chip. The carriers are going tobe flowing right in the silicon underneath this. So we want to make it as smooth as possible for the carriers to flow through it. That's what this chip is designed to do. same paper. They also did some Auger analysis. Remember, we talked about Auger spectroscopy as being a means of measuring the composition. So this is a vertical scan through the device. So what they're actually doing is going back here, they're the Auger experiment, and it's the same paper. Same paper. Similar to the one we showed you earlier in the week, but this time it's a different paper. It's a new type of paper. And it's published in the Journal of Chemical Technology. they're sputtering right through here. And through the center of the gate, they're looking at what comes off, what they see, what Auger electrons as they sputter. So here we see atomic concentration in percent as a function of depth, essentially. So this is the surface over here, and you can see the atomic concentration over there. And you can also see what's happening on the inside of the reactor. And that's what we're trying to get at here. can see that the red line is the nickel. The blue is the silicon. This is the thickness of the gate from the surface here to this point here, to the gate oxide. And what you see is there's quite a bit of silicidation, which is mostly nickel silicide. It is mostly Nickel silicide, and it is a very, very strong chemical. It has a very strong anti-oxidant effect. It's a very powerful chemical. And it's very strong. It can kill a lot of people. looks like here there's a little bit of silicon-- or here you have the silicon in the SiO2. And then this is the oxide beneath. So you just get some idea. This looks like it's fairly stoichiometric, almost 1 to 1 silicon to nickel. Maybe a little bits of nickel-rich, too, but it's a pretty stoichiometrical system. It's a very, very complex system, and it's going to take a long time to get it to work. using the types of techniques we talked about in our characterization lectures. This is a paper-- that last paper was from IEDM 2002 applied by AMD. IBM the same year also published at the same conference nickel silicide FUSI gates. This time they did them in a different way. It's a different paper. It doesn't use the same techniques as the last one. It uses a different technique. It is not the same technique as the one used in the last paper. not only on fully depleted SOI. I just showed you a silicon insulator device. They also did it on a device, which is called a FinFET. We haven't had any time, really, to go into these new types of devices, but there are silicon MOSFETs these days that are not SOI-based. They're called silicon insulators and they're called FinFets. They can be used to insulate silicon from other materials. being made in a planar structure. There's a device that emits very non-planar called the FinFET, when in fact, people form a fin. And the channel of the device is actually into the page. So it's into the board. The electrons actually flow along the side walls. Electrons actually flow in a non-Planar way. It's a very different way of looking at the universe, and it's very different from the way we see it now. flow right along here. And the source and drain are into the board. This is a device. And you have a gate on the right side and a gate in the left side. In fact, the gate kind of wraps around. So this whole thing ends up being a channel. It's a channel that goes from one side to the other. It has a gate that wraps around and a board that goes into the other side. And it has a drain that goes to the right and a drain to the left. that has some advantages, although it's a little tricky to make. It's a double gate device. You end up getting two channels in this thin silicon film. So they may have FinFET and they demonstrated they could make a nickel silicide gate going all the way around that fin. In the future, they may be able to use this technology to make superconducting nanotube devices, for example, in the next generation of superconductors and nanotubes. fact, this is the gate dielectric shown here, this amorphous-looking region with nickel silicide on the outside. Again, using a FUSI process where they put poly everywhere, put down the appropriate amount of nickel, and then reacted it. And the reaction stopped right when it hit the gateDielectric. And it's the same process that's used to make solar cells. It's called the polyester process, and it's used in the solar cell industry. interesting thing that was also done in this paper, if you end up wanting to do research in this area, is shown here on slide 34. This is something called gate work function engineering. We hadn't really talked about it, but the work function between the metal-- I think we think we have a good idea of what it is to make a metal gate. It's a very complex process, but it can be done with a small number of atoms or molecules or atoms or atoms of metal. may have talked about threshold voltage control. The work function, which is a property of the metal material, to a certain extent. And the silicon, that determines the threshold voltage of the transistor, the voltage at which the transistor turns on. So that's a very important property. People have been talking about it for a long time, but now we have the technology to make it work. It's a big step forward, but it's still a long way from being fully operational. We'll have to wait and see what happens next. using N plus poly and P plus poly on N FETs and P Fets for years because it has the right work function. The problem with poly, as we've mentioned, is it doesn't have enough carries. It tends to deplete. So people want to use metals. But the problem with metals is that they don't have the same carrying capacity as poly. That's why we're using poly on the P FET. We're using it on the N-FET. is, what work function do they have? Well, they have the work function, typically, of the metal. And there are only so many metals in the world. But what IBM has shown in this is that silicides can do a lot more than just kill a person. And they can do it in a very small amount of time. And that's what they've done in this study. They've shown that silicide can do much more than killing a person in a short period of time than they would have been able to. particular paper is that they can adjust slightly the effective work function of that gate stack, so the effect of work function in between this metal gate and the silicon material. They said they canadjust it to a certain extent by how much they dope the polysilicon prior to using it as a gate. The paper was published in the Journal of the American Chemical Society (JACS), which is published by the Association for the Advancement of Chemical Sciences (AACS) AACS is a trade group for the development of new chemical compounds. the silicide reaction. For the case of nickel silicide, what they found is, depending exactly on how much doping they put into the gate to begin with. And this is just a table that I took right out of that paper. If they don't dope it, or if they don’t dope it. If you’re not sure what the reaction is, you can go to the Wikipedia page and look it up. It’s called “The Silicide Reaction.” The effect of work function that they measure with respect to the silicon conduction band is shown here. It can be varied, maybe by about 100 millivolts. Maybe a little more. I guess the nickel silicide was 0.0. So it's a 0.1% work function. It's a very, very small effect, but it can be quite large if you want it to be. The effect of the work function is shown in the figure below. It is the effect of putting in 1e20, 2e20 or 4e20. little more, maybe a couple hundred millivolts, it can be varied by whether you put doping in or not and by how much doping. And this is important because you need this flexibility in being able to adjust your threshold voltage. So FUSI gates are also interesting, not just because of the doping, but also because they can be used in a variety of ways, and they are very flexible. It's a great way to get around the problem of how much voltage to put in. it's a little easier to integrate the processing. The frontend processing is what we're all familiar with. Everyone knows how to etch a poly gate and make a good poly gate, and you can convert it to silicide. But depending on how you dope it, you may be able to make it into a silicide as well. It's a lot of work, but it can be worth it in the long run. It can be used to make a range of different types of silicides. control the PT or adjust the PT a little bit. It's still a very tricky process. The reaction temperature or the thermal stability temperature is reasonably low. So you cannot take these and then take them to a backend process that is too hot. So they're very much a research. They're still very much in the early stages of their development. They can't be used in production yet because they're still in the research phase of the process. They have to be tested on a large number of people before they are used. It was only published by IBM a couple of years ago. It's certainly not ready necessarily for manufacturing right now. Perhaps in the near future, but just to give you an idea of the types of things that people are concerned about with siliciding. Before I go through the summary, I would like to point out that this is not the first time this has happened. It has happened before, and it has happened to a number of other companies as well. It is not a new thing, but it is a very different type of technology. let's take a few minutes, because we have a couple of minutes right now. I just want to go through with you very briefly, if we back up a little bit here onto slide number 27. And you can sit down and do this back-of-the-envelope calculation yourself over the next few minutes. You can do it yourself. It's very simple, and it's a lot of fun to do. And it's very easy to do, too, if you know how to do it. couple of days. It's not a homework assignment, but I think it's something you should do-- how to calculate these three resistances. And then we can talk about it and go through it next time. But what I want you to calculate is you're given everything you need to calculate. You're given all the information you need, and then you just have to go through and calculate it. And that's what we're going to do in the next couple of days." the contact resistance. You're given the specific contact resistivity rho C. And you are given the area of the contact. So you know exactly how to calculate that. You just do a simple division. You can calculate this resistor, the contact resistance, the sheet resistance of the silicide, and the sheet resistivity of the Silicide. You are given this resistor and you can calculate the sheet Resistance of The Silicide, which is the Percentage of The Sheet Resistance Of The silicide. You have its sheet resistance, or it's resistivity, I'm sorry-- 15 times 10 to the -6 ohm centimeter. And you know its thickness. So resistivity divided by thickness, you can get sheet resistance. And then you can figure out how many squares the current has to flow to get it to flow. This is the blue region of the map. The red region is the top of the chart. The blue line is the current flow to the device. And the red line is how long it takes to get the device to flow through the grid. through. So you should be able to calculate this resistance of the silicided regions. And then the little resistor here of the source drain extensions, we are given their resistivity, and again, its thickness. So we should be can calculate a sheet resistance, and from that figure out-- so so far so good, right? So far. So good, so good. So far, right now, we've got a pretty good idea of what we're looking at, and we're going to keep going forward. you get the ohms square and the number of squares. And you get a resistor. So one, two, and three resistors corresponding to this contact resistance, the resistance of the current flowing through the sheet. You'll get three numbers, and you will get a number of resistors. That's what you get when you add up the resistors to get the total number of Resistors in the system. You get a total resistor number, which is the total resistance in the whole system. just get an idea of the order of magnitude of those numbers and how they compare. So if you have time between now and next lecture, do that. We'll go through it at the beginning of the last lecture next time. But just an interesting comparison between those three numbers. Just an interesting compare between those 3 numbers. But if you've got time, do it now. It's a good way to start the next lecture and get a sense of what's going on in the world. We need good device contacts. They have certain requirements-- a low specific contact resistance, rho C. Very good thermal stability so when you heat them up, they don't spike or do anything. That's what we talked about today, we need goodDevice contacts. That’s what we talk about today. We need good Device contacts. We’re going to talk more about this in the next few days, but for now, we’ve got a lot of work to do. unusual. In general, you want to get a high doping concentration of a silicon right at the interface. That will tend to lower the contact resistance by inducing quantum mechanical tunneling. However, there is a fundamental limit on how much doping we can activate in silicon. This puts a limit on the amount of doping that we can do. This is the reason why we are able to do what we have done in this case. It is not possible to do the same thing in other materials. on the contact resistance and on the sheet resistance. The contact resistance is really a big problem. If you look in the ITRS, there's a lot of concern about how to lower that. The so-called self-aligned silicide process, or also abbreviated salicide, has a high contact resistance. It's a very complex process, and there are a number of ways to get it to work. It can be very difficult to get to the point where it's safe to use. been the mainstay of technology for many, many years now. It has a lot of advantages. It's self-aligned. It reduces the sheet resistance of the deep source drain region. And it also provides a local interconnect layer. It also reduces the gate sheet resistance because you put silicide on the gate. It is very, very versatile. It can be used in a variety of ways, including as a power supply. It doesn't need to be connected to the power grid at the same time. So it's been a very good workhorse. Silicides do consume silicon. That's one problem with them. And as you move the metal closer to the junction depletion region, it's a big problem because you tend to get more leakage. In fact, this is why people use deep source drain regions to allow a thick enough region in between the depletion region and the point where the silicide is formed. So you can get a reasonable silicide with low junction leakage. Because junctions are scaling to be thinner and thinner. thinner, especially in fully depleted SOI, people are moving towards nickel silicide because it consumes a lot less silicon per thickness of silicide than, say, Ti-silicide or cobalt silicide. So for fully depletedSOI, nickel silicides has a lot of advantages. And the last thing, which isn't in the summary, is that it's cheaper to use than other silicides, such as cobalt or Ti- silicide, which are more expensive to use. we just talked about, is that silicides are even being considered to be fully silicide purpose for the gate. And that's something that's in research right now, you may see in production over the next three or four years or so. So that's all I have for this lecture. Take a look back at some of the most memorable moments in the history of the U.S. Air Force, including the creation of the Air Force Academy and the first Air Force Base in Shreveport, Louisiana. a look at that simple calculation example by hand. And then next time we'll meet for the final lecture. And again, I announced it at the beginning. The people who are going to be speaking in the order, it's also posted on the website. But if you have any questions, please contact me at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk or on Twitter @jennifersmith. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. about your oral report or whatever, please get back to me. OK, thanks. About your oralReport.com. About. Your oral report. About Your Oral Report. Please get. back tome. about your oralreport or whatever. about. your oral Report or whatever,. please getback to me about.your oral Report. about Your OralReport.org. OK. Thanks, thanks, thanks for your report. You can send it to me via e-mail at jennifer@dailymail.co.uk.