Now, earlier in the demand context we talked about complement in consumption and substitute in consumption although, I did not use the term in consumption, but now we need to distinguish. When we talk about complement and substitute, we have to be clear whether we are talking about the demand side or the supply side. Just as convention if it is not mentioned that whether it is demand or supply side, you should take it as demand side. That is why I didn't mentioned that in consumption part but when you are talkingabout substitute and complements. on the supply side, you should always mention it that it is for the supply. So, we are talking about good X and good Y. Good X and Y are compliment to each other, if an increase in price of good Y increases the supply of good X. Can you give an example, first substitute think about it? Student: Plastic chair to iron chair like. plastic chair toIron chair like, iron chair to plastic chair. Plastic chair is a substitute for the iron chair. chair to iron chair; again think about it, we are talking about supply side not the demand side. One example let me give you from very low tech to high tech, the simple let us take a car. So, do not think from a consumer’s perspective, but Think from a seller’S perspective. It is a very simple thing to go from a car to an iron chair. It's very simple, it's not a big deal. It doesn't take a lot of time. let us say that here supplier of milk, the milk man he supplies milk. Let us say there is market for cow dung also, earlier when our economy was not developed,cow dung was quiet popular means to get energy to cook food. So, let us talk about that. We are talking about the milk industry. The milk industry is a very important part of our economy. We need to make sure that our milk is safe and that it is produced in a healthy way. example. So, let us say if there is an increase of price in cow dung, what would happen? Your willingness to supply milk at the same price would increase. Student: increase. Why think about it. Price of cow dunk is increasing. You want more cow dun. Students: More cow Dung. Teacher: Yes, you do. You are a student. You need to think about what you are doing. You should be thinking about what is going to happen next. To get more cow dung what do you need? More cows. More cows mean more milk. So, you will be willing to supply more milk at the same price. Cow dung and milk are complement in production. So,. that is what we need to get more cows and more milk for more dung. We need more cows, more milk, and more cows for more cows. We are in need of more cows to produce more milk and more cow dung for more people to eat. a very low-tech example. Let us talk about a very high-techexample Boeing Company. Boeing is a manufacturer of airplanes; it makes civilian airplanes as well as military airplanes. Now Boeing uses the same assembly line or same workshop to make civilian aswell as military aircrafts. So, if there are similarities between the two, it could be a sign that the two companies are working together on a new project. It could be an example of a joint effort between the United States and Russia. is an increase in price of military aircraft, what would happen? Boeing devote more a space to military. To manufacturing, to manufacture military aircrafts. What would happen to the supply of civilian aircraft? It would go down. Boeing willingness to supply civilian aircraft at the same price would be reduced. It would be cheaper to make military aircraft at a lower price. Boeing would be forced to reduce the number of military planes it makes to meet the demand for civilian aircraft. The cost of producing military aircraft would fall, but the price would go up. decrease. So, that is why here civilian aircraft and military aircraft, they are substitutes in supply or substitutes in production. Be very careful these are confusing terms; you have to be very certain that whether you are talking about the demand side or the supply side. Is it clear? So, be very carefulThese are confusing term; you must be very sure that whether it is the demand or supply side, is it clear?" he said. "Be very careful" he said, adding: "You have to have a very clear idea of what you want to achieve" So, now we have enough knowledge. So that, to talk about the factors affecting the supply schedule or supply function. So, now that we have that knowledge, we can talk about how to get the most out of the resources that are available to us. That's what we're trying to do here. We're going to try and get the best of both worlds. We'll see how it goes from here. It'll be interesting to see how we get on with it. We've got a long way to go, but we're getting there.