Part of what I suggested to you is that you as poets move from Neoclassicism to The Enlightenment. Part of what they're part of is a critique of The Enlightenment, and that's what we're gonna focus on today. We're gonna continue the train of thought that we began last time, which has to do with the critique of the Enlightenment. We'll be back next week with a look at some of our favorite poems from the last few days of the show. Back to the page you came from. engaged in is you might say a critique of a kind of impoverished view of mind or consciousness that over-relies on reason. And they therefore try to develop a higher faculty than human reasoning which they refer to alternately as fancy and imagination. All right so that's one problem with the book. The other problem with it is that it's very hard to understand. It's very difficult to understand what it means to be in a state of consciousness that is not aware of it. Enlightenment thought, that it is impoverished. It doesn't, doesn't get at the fullness of human creativity or human thinking. There's another side of it and that's what we're gonna explore today. We started to look at it a little bit with Barlow's [assumed spelling] Raven poem with Poe. The idea is that there is another side to enlightenment thought, and we're going to explore that side today. It's a very interesting and interesting topic. that in fact there is something wrong with reason as a faculty, and this can take a couple of forms. One is that all of those nice ideals that come along with the enlightenment may in fact be parasitic precisely on the kinds of negative types of thinking that they promote. The other is that the enlightenment can be parasitic on the negative ideas that it promotes, such as anti-Semitism, anti-capitalism, and anti-gay sentiment. The third is that it can lead to a more positive attitude to the world, and to a better understanding of the world. are designed to get rid of right? So that in fact, it may not be accidental that The Enlightenment is patriarchal and racist. It may be that there are real reasons that all of the vaunted ideas of The Enlightenment in fact co-exist with those things, tolerate them, maybe even even embrace them. The Enlightenment may not have been designed to be racist or patriarchal, but it may be co-existing with them, tolerating them, even embracing them. That may be a mistake. require them. The other thing is that reason itself may not be as powerful as we think, that there might be other things going in, on within human consciousness that are either hostile to reason or are its opposite. Things that go on when you're asleep and the unconscious mind. That might be what's going on in your mind when you are asleep. That may be what is going on with your body. That could be why you're not aware of it. It could be that you are not aware that it is happening. takes over, things that go on when reason loses its purchase on the mind and the mind becomes maddened for example or goes insane. All of these things are things that Charles Brockden Brown starts to explore, right? So again I want to review some of the places that we've been in the last few days and see where we're going to go from here. I'm looking forward to seeing what the next few days have in store for us. I've got a lot to look forward to. "We want to get our story straight here, we try to understand the larger story that we're talking about. Again the idea that enlightenment, from Kant, is an emergence from a self-incurred immaturity. Okay so we want to. Got it?" he says. "I mean we're moving towards the mid-term at the moment so we Want to. Get Our Story straight here. I mean we. Want to get it straight here," he adds. "We. Got It Right Here." think about that. The cause is not lack of understanding, but lack of resolution and courage to use understanding without the guidance of another. I want you to think about this now, how does this quote look to you having read Edgar Huntly? Does it look at all different now? I don't know if you can do it, but I would love to hear from you. If you can, please email me at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk or tweet me @jennifersmith. Is the story of Edgar Huntly a story of coming out of a self-incurred immaturity into something else, or is it a different kind of story altogether? Remember also that Edwards and Franklin right, are two men who are, roughly speaking contemporaries. They are roughlyspeaking contemporaries. It's a different story altogether, I think. I don't know what it is, but I think it's a good one. I think that's the way to look at it. I'm not sure what the real story is. Poised you might say in the cultural exchange between Calvinism and The Enlightenment. Edwards tries to appropriate enlightenment modes of thinking in order to bolster up US Calvinism. Franklin understands the continuing power of Calvinism as a mode of religious thinking but tries to try to make it less religious. The two men choose different strategies, all right. They choose different ways of looking at the world, and the world looks back on them in a different way. It's interesting to see how the two men look at each other. minimize its cultural power, to use it where he must, but to promote a set of ideals that really do rely or promote the idea of reason as the prime human faculty right? So you remember again the idea with Edwards, this is how he uses enlightenment thinking, right? He, he, he,. He, He, The Power of Reason, is published by Simon & Schuster at £9.99. The Power Of Reason is published at £10.99 by Simon and Schuster. For more information, go to www.simonandschuster.com. we called him also a kind of pre-romantic because he makes use of images that are drawn from nature. This is a very good passage for thinking about that. The soul of a true Christian appears like such a little white flower that we see. It's a literal process of It's the process of becoming a Christian, not just of being a good person but of being good to others. It is a process of love, it is not just about being good, but it is also about being kind to people. enlightenment right? It opens itself up to the light of the sun, and we've talked I think over the past couple of days about the ways in which the poems and writing that have to do with The Enlightenment often use light itself as a trope. That they are, that they are a trope, that the Enlightenment is a trope of light itself, and that's what we're trying to get at with this book. We want to get to the heart of it, I think, of what it means to be a poet. dramatizes the power of this new kind of thinking. Franklin thinks about moral perfection, all right he's gonna use enlightenment ideals, but he has a little bit of you might say that Calvinist self-denial about him. He's gonna set down a set of principles. Ultimately he's not a Calvinist right now, he's a New Englander right now. It's a new way of looking at the world, it's a different way of seeing the world. because a Calvinist would never say something like, the appearance of virtue was almost more important than the reality of it. So that, you know he prizes appearance in a way that no good Calvinistwould. But remember Franklin's idea of the erota and these are just a couple, some, some of the ideas he came up with. He would have called it the "appearance of virtue" or "the erota" or something like that. And he would have said that it was a way of showing that you were virtuous. examples right? He believes that you can identify error. And you might say that part of your goal as someone living life is to try to see error for what it is and correct it. And one of the things we suggested was that in the process of writing his book, we suggested that you could identify error in your own life. And he said that he had been thinking about that a lot. He said that in his own life, he was always trying to identify error, and he was trying to correct it in his life. Franklin in writing an autobiography changes himself from just a plain old self into a. life, which and I suggested to you that that shares something in common with you know the kind of confessional mode started in the west perhaps by St. Augustine, that idea of confession and conversion. Franklin's autobiography is called "A Man Walks On A Wire" and it is published by Simon & Schuster at £16.99. For more information, go to www.simonandschulder.com. self as author which requires him to create a self as character. And in so doing he's able as author to pick out the defective font [phonetic] of type those errors, and either talk about the ways in which he was actually able to correct them in real life in the book. The book is published by Simon & Schuster at £16.99. For more information on the book, visit www.simonandschuster.co.uk or go to www.thebookshop.com. his real life, or, saying I wish now that I would correct that, I can point that out as an error. It's a sort of textural do-over as he rewrites his life. All right so there's a kind of belief in the real life. He still is getting akind of do-overs. He's still getting a kind-of do- Overs. He is still getting his life re-written. He has a sort-of belief in his real life and his real people. idea of moral perfection that goes along with enlightenment thinking. And again these are some of the leading doctrines of the enlightenment. Now I want us to think about the ways in which what. what Charles Brockden Brown has written in Edgar Huntly might be a book that would seem at least a little bit like an attempt at moral perfection. It would seem that the idea of. moral perfection would be at the heart of the book. But it would not be the only way to achieve it. first to take many of these things for granted. Edgar Huntly would seem to be a kind of sturdy young man of The Enlightenment. His life is devoted under the tutelidge of his teacher Sarsefield to precisely pursuing all of these kinds of things. He is a man of the Enlightenment, not of the world, and a man who has a long way to go before he reaches the end of his life. He has a lot to learn, but he is not yet ready to learn it. principles and these kinds of ideas. The question is, how well does it go for him? Is this something that happens to him that in the end should lead him to question all of those ideas? All right so what I want to suggest to you is that Edgar Huntly is a man who should question his ideas. He should question what he is doing and why he's doing it. He needs to question what it is that he is trying to do and why it's important. is in fact exploring the dark side of The Enlightenment, the underside of it. It's looking at what's in the shadows that are cast by this light of enlightenment. And if you look at the back of your, I think it's a very dark place. I think that's what this book is about. I'm not saying that it's going to be a great book, but that it is a very interesting one. I hope that it will inspire people to look at their lives in a different way. still on the back of the edition that you have, it describes this as a story of a young man who sleepwalks each night a threat to himself and each other, himself and others, unable to control his baser passion. All right so it's the whole question of passion versus the law of attraction, isn't it? It's a story about a man who sleepswalks. It's about a boy who sleepswalked. It is about a girl who sleptwalks, and it's about passion and the power of passion. Passion comes from a Latin verb that means to suffer. Is it possible that The Enlightenment underestimates the power of passion? And we need to remember I think the etymology of the word passion, all right? The passions are something that you suffer. That's why they're so powerful, I think, and that's why the Enlightenment was so wrong. It was wrong to think that passion was not a powerful force. But it is, and it can be, if you let it be. why it's called The Passion of the Christ; it's what he suffers on the cross, all right? So, the passions are something you suffer. You're not entirely in control of them. But even more I wanted to point out to you the fact that the book, the back of the. book, is titled The Passion Of The Christ. It's called 'The Passion of The Christ' and it's about the crucifixion of Jesus. And it's also about the death of Christ. book tells you it's set in Philadelphia in 1787, all right? The same time as the Constitution is being framed a hop, skip, and a jump away. There's a way in which we might say this is also if not a critique, then a cautionary tale you might say about the U.S. government, says the author. The book is also a critique of U.K. politics, he says. The author is also the author of the novel "The Godfather," which is set in the same time and place. the principles of enlightenment that are enshrined in The Constitution. A kind of meditation on what the dangers to the new nation might be at the moment that the new country is being formed. Brown is an interesting character because he is one of the first US writers to write about the American experience. He is a kind of character who is interesting to read about because he's a bit of an oddball. He's a little bit of a weirdo, but he's also a very interesting character. try to take advantage of the first American copyright law which takes which is passed in 1790. Before that there is no official copyright law. The copyright law does something interesting; it makes a profession of authorship possible. But it isn't an international copyright law, so it doesn't protect US writers from being pirated abroad. It does nothing to prevent US publishers from publishing pirated editions of well-known books already circulating in the continent. So it creates a kind of paradox. On the one hand we would like to be an author and though the copyright law makes the profession ofAuthorship a possibility, at the same time there are sort of economic factors that militate against that. Why would a publisher pay for a young author like Charles Brockden Brown when he could print something that's already known to be a best seller that has good buzz, good word of mouth from the public, he says. "I'm not sure why a publisher would pay for me when I'm already a best-selling author," he says, "and I don't know why they would want to pay me for it" continent? You can just reprint it here, and it's guaranteed to sell. So that seems like a bad thing for the aspiring US author. On the other hand remember what I said before, there is no patronage system in place in the early republic; therefore, what is emerging is a new type of author. It's a new breed of writer, and I'm not sure if it's a good thing or a bad one. I don't think it's good, but it's not bad, either. kind of marketplace for writing. And one of the processes you might say that's in place is the growth of this marketplace precisely through the pirated editions. It's not all bad for there to be pirated versions of writers that are well-known like Walter Scott or other writers from England, he says. He says it's a good thing for writers like Scott to have their work pirated in the U.S. and other countries where it's possible to do so. It makes it easier for people to buy the book and read it. because they develop a market for a reading public. Without that market, a young American author wouldn't be able to sell his writings and sustain himself as a writer. So it's a kind of double edged sword and Brown is participating in it right at the beginning of it as well as in the later stages of his career. It's a very exciting time for young American writers, and I'm looking forward to seeing what the future holds for them," he says. "It's a great time to be an American writer," he adds. even a possibility you might say. In writing he is trying to do what in another age you might have done as a philosopher, or a professor or even a lawyer. He gives up the law because he wants to be a writer. He wants to make a difference in the world, he says. He says he is not a lawyer, he is a philosopher. He is a writer, he adds, and a philosopher at the same time. He writes about what he has seen, what he thinks, what has happened. feels that the United States doesn't need another lawyer. But he doesn't give up the idea of doing something that's morally good, all right? He thinks of himself as a teacher, and he says that the novelist should be thought of as a lawyer. He says he's not a lawyer, he's just a person who wants to do something morally good for the country. He doesn't want to be a lawyer for the sake of being a lawyer; he wants to make a difference in the world. of as a storytelling moralist. That's in the advertisement or the preface to a now lost early work that's called Sky-Walk. So I want you to see that there's a bridge to be made between the kinds of didactic neoclassical poetry that we were looking at. Someone like Phillis Wheatley would have been able to do that, too, if she'd had the time to do it. I think that's what we're going to see in the next few years. for example, or the you know the poems of Barlow and others. People who are devoted to public poetry on public themes. We didn't look at a ton of the kind of hagiographic poems that are in the vein of say the praised poem towards the Reverend Whitfield, the poem that was praised towards him. We were looking for poems that were more in the public domain, that were not just about him or about the church, but about the world in general. That's what we were looking at. by George Washington and others. Brown wants to fulfill that didactic purpose, but he wants to reclaim a genre that already you might say is in bad repute, and that genre is the novel. So he publishes a first book that's called "The Novel," and it's very different from his other books. Brown: "I want to reclaim the novel, and I think I've done that. I'm very proud of it." The novel is published by Simon & Schuster, and it comes out in September. Wieland in 1798. Wieland: or, The Transformation, and he says that his aim isn't merely to please the idle and the thoughtless, which had previously which is previously thought to be in the province of the novel, but actually he says to engage those who study and reflect. So Wielands: or the Transformation, is published by Macmillan, London, priced £16.99, with p&p from £12.99. To order a copy of the book, call the Mail on Sunday on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local branch or click here. appears in 1798 and it's the first novel that he actually publishes. And he talked he echoes what he had said before there, and says that the novelist should be regarded as a moral painter. That that that's part of his aim, to be amoral painter. He proposes, he proposes, that he should be a 'moral painter' of the world. And that's what he does in his first novel, which is called 'The Moral Painter' The moral painter is a novelist who paints the world with his mind. says, to illustrate some important branches of the moral constitution of man it's a very strange story actually. It plays on religious enthusiasm, it uses ventriloquism, it has an episode of spontaneous combustion because Brown, as a sort of man of The Enlightenment was very interested in science. And therefore therefore the story is very strange. It's a strange story, but it's also very interesting. It shows that Brown was a man of the Enlightenment, and that he had a lot to say about morality. he was interested in scientific oddities and brought them into some of his novels. So ventriloquism and spontaneous combustion, religious enthusiasm and fanaticism all in Wieland. In Edgar Huntly there's another kind of scientific fact that is played with right? Sleepwalking. And this is Wiel and: or, The Transformation, the title. And it's a great novel. It's a wonderful novel. I love it. I can't wait for the next one to come out. page. An American Tale, right? He's stressing that he's doing something American. If you could read the little epigraph here it says from virtues blissful paths away, the double-tongued are sure to stray. Good is a forthright journey to still, and many paths but lead to ill. All right again, all right again. We're back to the page we left off on, with a new chapter and a new story to tell. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. a kind of moral note. And yes, if you can actually see it, that is not an F. That is an old fashioned way of setting an S. So you just, you've probably encountered that if you looked at early revolutionary documents. That's the way the S was originally printed, that's how it's printed now. And it's not a F, it's a S. It's an S-S-S. It doesn't mean it's an F or a F-F, it just means it's the S. at the beginning of a word. A colleague of mine who teaches renaissance told me he once observed a TA give a class in which she hung her whole reading of a renaissance poem on reading this as if it was an F rather than S and asking what does that mean. A TA once hung her entire reading of an F poem in a renaissance class on reading it as if this was a S. and not an F. A teacher once told me she hung a whole reading in a class on a reading of this poem. it mean to substitute F there. And that's one of those things where if you, he says he was aghast but he didn't correct it right away and then there was nothing to do but sit there the entire time. So don't make that mistake yourself. Okay, other thing. If you, if you say you're going to do something and then you don't do it, then you're not going to get it done. So that's what I'm trying to tell you. secured. See he's taking advantage of the copyright law which has been passed just 8 years before in his first novel. So, after Wieland he publishes a series of novel in quick succession. All right Brown is not a careful writer in the sense that he doesn't take his time with his writing. He's not a writer who takes his time. He doesn't wait for the perfect time to write a novel. He just writes it, and then he writes another one. That's what he does. sense that he tries to bang them out. So 1, 2, 3, culminating in Edgar Huntly, all of them in 1799. Yes it puts them all to shame when we worry about how, you know how fast we are writing. And you can see that, if you notice, we'll talk about that later. We'll talk a little bit about that, but we're going to get to the point of the story. We're not going to go into too much detail. about it a little bit but there is a certain kind of haste that is evident in the plotting of Edgar Huntly. There are red herrings, there are loose ends that are not exactly tied up, and that might be the result of the fact that it was the third book in the series. It was the first time the author had written a book in three years, so there was a lot of time to get the story right. It's a good thing the book was written in the third year of the series, because there were a number of unanswered questions. book that he wrote in that particular year. So that's one of the things to bear in mind. Brown is writing for an emerging market. He's writing in order to transform the novel into a higher form than it's thought to be, and he's writing something that is not just a novel, but something that's a new form. That's what he's trying to do with this book. It's going to be very different from anything he's ever written before, he says. The main line of novelistic writing might be embodied famously in English by Samuel Richardson. His novels Pamela and Clarissa which are novels about you know heroines, you can see the pattern right? A female heroine, protagonist, name of the book. Happy, not happy, not Happy, Not Happy. That's the way to write a novel, I think. And that's what I'm going to try to do with this book. I think it's going to be very interesting. happy, many, many pages. Has anybody read Clarissa or an abridged Clarissa? Clarissa's a seduction narrative right, in which a middle class heroine is menaced and finally seduced and raped by an aristocrat. Then goes through pages and pages and Pages of decline all done through the pages of Clarissa. It's a story of a middle-class girl being seduced by a rich aristocrat and then going through pages of decline. It was a great story. letters. And you might say right away in the early English epistolary novel there's the worry about what it is we're writing and reading. Why would there be so many pages describing something and one solution early on was well, it would be realistic if these were letters that you wrote and read. And so that's how the letters came to be written in the first place. And that's the story of the first letters in the English novel, which were written in 17th century London. were getting to read. Of course, the idea that people would spend that much time writing and then reading, would leave hardly any time for living right, if you write thousands of pages of letters. Laurence Sterne Tristram Shandy actually makes fun of this little thing [inaudible]. And one of the things he says is, 'If you want to be a good person, you have to write a lot of letters and then read them.' And so that's what we do. The novel starts to question its own devices early on. In Tristram Shandy, he has a writer who realizes that the more he lives theMore he has to write. The more he writes, he'll never live and he'll always be a writer. The novel is set in London in the 1930s and 1940s. It is the first of a series of novels about the life of a writer called Tristam Shandy. The book is published by Simon & Schuster, which also publishes The Quartet. finish as a kind of you know, that you know paradox. In the United States context, Susanna Rowsan's Charlotte Temple is probably the earliest example of this kind of thing. The more, the more he lives the more I have to write. It's an endless kind of things. He'll never get to the end. I don't know how to end it. I'm not sure what to say. I just want to say that I'm sorry for what I've done. This is a front matter from an early novel. The Power of Sympathy which is thought to be the first American novel published. Brown is not writing in this tradition. He is writing, trying to write over against this tradition and you could see that again. And you can see that you can read this in the book. This. is not a book about American literature. This is a book of American literature about American life. And it is not about American history. It is about American culture. look at it. These volumes intended to represent the specious causes and to expose the fatal consequences of seduction to inspire the female mind with a principle of self complacency and to promote the economy of human life are inscribed with esteem and esteem. To the young ladies of United Columbia, these volumes are intended toRepresent the Speculious Causes and to exposed the fatal. consequences of Seduction. to inspire. the femaleMind with a Principle of self Complacency, and to. promote the Economy of Human Life. sincerity by the blah blah blah, okay? So that's what The Power of Sympathy is, but it addressed to young women. So there's something feminized about the form of the novel in this period which is part of why it is, you know regarded as a kind of lower form. It's not a novel for men, it's a book for women. That's the way it's always been, I think. I don't know why it's so different. of writing, not really literary. The Coquette, or The History of Eliza Wharton, a Novel. There's a worry that's probably a worry of Puritanism that there's something wrong with novels because they're not literary. But look at this note, founded on fact. And here is another example of a title page. The history of Elizabeth Wharton. A Novel. A History. Of Eliza. Wharton,. A Novel, a History. fiction. And what is fiction, if not the opposite of truth? Fiction means lies, right? Why would you read this? If you do it's got to be only a guilty pleasure. There can be nothing improving by it. So fiction, as opposed to fact, fiction somehow has falsehood. Therefore early is early for us. We need to get to bed early and get to sleep early. We don't want to be up in the morning with a hangover. We want to go back to sleep. novels try to insist on their basis in fact. Don't worry about this, it's based on a true story. As if there were something that would then could be morally improving for that. Ask yourself now, I mean many TV movies, even actual movies say based on real events, or even real life events. It's not a good idea to try and convince people that you're a better person than you actually are. It doesn't work. It just doesn't. why does that make a difference? Why should you care if something is, does it hold your interest more? There's a certain way in which part of the problem for writers like Brown, and you might say for Romanticism, is how to take some of the prestige out of a work, says writer David Walliams. "I don't think there's any such thing as the perfect novel," he says. "There's no such thing in the world as a perfect novel. There's no point in trying to find one." that is you know linked to the to some of the prestige factuality and history and transfer it over to fiction and literature. How to create the literary as a category that is separate from the bible and sermons and biographies and history. A category that's going to be going to the next generation of writers and thinkers and thinkers. That's what I'm trying to do, I think, is create a new category of literature. I think that's what we're going to see in the next few years. be linked to this other faculty of the mind called imagination. This is part of the larger project of romanticism of gothic fiction. All right so that's the kind of regime of facts, the tyranny of fact. And here's to give you an idea of what it's like to live in a world that doesn't believe in the facts. And that's part of Brown's project as well, of course. It's a bit of a mess, but it's a lot of fun. some sense of the way novels were regarded in this period, this is a quote from the New England Quarterly in 1802. Without the poison instilled by novels into the blood, females in ordinary life would never have been so much the slaves of vice. It's no uncommon thing for a woman to want to kill a man, or for a man to murder a woman. It is not an uncommon thing to want a man's body to kill you, or to have a man kill you. But it is not uncommon for women to want the man's life. a young lady who has attended her dearest friend to the altar, a few months after marriage which perhaps, but for her had been a happy one, to fix her affections on a friends husband and by artful blandishments allure him to herself. Be not staggered such a moral reader at the thought of such a young lady in love with a friend's husband. The story ends with the young lady leaving her friend at the altar and returning to her own home in the city. Such serpents really are in existence. Why? Because they read novels. I have seen two poor disconsolate parents drop into premature graves miserable victims to their daughter's dishonor and the peace of several relative families wounded never to be healed again in this world. It's a sad world we live in, but it's a better one if you're a reader, I say. I've seen some very sad things in my life. I'm not proud of them, but I'm glad they exist. novels. I mean, really, I guess there are people that burn books you know you'll throw Harry Potter onto the fire if you live certain places in the United States because you feel that Harry Potter is dangerous. But really, there's no such thing as a "Harry Potter" book. It's just a book that you can't throw on the fire. It doesn't mean you're going to burn it. It just means that you're not going to throw it on the flames. come on. Do we really think books are dangerous? Most of us probably don't. I mean can you imagine that a book's gonna cause like what, social unrest? Maybe it's better to live in a culture where they actually do persecute the novelists 'cause it would mean that literature matters. Here it's negative, but they thought that novels were actually dangerous. You could read a novel and become depraved. Brown is thinking you should be able to read a book. Virtue comes from the Latin roots of man, so you see the emphasis on masculinity and also Virtus which means courage. All right when Machiavelli talks about virtue, he's not really talking about being a good.novel and become virtuous and that's part of what he is trying to promote Virtue comes from. the Latin Roots of Man, which means masculinity, courage, virtue. And that's what he's trying to do in his book, The Art of Virtue. guy. He's more like he's talking about these things, manliness and courage and the ability to act decisively, right? So Brown is trying to find a form of the novel that can be used to instill virtue and all of these other qualities. It's trying to wrest the novel away, he's saying, from the author's hands, he can use it for his own ends. He wants to use the novel as a tool for his ends, he says, to get his point across. from its association with some kind of damaging femininity. In part because he wants to say that you know to accept that kind of separations of fear does neither men nor women credit. So if we could get away from this idea that somehow there's something feminized about the novel, that would be a big step. That would be huge. It would be really, really big. And I think that's what he's trying to say. He wants to make a point about that. it's good for both sexes. Oh we don't need that one anymore. One last quote, this comes from the Reverend Samuel Miller. He says this, the author has no hesitation in saying that if it were possible he would wholly prohibit the reading of novels. For it may with confidence be with confidence that we should not read novels. It may be that if we were to read novels, we would find that they were not good for us. We should not be allowed to read them. be pronounced that no one was ever an extensive and especially a habitual reader of novels even supposing them to be well selected without suffering both intellectual and moral injury and of course incurring a diminution of happiness. Okay, this is the context in which Brown writes this book. Now, now, now. Now,. Now, Now, Brown writes a book in which he says that no. one can ever be an extensive reader of. novels even if they are well selected and even if. they're well selected. let's think about virtue again. The form that Brown decides to use is the Gothic novel. The Gothic novel isn't, is a forum that in the English context is probably pioneered by this guy, Sir Horace Walpole who wrote a novel that was called The Castle of Otranto. That was a Gothic novel, not a novel about virtue. That's a different form of virtue. It's not about virtue, it's about being a good person. And that's what Brown is trying to do. was published in 1764 on Christmas Eve and subtitled, A Gothic Story. Gothic, you know is a form of architecture I suppose, first and foremost. It's a kind of you know the pointy churches after the Romanesque arches that are more rounded. Gothic is more pointy. Chartes for example, are more pointed than Gothic churches. The book is published by Hodder & Stoughton, priced £16.99 with p&p of £12.99. it's a Gothic cathedral. They're gorgeous. But it becomes a pejorative term by this time that is, that takes on the medieval association and makes you think of you know it's so Gothic, it's medieval, which means if it's not modern, it is not enlightened. It's medieval and Gothic and dark, says the architect. The term is used to refer to a building that is not modern or enlightened, he says. It can be a derogatory term for a building, he adds. Romantic writers are gonna mobilize the medieval and Gothic and dark over against The Enlightenment. Story of the Castle of Otranto, a villain named Manfred who lives in the Castle and rules his realm unlawfully. His grandfather has poisoned him and he is trying to kill him. The Enlightenment is not what it's cracked up to be, it's what's wrong with it, and we're here to show you what is wrong with the Enlightenment, and how to get out of it, too. the rightful ruler whose name was Alonso, and it has been cryptically prophesied that the usurpers will prevail and continue to occupy the castle so long as the castle remains big enough to hold the rightful heir. Do you see the loophole forming? There are many strange incidents as it has gone on, including the death of the rightful ruler and the disappearance of his son, Alonso, in the middle of the night. It has also been claimed that the castle has been haunted by the ghost of Alonso's son. goes on. The villain who is now ruling named Manfred wants to marry the son, marry his son off to a woman named Isabella. In one of the novel's many supernatural events, a giant helmet falls out of the sky and crushes Conrad. So Manfred then decides to marry Isabella himself, whom he, you know he's hoping that it'll kind of firm up his succession when and he's, there's another figure, a young peasant named Theodore that Isabella is really interested in. at the end of the thing, guess what happens? Alfonso's ghost the rightful king, rears up and he's huge. I mean he's a ghost that's a really huge knight. The castle is not big enough to hold him, therefore everything is exposed, and Theodore the peasant turns out to be a ghost. The ghost is a huge knight, and the castle is too big for him to fit in. He's a huge ghost, and so is the castle. And so is Theodore, the peasant. the rightful heir of Otranto and we have a happy ending in the end, okay? The ghosts are real. And one of the things that Walpole said about The Castle of O Tranto which he published anonymously, was that later on he said, it's not everyone that may play the fool. The ghosts of OTranto are real, and the ghosts of those who played the fool are real too. And that's what we have to deal with in this story. with impunity. Right so again it goes back to that model of artistic production. He's a nobleman, he has spare time, he can write a book and publish it. It's no big deal. Later on however, with the success of the novel, he takes it more seriously and he becomes a more serious writer. He becomes a better writer and a better person. He has become a better author. He is a better man because he has become more serious about his art. says in fact that the novel, The Castle of Otranto had he said, freed up great resources of fancy that had been damned up by common life. All right? So think again of Freneau's Graveyard and fancy. The novel, the Gothic novel which seems like kind of a Gothic novel, this Gothic novel. It seems like sort of a horror novel, which seems kind of like a thriller. It's a thriller, but it's not a horror, it's more like a horror. of a trifle nevertheless has a role to play because it frees up these resources of fancy. Sir Walter Scott is you know one of the great historical novelists in this period and he would write later on that even the name of romance now so venerable in the world has a place in literature. He would write that even if romance was so venerable, it still had a role in literature, and it still does today. He was a great writer of the period. He wrote about the Victorian era. He's a great novelist. ears, in the ear of the antiquaries of book collectors was almost forgotten in the time of The Castle of Otranto. And he added that Walpole had a decided predilection for what may be called the Gothic style, a term which is now almost forgotten by book collectors. He said: 'Walpole was a great admirer of Gothic architecture, especially that of the period when the castle was built' He added: 'He was also a great lover of fine art, especially of the kind that was to be found in the castle' he contributed not a little to rescue from the bad fame into which it had fallen being currently used before his time to express whatever what was in pointed and diametrical opposition to the rules of bad taste. Right, so the Gothic is, [inaudible] good true taste. Walpole starts to reclaim it. Brown wants to do something similar to reclaim the Gothic in the American context, okay. And there you can see what he says about it. But it's interesting that the novel, the Gothic novel, is still relevant today. itself as a form doesn't take off in 1764. It has to wait about 25 years in and around the French Revolution. Then it really takes off when a woman named Ann Radcliffe writes her Gothic novels. And Radcliffe had a slightly different formula than Walpole did in the 1760s. It's a little different than the one he used in the '40s and '50s. But it's the same idea, just with a different name and a different time period. writing of her novels. She used this formula by the way over and over. It goes something like this. There's a kind of dream landscape in which a young girl is fleeing in terror from some unknown or unnamed persecutors. Usually the place is given some Italian name, right, something Italian. Something like 'The House of the Rising Sun' or 'The Garden of Earthly Delights' or something like that. It's a very strange formula, but she used it all the time. like that. There appear to be manifestations of the supernatural. She often finds herself in the various kinds of settings crumbling castles, dungeons, graveyards, darkened churches. Usually she almost escapes her persecutors, then they catch her. They are trying to get her out of greed or lust or both. In the end, all of the ghosts and supernatural manifestations that have tyrannized her are shown to be fakes. They're people in costumes or they're people with masks or in costumes. [inaudible] effigy's or there's some machinery. It's a very popular formula and it continues to this present day. Does it remind anybody of anything? >> Scooby-Doo. [Music] Scooby dooby doo, where are you, we've got some work to do now. >> And I want you to understand something about Scooby Dooby Doo, because it's a little bit like you and I, and it's very, very funny. it, if you go back to classic Scooby-Doo which would be the early the first season, [inaudible] on DVD 1969, the ghosts are never real. It's always Mr. [inaudsible] in the blah blah blah. You remember in Wayne's World, [INAudible) see Wayne's world? Okay fine. [laughter] So, later on there there are ghosts, but they're never real, and they're always in the background. was one cartoon called Scooby-Doo and Zombie Island or something where it's much later on and Daphne's like oh my god [inaudible] she's now a reporter she says but you know what, the ghosts are always fake. "I'd just once like to find a real ghost so they go," he said. "It's just a little bit of fun. It's just like, you know, it's like, 'Oh my god, I'm going to be a reporter.'" looking around New Orleans for a real ghost and eventually they actually find one. So you might say in that movie it breaks the formula, and in so and by breaking the formula it reaffirms the formula. Later on, the Scooby-Doo canon has become a little slack and there's been been a lot of ghost sightings in the past few years. It's been a little bit of a let-down, but it doesn't mean it's gone away, it's just changed a little. just too much of the actual supernatural. Classic Scooby-Doo is Ann Radcliffe. The ghosts are fake. Okay, but there's another tradition of Gothic that happens at the same time. Matthew Gregory &quot;Monk& quot; Lewis who got this nickname. This is the tradition of the Gothic that is pioneered by this man, Matthew Gregory and his colleagues at the Museum of Gothic Art in New York City. They call it the "Gothic Gothic" tradition. because he wrote a very famous book called, The Monk. And The Monk you might say is really horrific Gothic. In it the ghosts are real. It is blasphemous. And, this is a French an illustration from a French translation of The monk. The story goes something like this, again, again and again. It's a very horrific story, and it's very dark. And it's also very funny, and very, very sad, and really, really good, too. it's Italian right so you can see there's almost always in English Gothic a kind of political anti-Catholic, anti-Italian sort of strain and you know anti-French I guess as well. So Juan Ambrosio is the abbot of the capechins [assumed spelling] and he's presented as a sort of admired. He's presented in the Gothic as kind of admired by the people of the area. It's a very interesting way to show the relationship between the different cultures. preacher. Those of you who know Shakespeare's Measure for Measure might think of him as a lot like Angelo in that play. A man who's so repressed and severe that Shakespeare calls, what does he say? He scarce confesses that his blood flows. This guy Ambrosio's that kind of guy, and he's a preacher, too. He's a man of God, and that's what we need in this country. We need more of that. We can't have more of this. except his blood does flow and he's soon readily corrupted by a satanic woman named Matilda. Matilda gains access to his cell by disguising herself as a young nun, although it, we have to remember that he's kind of already been enflamed in secret by fantasizing about a portrait of his former lover. The film was released on November 25, 2013. It is directed by Michael Hirst and written by Hirst. It was based on the novel by the same name. the virgin Mary which is hanging in his church for which this Matilda has posed. They become lovers, naughty, naughty. But he soon gets tired of her and of course she's promoting this, and he dreams of possessing a 15-year-old girl named Antonia, who is the daughter of his friend's father. The film is set to be released in the U.S. on September 14. For more information on the film, visit the official website of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London. Elvira who is a noble lady who is one of his, you know in his parish. He's her confessor. With the aid of the satanic Matilda who conjures up the devil also for added backup, Ambrosia gets into Antonia's room and is about to rape her. So he kills Elvira by smothering her with a pillow, gives Antonia a sleeping potion, and throws her in the dungeon. She cries out so he kills her. Okay. At the same time there's another woman who is. there named Agnes. She's been imprisoned for other reasons down there and she actually gives birth to a baby down in the [inaudible]. I thought I would read you a little bit about this because it might remind, it might reminding us a littlebit of, yeah might remind us of the '60s and '70s. It's a great story, it's great to read about. It was great to see you again. I'll see you in a few weeks. a little bit of Mary Rowlandson. Anyway, let's just listen to this, I won't bother to put it up. My, this is Agnes speaking toward the end of the novel. My grief unavailing, my infant was no more nor could my sighs impart to its tender little frame the breath the breath of life had given it. I was grief-stricken, my grief-stunned, my baby was dead. I couldn't bear to look at it. of movement. I [inaudible] my winding sheet and wrapped in it my lovely child. I placed it on my bosom, it's soft arm folded around my neck. It's pale, cold cheek resting upon mine. Thus did its lifeless limbs repose while I covered it with kisses, talked to it, wept, I wept. I was overcome with tears of joy and tears of grief, I was overwhelmed with joy and grief, and I was overjoyed. and moaned over it without remission day or night. I vowed not to part with it while I had life. Its presence was my only comfort and no persuasion could induce me to give it up. It soon became a mass of putridity, and to be rid of it I had to give up my life. It was the hardest thing I have ever had to do in my life, but I am so glad I did it. I will never forget the day I gave it up, and I will always remember that day. every eye was a loathsome and disgusting object. To every eye but a mothers. In vain did human feelings bid me recoil from this emblem of mortality. I persisted in holding my infant to my bosom and lamenting it, loving it. With repugnance I was stood and vanquished that repugnce. I was a mother and I loved it. I am a mother. I love my baby. I will always be a mother to my child. I have always loved my child and will always love my daughter. adoring it. Hour after hour have I passed upon my sorrey couch contemplating what had once been my child. And later on she goes to describe some of the other nice things about her captivity. My slumbers were constantly interrupted by some obnoxious insect crawling over me. Sometimes I felt sometimes I felt like I was in the middle of an insect infestation. I was constantly being invaded by something that I couldn't control. I had to fight to keep my eyes open, to keep from falling asleep, to stay awake. the bloated toad hideous and pampered with the poisonous vapors of the dungeon dragging his loathsome length across my bosom. Sometimes the quick, cold lizard roused me leaving his slimy track upon my face and entangling itself to the trusses of my wild and matted hair. Often I have at least one night a week in which I am able to sleep with my eyes open and not be woken by the sound of the toad's shriek. waking around my fingers ringed with long worms which spread in the corrupted flesh of my infant. So this conflation of this kind of carnal house, you know disgusting flesh, morbidity, is part of this stream of the Gothic in which as I suggested the supernatural as real. We should take it seriously, I think. I think we need to take it very seriously. We need to make the supernatural real, I believe, and we should make it part of our culture. Go back to the story of Ambrosio. The Napoleonic troops start to try to find him. He manages to escape their clutches by selling his soul to the devil. Except he doesn't quite specify the terms of the bargain well enough so they don't get the full bargain. The story ends with him being taken prisoner by the French. The film was directed by Jean-Claude Van Damme and is based on the novel by the same name. It was released in France in 1815. he's immediately transported by a demon to the top of a mountain peak where he is told hey guess what Elvira, remember you murdered her? She was your mother. And that makes Antonia whom you raped and murdered, uh yes that would be your sister. And then he's thrown to the ground where he's told that Antonia is his sister. He's then taken to the bottom of the mountain and thrown to his death. He is then transported to a different part of the world. his death. So that is the other kind of Gothic. The ghost's real. And you could see how there's a kind of weird conflation of supernatural demonic activity, sexuality, violent and disgusting death. I mean this is come all the way down to current slasher movies and currentslasher movies. [laughter] All right. All right, I'm going to take a break. I'll be back in a few minutes with the rest of the gang. We'll see you then. other, and you know the kind of torture porn that people have been watching the last couple of years. It's all part of this larger idea of this strain of Gothic. And one last thing to say about this is the, what I just read is the. kind of anti-Radcliffe Gothic, and that's what I'm trying to get at here. I'm not trying to say that it's not Gothic, it's just a different kind of Gothic, I'm just trying to make a point. to you from The Monk really might be considered a form that we could call the anti-sublime, right? Oh I've actually put them up. I guess I thought I wouldn't, but here we go. Shriek with terror and disgust while I shook off the reptile. Very good. So, one of these days, I'll get back to you with the real deal. I'll be back with a real deal, and I'll show you how it's done. the famous treatises in this moment was Edmond Burke's on the Sublime and the Beautiful. What is well-formed and aesthetically pleasing, whereas the sublime is what has the power to compel and overwhelm us. All right so formal gardens are beautiful, but this, is the sublime. Allright, and you, all right, and we'll see you in a few weeks. We'll be back with a new episode of This Is Life with David Walliams on Channel 4 at 10pm. could think again of those moments in Edwards. Edwards is pioneering the sublime when he thinks about the thunder and the kind of awful majesty. It's beautiful, but it's frightening at the same time. The sublime is kind of like the romantic emotion par excellence, it's what they are try to achieve. It is the most beautiful thing I've ever seen, and I've seen a lot of beautiful things in my life, but this is one of the best. I've never seen anything like it. they are striving to recreate. In a sense, Matthew Lewis's you know disgusto Gothic is actually making fun of that. It's doing what might be called the anti-sublime. But you can see that this discourse of the sublime, is part of what Brown is drawing on in Edgar Huntly as well as Edgar Huntley as a character in the novel. The book is published by Bloomsbury at £16.99. To order a copy of the book for £12.99, call the MailOnline Bookshop on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local branch or click here. well as he sends Edgar out into the wilderness. But the sublime, if the wilderness is about the sublime for many romantic writers, for Edgar Huntly the wilderness becomes about something else altogether. All right, one last thing. Terror and disgust is what Agnes feels in The Monk. Ann Radcliffe, who plays Agnes in the film, says: 'I'm so proud of you. I'm so happy to have you in my life' She adds: 'It's been an incredible journey. I've been through a lot of things. It's been wonderful' makes a distinction between what she calls, let me see if I have it here, the distinction between terror and horror. And she says that horror closes down the mind, whereas terror opens you up. So, and terror would therefore be linked to the sublime and the faculty of imagination. And that is what horror is about. It's about terror, it's about fear, and it's also about the sublime, and that's why it's called terror. And I think that's the key to understanding it. So Monk Lewis' Gothic is horror. Her Gothic she would've offered was a form of terror, okay? Finally, this is a rather famous if somewhat overstated account of what's going on in the Gothic novel. It comes from a moment when Freudian criticism was very much in the [inaudible]. This is an overstatement. This is not the real Gothic novel, but it's a kind of Gothic novel that's very similar to it. It's a sort of horror novel. is still a very interesting book although if you read the subtext of the book, it suggests it's an account of American literature says that a lot ofAmerican literature is about cross-racial friendships and more between men. Huck and Jim for example [inaudible] American relationship. [Inaudible] he has a [InAudible] relationship. He has a love affair with Huck. Huck has a relationship with Jim. Jim and Huck have a love relationship. Huck is a man. Jim is a boy. wonderful chapter on the Gothic novel and [inaudible] writes this, the guilt which underlies the Gothic and motivates its plots is the guilt of the revolutionary haunted by the paternal past which he has been striving to destroy. And the fear that possesses the Gothic is the fear of the past. And that is what motivates the Gothic, and that is why it is so beautiful. And it is also the reason for the horror of the novel. And so it is the reason why the Gothic works so well. the fear that in destroying the old ego ideas of church and state, the west has opened a way for the eruption of darkness, for insanity, and the disintegration of the self. Through the pages of the Gothic romance, the soul of Europe flees its own darker impulses. And I fear that this is what will happen to us in the future. I fear it will happen in a way that will lead to the breakdown of our society. I am afraid that this will happen, and I am terrified of it. think there's a cultural reason why Gothic takes off, not when Walpole writes, but when Radcliffe and Lewis do, in the aftermath of the French Revolution. All those democratic ideals, liberty, equality, fraternity, turn into the horror of the terror, and that's a terror that is a horror. You can read the full interview in this week's edition of The New York Review of Books, published by Simon & Schuster at 10:30 p.m. ET on Thursday. know when all the heads being chopped off. And then finally the Napoleonic era which is the re-institution of anti-democratic principles. So, the experience, the cultural experience of the French Revolution would suggest that this regime of reason is not all that it is cracked up to be. And you know when all of the heads are chopped off? That's when the revolution begins. And that's when you start to see the end of the world as we have known it. could see that in the U.S. there's this idea that in overthrowing what [inaudible] calls the old ego ideals of church and state we're opening up a new, a new moment. Right what, remember Jefferson's quote, that not everyone is born to be booted and ridden by other people. That's what we're trying to do here in the United States, I think. I think we're going to see a lot of interesting things come out of this. There's grounds of hope for everybody, he says. But it also means destroying old systems of obligation. The Puritans could if not blame, they could understand that there was a reason for things because it was part of God's will. What happens when you don't have that? That's what we're trying to figure out. It's a very difficult thing to do, but I think we're on the right track, I think, and we're going to get there," he said. take God out of that equation, and you say this is all you know we're gonna rest it all on human beings. And then human beings turn out to be not all they're cracked up to be. What if the total depravity of human beings is true, not because of God but because of them? That's what I'm trying to figure out. I don't know if that's true, but that's the way I'm going to try to figure it out, I think. something called the fall of human kind, but just because that's human nature? Then, we've got a big problem. All of this you might say is the context for Charles Brockden Brown's Edgar Huntly. Okay? Now, let's take a look at the first pages of this. This is the preface to the first page of Edgar Huntley. The first page is called "The Fall of Human kind" and it's on page one. The second page is "Edgar Huntly," on page two. to Edgar Huntly on page 1 of the text. It's in the part that's called, to the public, right? And this lays out what we might think of as the project of American Gothic. Look at the third paragraph, well no let's just let't just say that it's called Memoirs of a Sleepwalker. And it's in that section that's the most interesting to me, because it's the one that's most revealing. It says, 'I am a sleepwalker. I am a dreamer. I can't sleep.' look at the whole thing. So, he says America has opened new views to the naturalist and politician but it has seldom furnished scenes to the moral painter. Again that idea of the novelist asmoral painter. That new springs of action and new motives to curiosity should operate that new motive of curiosity. That is the idea of a moral painter, not a moral novelist. The moral painter is a moral person, a moral thinker, and a moral character. That's the moral role of a novelist. the field of investigation opened to us by our own country should differ essentially from those which exist in Europe may be readily conceived. The sources of amusement to the fancy, imagination, and instruction to the heart that are peculiar to ourselves as Americans are equally numerous and inexhaustible. It is an honor to be a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and to be one of the members of the Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. We are proud to be Americans, and we will always be Americans. is the purpose of this work to profit by some of these sources to exhibit a series of adventures growing out of the condition of our country. It is connected with one of the most common and wonderful diseases or afflictions of the affection of the human frame, right, sleepwalking. One of the adventures is to find out what it is like to be a person who has never been to sleep. The other is to learn how to sleep and how to wake up from it. One is to discover what it's like to have been a man who has not been to bed. merit the writer may at least claim that of calling forth the passions and engaging the sympathy of the reader by means hitherto unemployed by preceding authors, right? So over against things called the power of sympathy, he's presenting this. Puerile superstition and exploded manners, Gothic castles and chimaeras are the main themes of the novel. He's presenting it as a story of horror, of horror. It's a horror story of terror and horror. And it's not. the materials usually employed for this end right? If you're not writing seduction obviously you're writing Gothic. And if you're doing English Gothic you'reWriting about these stupid things. But here in the United States we have an opportunity. The incidents of Indian hostility and the perils of the western. That's what we're trying to get at here. We're not trying to write about Indian hostility. We are trying to do English Gothic. We want to write English Gothic about the stupid things that happen in India. wilderness are far more suitable and for native of America to overlook these would admit of no apology. These therefore are in part the ingredients of this tale, and these he has been ambitious of depicting in vivid and faithful colors. The success of his efforts must be estimated by the success of the story. The story is set in the American West in the early 1800s, and is set against the backdrop of the First World War. It is described as a tale of the American frontier and the American people's struggle for freedom. the liberal and candid reader. So that's the project of American Gothic, and that whole question of what are we supposed to do. I mean you know again think of Barlow; I'm gonna use Neoclassical poetic machinery, I'm going to give it a new world subject the hasty pudding and we're going to see what happens. That's what I'm trying to do with American Gothic. I'm just trying to make it a little bit more exciting, a little more exciting. gonna come out with this great poem. Barlow's gonna say I'm gonna use these [inaudible] and frankly they were always kind of childish resources that the English Gothic novel has used. But I'm going to give them teeth by setting them in real life. Come on there's no such thing as a good poem. There's only one good poem, and it's not a good one. It's a great poem, but it's just not a great one. giant knights and you know demons and all that stuff, but there are monsters in those woods here in the United States, all right? I'm gonna write about those. So it's a series. It is adopting this epistolary form. It's a novel, but it's going to be a series, too, because there's a lot of story to be told in this novel," he said. "There's a story to tell, and I'm going to write about it." of letters that Edgar Huntly is writing down. Page 5, I sit down my friend to comply with thy request. At length do the impetuosity of my fear as the transports of my wonder permit me to recollect my promise to perform it. at length am I somewhat delivered from my fear and begin to write the rest of the letter. Page 6, Page 7, Page 8, Page 9, Page 10, Page 11, Page 12, Page 13, Page 14, Page 15, Page 16, Page 17, Page 18, Page 19, Page 20, Page 21, Page 22, Page 23, Page 24, Page 25, Page 26, Page 27, Page 28, Page 29, Page 30, Page 31, Page 32, Page 33, Page 34, Page 39, Page 40, Page 41, Page 42, Page 43, Page 44, Page 45, Page 46, Page 47, Page 48, Page 49, Page 50, Page 51, Page 52, Page 53, Page 54, Page 59, Page 60, Page 61, Page 62, Page 63, Page 64, Page 69, Page 70, Page 71, Page 72, Page 73, Page 74, Page 79, Page 80, Page 81, Page 82, Page 83, Page 84, Page 89, Page 90, Page 91, Page 92, Page 93, Page 94, Page 103, Page 104, Page 105, Page 102, Page 113, Page 101, Page 112, Page 123, Page 114, Page 119, Page 130, Page 131, Page 133, Page 134, Page 138, Page 139, Page 169, Page 173, Page 174, Page 179, Page 189, Page 199, Page 190, Page 191, Page 200, Page 188, Page 219, Page 209, Page 220, Page 211, Page 217, Page 218, Page 229, Page 230, Page 210, Page 221, Page 233, Page 204, Page 239, Page 215, Page 216, Page 231, Page 208, Page 207, Page 228, Page 205, Page 301, Page 222, Page 227, Page 238, Page 401, Page 300, Page 308, Page 303, Page 304, Page 403, Page 4, Page 398, Page 406, Page 319, Page 400, Page 404, Page 413, Page 410, Page 414, Page 415, Page 5. suspense and from tremors. At length the drama is brought to an imperfect close in series of events that absorbed my faculties that hurried away my attention has terminated in repose. So, it's a quiet moment. It's all over. Look at that, the language that he uses already is the language of tension and fear and tension. It is all over, it is over. It has been a long time coming, it has been an amazing journey. It was a great experience. language of enlightenment right? My faculties. Terminated in repose. This will, proleptically remind us of what Wordsworth would later write about the way poetry springs, from emotion recollected in tranquility. That's theoretically what we're getting here. Turn the page. The second full paragraph he says this, "My faculties.terminated in Repose. That is what we are getting here, emotion recollections in tranquilities. That was what we were getting here." how short is the period that has elapsed since thou and I parted, yet how full of tumult and dismay has been my soul during that period. What light has burst upon my ignorance of myself and of mankind, exclamation point. How [inaudible] and enormous the transition from [inaUDible] to [inaudsible] in the course of my life, and how I have grown so much in my knowledge of the world, and of myself, since I have left you. uncertainty to knowledge, exclamation point. Look at the tropes. Light burst on my ignorance. Transition from uncertainty to knowledge. It sounds like you know he's talking about I don't know what, the defense of Fort McHenry all right the way we described that. So this is theoretically going to be a good thing for the U.S. It's not a great thing for us, but we'll get through it. We're not going to die, we're just going to get better. a story about enlightenment. Is it? Is this a story about Enlightened? Let's skip a little bit further on. Let's take a look on page 15. He has a good friend Waldegrave who's been killed. So this starts off as if it's almost kind of an enlightenment story. But it's not. It's more like a tragic story about a man who loses his life. And it's about the loss of a friend. And that's what makes it so tragic. a proto-detective novel. He's gonna figure out who killed Waldegrave right? That would seem to be the issue of the text, and then he finds this guy kind of hanging around, and he's starting to put two and two together. So he starts being interested on this guy whose name is Waldeg Grave. That's what the book is about. It's a detective novel, but it's also about a man who wants to find out what happened to his wife.  Edgar Huntly becomes interested in Clithero Edney right? Remember what I said about doppelgangers last time. Take a look on page 15. This is in the second chapter. Found it? He worries about the possibility of behaving rashly here he says. Find it? Take a looks on page 16. Find the rest of the book on Amazon.com and the Kindle version on Amazon UK and the iPad version on the Kindle store on Amazon US and the Amazon Kindle edition on the iPad. at the second, second to last paragraph on the page. But it suddenly occurred to me for what purpose shall I prosecute this search? What benefit am I to reap from this discovery? How shall I demean myself when the criminal, all right the one who murdered Waldegrave, is detected? I suddenly realised that I had no idea what to do with this information. So I began to search the internet for information on the man who murdered the poet. I found out who it was and began to look for clues to his identity. I was not insensible at that moment of the impulses of vengeance. But they were transient. I detested the sanguinary resolutions that I had once formed. Right and that's a form of [inaudible] right, for talking about being bloody minded or being revengeful. Yet I was fearful of the effect of the words I had spoken. I was afraid of the effects of what I had said on the people I was speaking to. I feared the effect it would have on them. of my hasty rage and dreaded an encounter in consequensive wish I must, I might rush into evils which no time could repair, nor penitence expiate. Okay good thing, he's worried about behaving rationally. But look how quickly he rationalizes and changes his mind. But why said I, should it be so difficult to behave rationally? I don't think it is. I think it's a sign of a man's character that he can be so irrational. be impossible to arm myself with firmness? If forbearance be the dictative wisdom can it be so deeply engraven on the mind as to defy all temptation, and be proof against the most abrupt surprise? My late experience has been of use to me. It has shown me my weakness, and I have learned to be more firm in my resolve. I have learnt to be firm in the face of adversity, and to be willing to take risks in order to achieve my goals. and my strength. Having found my ancient fortifications insufficient to withstand the enemy, what should I learn from thence but that it becomes me to strengthen and enlarge them. No caution indeed, he says, can hinder the experiment from being hazardous. Is it wise to undertake experiments by which nothing is achieved? He says, 'No. I am not going to do anything by which I have nothing to gain.' He adds, 'I am not a man who has anything to gain by doing anything that is not worth doing.' can be gained and much may be lost? Curiosity is vicious if undisciplined by reason and inconducive to benefit. Now again, key terms from The Enlightenment here: Experimenting, progress, science. Right? Except that he's gonna be experimenting with a person who might well be a murderer and may well be. In fact, he might be. A murderer. He might be a. murderer. And he might even be a good person. He may be. But he's also a murderer. insane. And he says oh curiosity if vicious if undisciplined by reason. Okay, so we can keep curiosity in check and disciplined if we use our reason. But how does that square with what he says in the next paragraph? I was not however to be diverted from my purpose. I was going to write a book about it. And I did. And it was a great book. But I'm not going to give it away. I'm going to keep it to myself. Curiosity, like virtue, is its own reward. Knowledge is a value for its own sake and pleasure is a next to the acquisition. It is precious even when disconnected with moral inducements and heartfelt sympathies. But the knowledge which I sought by its union with these was calculated to excite the most complex and fiery sentiment in my bosom. Ask yourself is there something wrong with that pattern of reasoning. Seems reasonable at first but, is curiosity, like Virtue its own Reward? Virtue never killed the cat, right? Curiosity may not be as valuable or valuable as virtue. as you might say free from danger. Is knowledge a value for its own sake? And is it true that it's valuable, but it's even more valuable when you have a personal stake in it? There's something odd about Edgar's reasoning here, and the text is. You might say that you might says that you may be able to find out more about a subject if you know more about it than you think you do. But if you're not sure, you can always ask a friend or family member. this is again one of these texts where the way which Brown has put it down seemingly through the words of Edgar should be allowing us to open up space between what Edgar is ostensibly realizing about himself and what we are realizing about Edgar. Take a look at a few of the passages in the book and see if you can figure out what the author is trying to say. We'll be back in a few days with a selection of the best from the rest of the book. Back to the page you came from. pages on on page 31 now, and we'll see that as a man of reason, Edgar has now decided not to seek vengeance. He decides instead to be something like Clithero shrink or his comforter or perhaps blasphemously, his priest. Middle of the page on 31, I am a stranger, he says to the reader, as if to say that he is a stranger as well as a stranger. The book ends on page 32, with Edgar's final words: "I am not a stranger." to your knowing cares, to the deep and incurable despair that haunts you to which your waking thoughts are [inaudible] from which sleep cannot secure you. I know the enormity of your crime, but I know not your inducements. Whatever you were I see the consequences with regard to yourself. I see what you did and the consequences of your actions. And I know that you will pay the price for what you have done. I am sorry for what I did. I see proofs of that remorse which must ever be attendant on guilt. That is enough. Why should the efforts of our misdeeds be inexhaustible? Why should we be debarred from comforter? An opportunity of repairing our errors may at least be demanded from the rulers of our destiny. Look at us now. We are all guilty. We have all made mistakes. We must take responsibility for them. And we must take the opportunity to repair them. Look. At us. at that Franklinian language there, right? If we admit that there's destiny come on the rulers have at least to give us the opportunity of repairing errors, our own and he seems to think here, other people's. So we're right in the Franklinian enlightenment mode here. I once imagined that. IOnce imagined that we would all be able to read each other's minds. But we're not there yet. We're not even close to there. We've got a long way to go. he who killed Waldegrave inflicted the greatest possible injury on me. That was an error which reflection has cured. [Inaudible] laid open to my view and events with consequences unfolded, I might see reason to embrace the assassin as my best friend. Be comforted, he says. And he says Clithero, Clit hero, is the best man in the world. He says: 'I am the greatest man you have ever met. I am your best friend' was still incapable of speaking here. All right, this is the confidence of enlightenment thinking. This is the kind of thing that somebody like Franklin would believe. He can diagnose what's wrong with this person and he can help him. Right? Take a look a little bit further down the page. Take aLook at the next page. The next page is the next section. The third and final section is the fourth. The fifth and the sixth page are the fifth and sixth pages. The seventh and the seventh pages are the eighth and the ninth. 32. My stormy passions had subsided into a calm, portentous and awful, and that's the language of the sublime. My soul was big with expectation. I seemed as if I were on the verge of death. 33. My condition was not destitute of enjoyment. I was in a state of ecstasy. 34. I had a feeling that I was going to die. 35. I felt like I was about to be killed off. 36. I could see the end of the world. eve of being ushered into a world whose scenes were tremendous and, now he uses the term, sublime. The suggestions of sorrow and malice had for a time taken their flight and yielded place to a generous sympathy which filled my eyes with tears. But there was more in it of the sublime than sorrow or malice. It was the beginning of the end of a life that had been so much more than just a story. It had been the birth of a new world. And it was the start of a better one. pleasure than of pain. That Clithero was instrumental to the death of Waldegrave that he confers [inaudible] explanatory to every bloody and mysterious event that [inaUDible] occurred that was no longer a possibility of doubting. He is indeed said I, the murderer of Waldegrave, yet it shall be my promise. It is said that he is the only person who has ever killed a man in the history of the world. He was the only one who ever had the power to do so. to emulate a father's clemency and restore this unhappy man to purity and peace. That you might say is the ultimate statement of enlightenment principles and also of enlightenment hubris. The enlightenment will take the place of Calvinism, Christianity and everything else. Edgar will fulfill the role of a father. He will restore the unhappy man. He'll restore the unhappiness. The unhappy man will be restored to purity. The unhappiness will be returned to him. It will be the end of his unhappiness and the beginning of his enlightenment. confessor. He will dispense the healing balm of rationality and reason, right? How does that work out? Chapter 4, page 34. The bottom of the page, Clithero abrades him. You were unacquainted with the man before you. The inference with to have drawn with regard to my designs and my intentions is that you were not aware of my plans and intentions at the time of the attack. You are not aware that I was planning to kill you. conduct are a tissue of destructive errors. You like others are blind to the most momentous consequences of your own actions. You talk of imparting consolation, you boast of beneficence of your intentions. You set yourself to do me a benefit, and what are the effects of your misguided zeal? You are blind. You are misguided. You have made a series of mistakes. You will pay the price for them. You must not let your foolishness get in the way of your good intentions. and random efforts? They have brought my life to a miserable close. They have shrouded the last scene of it in blood. It's anti-enlightenment right? Instead of having a design, it's a tissue of destructive errors. It’s random efforts and misguided zeal. They've put the seal to my perdition. They’ve shrouded the final scene of my life in blood, they’re killing me. They're killing my life. I’m going to die. Clithero portrays Edgar here not as a redeeming confessor, but as an agent of perdition, of damnation. And if we look at what happens in these 4 chapters right, Chapters 4 through 8, which his Clithero's story, we see that it's clear that he actually has had nothing to do with it. It's clear he's had no role in it. And that's the way it's supposed to be. And it's not a happy ending. with the death of Waldegrave. And the story reinforces the novel's picture of identity as confusing and inconstant right? Think about the motif's in there. There's that strange co-partnership of being that Mrs. Loramer has with her brother Arthur Wyatt as if they weren't really somehow separate people that they were. The novel is published by Simon & Schuster at £16.99. For more information, visit the publisher's website or go to www.simonandschuster.com. might share the same kind of soul. Wyatt who was taken for dead, turns out to be alive. Clithero takes Clarice, who is Mrs. Loramer's niece, and his fiancee to be Mrs. Loramer and he almost kills her, and then he then almost kills herself. The film is based on the novel of the same name, written by Stephen King and published by Simon & Schuster, Inc. in the U.S. and Canada. he descends into madness which is a state of sleepwalking in which Edgar finds him. So that you might say that Clithero's story in these 4 chapters act as a kind of narrative counterweight to the primacy of reason that Edgar is trying to say this larger story is about, is a dramatization of. Take a look on page 88, he describes himself as a dispassionate. Clit hero is proof you might says that a rationality even madness is alive and well in the world and very powerful. observer still. unwilling to accept the evidence of what is in front of him. He says this, at the very bottom about 3 lines up from the bottom of 90, could I not restore a mind. And later on, take a look at this on page 90, he still is unwilling toAccept the evidence. of what's in front. of him, he says. He still. is unwilling. to accept. the evidence, even though it is clear that he is wrong. thus vigorous to tranquil and wholesome existence? Could I not subdue his perverse disdain and immeasurable abhorrence of himself? His [inaudible] were unmerited and misplaced. Perhaps they argued frenzy rather than prejudice but frenzy like prejudice was curable. Reason was no less an antidote to the illusions of insanity of the madman. He was a madman, but he was also a man, and he was a man. He had a right to be mad. "Edgar still believes in reason. He believes in the ability to know another person, to be able to see what's going on within another person through the application of his mind," says the author. "So we're 90 pages in, we've heard this story about madness and unstable identity and Edgar still believe in reason and to the illusions of error," adds the author of the novel. "Edgar is still a man of reason," he adds. "He believes in a person's ability to understand another person" of reason. Take a look at page 111. This is in the middle or about 3 lines into the [inaudible] first full paragraph, right? He's talking about trying to understand Clithero. If he were thoroughly known his character might assume a new appearance, and what is now so difficult to understand is why it's so hard to write about him. He was talking about the difficulty of writing a character who is so well-known but not so thoroughly known. reconcile to common maxims might prove consistent with them. It's like it doesn't look like it makes sense but he believes there's got to be some design, something he can discover that will make it all make sense. I desire to restore him to peace but a thorough knowledge of the rules will be needed to do it. I want to restore his peace but I need to know how to get him back on track. I don't want him to go back to his old ways. his actions is necessary both to show that he is worthy of compassion and to suggest the best means of knowledge. So what is Edgar gonna do? A little breaking and entering. Take a look on the next page, Chapter 12, The Box. I surveyed it with the utmost intention. I Surveyed it With The utmost intention, I Survey it With the utmost intent. I Surveyed It With The Highest intention, and I Surrounded It with the Highest Intention, I Surrounded It with The Highest Intensity, and It Surrounded me with the highest Intensity. All its parts appeared equally solid and smooth. One of its sides served the purpose of a lid and was possible to be raised. Mere strength could not be applied to raise it because there was no projecture which might be firmly held by. It could not been doubted that one of its side served the Purpose of a Lid and was Possible to Be Raised. It was not possible to raise the lid by any other means than by means of a lever or lever of some sort. the hand and by which force could be exerted. Some spring therefore secretly existed which might forever elude the senses, but on which the hand by being moved over in all the directions might accidentally light. So look at that. He says physical force isn't gonna work, but he can use his reason to come up with a mechanism. But interestingly that mechanism has to make use of accident. The process was effectual. A touch, casually applied at an angle drove back a bolt and a spring at the same time was sent in action by which the lid was raised above half an inch. No event could have been supposed more fortuitous, by chance than this. And a hundred hands might have sought in vain for the spring, the spot at which a certain degree of pressure was sufficient to produce this effect was of all the  of all the occasions to produce this effect. It was the only place in the world where such a thing could occur and occurred in such a way. last likely to attract notice or awaken suspicion. I opened the trunk with eagerness. The space within was divided into numerous compartments, none of which contained anything of moment. Tools of different and curious constructions and remnants of minute machinery were all that offered themselves to me. Remind you of anything? If so, I would like to hear from you. If not, I am happy to answer any questions you may have about my work. If you have any questions, please contact me at [email protected] My expectations being thus frustrated, I proceeded to restore things to their former state. I attempted to close the lid, but the spring which had raised it refused to bend. No measure that I could adopt enabled me to place the lid in the same situation in which I had found it. In my efforts to press down the lid [inaudible] in proportion to the resistance that I met with, he's trying to force it, the spring was broken. This obstacle being removed the lid resumed its proper place, but no means within the reach of my ingenuity. enabled me to discover, to discover enabled me to push forward the bolt and thus to restore the fastening. I now perceive that Clithero had provided not only against the opening of his cabinet, but likewise against the possibility of concealing that it has been opened. So this is one of the secrets of the world that I have never been able to find out how to get at. I am still trying to work out what it is that makes it possible for a man to open a cabinet and then close it. of these da da daDa scenes that you should be looking at as kind of an exemplary moment. What's going on here? What's the immediate ideas that this scene conjures up for us? It's a box. Anything? Any, yeah? >> [Inaudible] >> Okay so it's reason, used to open. It's like a door. It opens. It goes in. It closes. There's no reason to go in. There is no reason for it to close. a box that can't be closed. Let's take that as a starting point and go further with it. Remind you of anything else? >> [Inaudible] >> Yeah, it's called Pandora's Box, okay?Pandora's Box. What happens in Pandora's box? Don't open it, don'tOpen it, then open it again. Then what? Then open it. Then close it. Don't Open it, Don'topen it, Then Open It. happens? What comes out? >> All the bad things. >> All bad stuff. One thing doesn't come out. Stays in there for use later. The thing with feathers. >> Hope, yeah. Think about what that is, so that's one cultural reference right? Clearly Pandora's Box, it's a way of looking at things in a different way. It's like a Pandora's box for the human mind. It can be opened in a way that allows us to look at things differently. understanding what's happened. He says I want to know something about Clithero. He in fact has learned something. He through his, you know insinuation of himself into the circumstance, Clit hero says you've sealed my fate. But you might say it's also another way of figuring what's been going on with his mind right? He says he wants to know what's going on in his mind. He wants to figure out what's gone on with him. But he also wants to find out what has happened to him. the damnation right? You've opened Clithero's mind up. Now what's in there is out and it can't go back in. You've unleashed this madness, right? The box cannot be restored to its former state. And if you look inside it does look like it's a little bit of a kind of a box right? It's a box of madness, that's what it is. It's not a box at all. It is a box full of madness. of parody of the enlightenment mind. It has lots of compartments, it has kind of machinery. But Edgar can't understand it. Think back to your Columbus. No kings, no cities, people without [inaudible] nothing of importance. Edgar says well whatever's in here it's not important. But maybe he's missing. It's a very strange place to be in, but it's a good place to start. I'm glad I'm here. I hope you're here too. something about what's important. Or maybe the important thing is you weren't supposed to break into the box and now that you have, there's no way to set things right again. But what we want to ask is if this is clearly a metaphor for the cultural situation, for the people of the U.S. and around the world. We want to know if it's a sign of things to come, or a warning to stay out of the box. We'll have to wait and see. situation with Clithero, is it also a metaphor for what's going on with Edgar's mind as well? Is something happening to Edgar that he doesn't quite understand? It makes us doubt for one thing surely his neutrality, his rationality right? I mean again think of those [inaudible] that I told you that I was going to do. I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do it. I don't know if I can do this. you about where they seem reasonable. Then they describe how they murdered somebody. Wow they're not reasonable anymore. They're kind of nuts. Is Edgar switching over into something else? And this this account of breaking into the box seems a little [inaudible] but, in the end, it's not what you think. It's what you really think it is, and it's what we have to live with for the rest of our lives. We're not going to live in a fantasy world. a kind of neutral sentence like, in my efforts to press down the lid which were augmented in proportion to the resistance that I met with it, the spring was broken. I mean, you know the language is keeping you at a distance but you can see him starting to. You can see that he's starting to get into it. He's getting into it, I think. I don't know if it's just me, but I'm starting to see it. I think he's beginning to get it. Clithero's actions suggest that Clithero is wracked by guilt. But the opening of Chapter 13 suggests that Edgar may be feeling guilty too because you might say he's torn.get a little pissed off, right? And reason is having a more tenuous hold here. Chapter 13, the chapter that follows cements our understanding of the perils between Clit hero and Edgar. It give us an account of Edgar's relationship with Waldegrave. It gives us our first glimpse into Edgar's personal history and so it invites us to compare the two. by conflicting allegiances to his dead friend Waldegrave and to Mary. Take a look on page 124 where Edgar tells us that he isn't sleeping very well. But it isn't Clithero that appears in his dream. Third sentence, the top of the page. What however was nearly banished from my memory was that I had been in love with a woman named Mary. I was in love. with Mary. But I was not in love at the time. I have since been reunited with Mary and we are together again. waking thoughts occurred in an incongruous and half seen form to my dreams. During my sleep the image of Waldegrave flitted before me. Me thought the sentiment that impelled him to visit me was not affection or complacency, but inquietude and anger. Some service or duty remained to be performed. I thought he was angry because he felt he had not done his duty as he should have done. He was angry with himself for not doing his duty. by me which I had culpably neglected, to inspire my zeal, inspirit my zeal to awaken my remembrance and insight to me to the performance of this duty, did this glimmering messenger, this half indignant apparition come. And now he recalls his promise that he's made to Waldegrave's sister to keep his promise to her. And he recalls the promise he made to her that he would return to her in the future. And so he returns to his duties. transcribe for some of Waldegrave's letters preserving for posterity what he calls at the top of the next page, the intellectual existence and moral pre-eminence of my friend. So he decides to postpone his searching for Clithero for a day in order to fulfill his promise. But then it occurs that he will have to wait until the next day to find out what has happened to the man he loved most in the world. And so he waits until the following day to discover the truth. to him that maybe he's misinterpreted the vision. Maybe Waldegrave is appearing to him in order to keep him from transcribing those letters. And now some dodgy things come to light. Bottom of 125 we find out that Waldeg Grave might have been thinking some things that he maybe didn't want to think. And that's the end of the story for this episode of The X-Files, which airs tonight at 10 p.m. ET on X-Men TV and Blu-Ray. shouldn't have been thinking about. Bottom of the page, and again this is maybe a critique of The Enlightenment. Waldegrave like other men early devoted to mediation and books had adopted a different [inaudible] different systems of opinions on topics collected with religion and morals. His earliest creeds tended to tended to be more liberal than others of his time. He had a different view of the world than many of his contemporaries, who were more conservative. He was also more interested in the role of the church in society than others. efface the impressions of his education to deify necessity and universalize matter, to destroy the popular distinctions between soul and body and to dissolve the supposed connection between the moral condition of man anterior, and subsequent to death. This creed he adopted with all the fullness of conviction and propagated. He propagated it with all his fullness and conviction. He believed it to be true. He was a man of the highest principles. He had a great sense of right and wrong. He knew the difference between life and death. He saw it as a matter of principle. with the upmost zeal. Soon after our friendship commenced, fortune placed us at a distance from each other and no intercourse was allowed but by pen. Our letters however were punctual and copious and those of Waldegrave were too frequently devoted to the defiance of his favorite tenets. But when when we met again, we were able to write to each other once more and our friendship was rekindled. We were inseparable for the rest of our lives and remained friends to the very end. Edgar looks for these letters, on page 128, he finds that they're missing. This is the second full paragraph. I've perceived, he says, thou canst not imagine my confusion and astonishment when on opening the drawer I perceived that the packet was gone. I looked with more attention and put them back in the drawer. They were in there, but I couldn't find them. I thought they were in the bottom of the drawer, but they weren't. I opened the drawer again and found that they were gone. my hand on it, within it, but the space was empty. Wither had it gone, and by whom was it purloined? I was not conscious of having taken it away, yet no hands but mine could have done it. On the last evening I had doubtless removed it to some place, and it had doubtless been removed to some. I had not thought of taking it away until I saw it again, and then I knew I had taken it. It was gone. other corner but forgotten it. And when he can't find the letter he finds himself lost in horror and amazement. I think it's this chapter if by now we haven't already that we start to realize that there is something wrong with Edgar's thinking process. Even more so perhaps on perhaps on the part of Edgar's wife, Edith, in this chapter of the novel. The book is published by Simon & Schuster at £16.99. For more information, visit www.simonandschuster.co.uk. page 130 when his uncle starts quizzing him about what he was doing last night. But why did you go upstairs the uncle says. You might easily imagine that the sound of your steps would alarm those below who will be puzzled to guess who it was that had thought to do it. You will be surprised to find out who it is that thought to have done it, says the uncle. The story ends on a cliffhanger, with the boy's uncle asking him why he had gone upstairs. "It is not 10 minutes since I awoke and my door has not since been opened. Edgar has no idea that he's sleepwalking, right? So one of the things that we have to realize is that he is not proper to amuse himself in this manner," he says. "Upstairs? I have not left my room this night. It is not ten minutes since he awoke and his door has been opened," he adds. "He has not been able to find his way up to his room. He has been sleepwalking." here, already we're starting to see that Edgar has a somewhat mysterious personal history and it's a personal history that is not dissimilar to the personal history of Clithero. The two of them are being developed by the novel as doppelgangers, as doubles. Now, Chapters 14 and 15 are chapters in the novel, and we'll see what happens in the rest of the book as it goes on. The book is due out in September. It's being published by Simon & Schuster, with a release date of September 25. that probably don't get fully worked out in the course of the novel. They are, they involve the appearance of a stranger named Weymouth who claims that Mary's inheritance from Waldegrave belongs to be their own. I mean, it's actually his own. And Waldeg Grave hasn't left a record of it, and he hasn't been seen in years. And he's never been seen by anyone else. And it's not like he's going to leave a will or anything. but Edgar believes Weymouth's claim, and something else comes out. This is on page 149. Middle of the long paragraph. Think upon the merits and misfortunes of your brother's friend, think upon his aged father whom you have never met. And so on and so on until you get to the end of the book, which is at the bottom of the page. And then you can read the rest of the story, which starts at the top of the next page. we shall enable him to rescue from poverty, think upon his desolate wife. He's talking about Weymouth, whose merits are probably at least equal to your own and whose helplessness is likely to be better, greater. I mean he's a good guy, he wants to do the right thing, right? He wants to rescue his wife from poverty. He doesn't want to rescue himself. He just wants to save his wife. That's what he wants, that's all. I am not insensible to the evils which have returned upon us with augmented force after having for a moment taken their flight. I know the precariousness of my condition and that of my sisters, that our subsistence hangs upon the life of an old man. My uncle's death, will be a great loss to all of us, and I am sure that we will all be better off as a result of his death. I hope that all of you will join me in praying for him and his family. [inaudible] will you know he's living, he and his sisters are living with his uncle after the death of his parents, by I think who were killed in an Indian raid. My uncle [inaudibles] will transfer this property to his son who is a stranger and an enemy to us. He will give it to his brother who is an enemy and a stranger to us, and he will give the property to him. He'll give it back to us as a gift. And the first act of whose authority will unquestionably be to turn us forth from these doors. Marriage with thee was anticipated with joyous emotions not merely on my encounter on thine, but likewise for the sake of these beloved girls to whom that event would enable me to furnish. And so it will be, too, when we are married in the coming days. And then we will be together for the rest of our lives. And that will be the most wonderful thing in the world. an asylum. But wedlock is now more distant than ever. We start to see that there's a whole property motif that is sort of hidden and starting to come up to the surface here. You know, life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness means life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness. That's what we're trying to achieve here, I think. I think that's the key to the whole thing. I don't think it's going to be easy, but I think we're getting there. Edgar has been banking his whole future on the fact that Mary is supposed to inherit from Waldegrave. What doesn't, what happens if that doesn't happen? All right? So there's a whole way in which you might say Edgar is self interested, that he only reveals to us you might you might.property. He's been banking on that. What does that mean for him? What does it mean for Mary? What happens if he doesn't get it? What do you think? say in the margins of the narrative. He doesn't actually address it. All of his future plans have in fact been prompted by Waldegrave's death. He said it's a disastrous event and yet it's paving the way for his future happiness. All he said was that he could imagine marrying, and that he was looking forward to it. He didn't say he would marry, but that he would look forward to the day when he could. He also said that he had no plans to marry at the moment. the sudden just as it happened for Clithero the past is suddenly beginning to impinge on Edgar. Take a look at page 90, because now something decisive happens. We'll backtrack a little bit. Bottom of page 90,. he's talking about the woods as a place where he learns and has. The past is starting to intrude on Edgar, and it's starting to get to him. It's beginning to affect him in a way that he doesn't know how to deal with. aesthetic experiences, bottom of page 90. Thou knowest my devotion to the spirit that breathes its inspiration in the gloom of forest and on the verge of streams. I love to immerse myself in shades and dells and hold congress with the solemnities and delicacies, secrecies of nature in the wild. I am a man of the woods. I live in the woods, and I love the forest. I have a love for nature. I want to live in it. rude retreats of Norwalk. The disappearance of Clithero had furnished new incitements to ascend its cliffs and pervade its thickets. And again you might say, it's this whole you know business of the sublime right? I mean that's what he's talking about there. As I cherish the hope of meeting him again, I hope to meet him again. I hope we'll meet again, and I hope he'll meet me again, too. I love him so much. in my rambles with some traces of this man, but might he still not live? His words had imparted the belief that he intended to destroy himself. This catastrophe however was far from certain. Was it not in my power to avert it? Could I not restore a mind thus? I thought to myself. I was not sure. But I was sure that I could do something to prevent it. I had to do something. I could not be certain. But could I not do it? vigorous to tranquil and wholesome existence? Right, we get back to that. So Edgar has thought of himself as a man of The Enlightenment, aMan of science. He's gone for walks in the woods. But what we suddenly realize after all this has happened is that he hasn't fully fully understood what it means to be a man. It's not about being a man, it's about who you are, and how you feel about yourself. That's what we're trying to find out here. mapped those woods. For one thing, he's only been there in the daylight. For another, he hasn't fully mapped his mind in the same way either, right? So one of the things that Brown does as you might say maps the woods onto Edgar's mind. In exploring the woods, he also explores the mind of Edgar, who is also in the woods. The series premieres on Thursday, October 25, at 9 p.m. ET on PBS. For more, go to www.pbs.org. as you might say in exploring the box, Edgar starts exploring facets of his own mind that have remained hidden from view. Take a look a couple of pages on on page 151 and all of the sudden we see that there's a kind of a break in the narrative. The book ends on a cliffhanger, but it's not the end of the story. It's the beginning of a new chapter in the life of Edgar's character. The story continues on the next page. And he says this: possibly the period will arrive when I shall look back without agony on the perils I have undergone. That period is still distant. Solitude and sleep are now no more than the signals to summon up a tribe of ugly phantoms. Famine and blindness and death are now the signals for me to summon them up. And they are waiting for me. They are waiting to be summoned up by me. I am waiting for them to summon me up, and I will summon them. and savage enemies never fail to be conjured up by the silence and darkness of the night. I cannot dissipate them by any efforts of reason. Reason now completely fails him. My cowardice requires the perpetual consolation of light. My heart droops when I mark the decline of the sun. My fear of the dark is so great that I cannot bear to look at it. I am afraid of the darkness. I fear the dark. I do not want to see it anymore. I want to be able to see the light. and I never sleep but with a candle burning at my pillow. Right, so from the confidence of enlightenment, now it's the pathetic I need to have a nightlight on, right? That's what Edgar has sunk to. What has caused all of this? His experience in the woods. And we'll find out soon enough, I'm sure. I'm so glad you're here. I've missed you. I love you all. I'll see you soon, I promise. take it up again on Wednesday, the experience of the woods. One thing I'd like you to do in addition to reading the short stories of Irving's that are assigned for next time which elaborate on this theme of Gothic and reason, is to take a little look at Edgar, the author of "The Little Engine That Could" The short stories are assigned to you for next week. They are all short stories that elaborate on the Gothic theme of the story. The stories are written in the style of Edgar Allen Poe. the pit, and the panther. I want you to look for the motif of light in the Panther scene, and also track one particular word, and that word is savage. All right we'll leave it there. Thanks a lot. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. The panther scene is one of the most memorable in the film's history. The Panther is a film that has won numerous awards, including Best Picture, Best Director and Best Actor.