An independent set in a graph is a subset of vertices with no two adjacent. For example, if the graph is this cycle on four vertices, an example of an independent set would be two vertices like this. In this video, we'll look at an application of the probabilistic method to graph theory. The video was produced by YUFEI ZHAO for CNN's iReport channel. For more, go to CNN.com/YUFEiZHAO. graph, what can you say about the size of its independent sets? The following theorem, due to Caro-Wei, says that every graph G contains a large independent set in the following sense. It contains an independent set of size at least the following quantity, summing over all v among vertices. For example, the set of all vertices of a graph G is the sum of the number of vertices in the graph G, plus the number of vertices on each vertice. G, 1 over the degree of v plus 1. So let us prove this theorem first, and then we'll see an application and some ways to interpret this result. The proof of this theorem applies the probabilistic method. So we are given this graph G. And the first thing we'll do is prove that G, 1 is a positive number. And then we will see some ways we can use this number to interpret the result. We'll start with the proof of the theorem. do is order the vertices of G uniformly at random. For example, from the graph earlier, had we ordered theVertices in this order-- so that's, say, some random ordering. So the edges are 1, 2, 3, and 4. So let's order the Vertices 1,2, 3 and 4, and so on. And let's consider the set I of vertices defined as follows. These are the vertice in G such that v appears before all it's neighbors in the random ordering of G. I claim that I is always an independent set. It will be impossible to have two vertices in I that are adjacent to each other. But in more complicated graphs, it can pick up additional vertices. I would pick out is a set of vertices such that-- so let's see if each vertices would belong to I. The first vertex appears before all of its neighbors. So we put the first vertex in I. But the second vertices do not appear before one of their neighbors, 1, so we do not put it in I as well. And the third vertices here also does not appears before its neighbor. And we don't put them in I, either. because one of them would appear before the other in the order, and that would violate the condition on how we chose I. Next, let's think about how large I is. For every vertices V and G, the probability that V is in I-- well, this is the probability of V being in I. And we can see how large this is by looking at how many vertices there are in each of the vertices. For example, the number of vertices that are in I is 1. the V appears first among V and its neighbors. Well v has D sub V with degree of V neighbors. And all the ordering are chosen uniformly at random. And thus by the linearity of expectations, the. probability is 1 divided by the degree ofV plus 1. The probability of the V appearing first among the V's neighbors is 1, divided by 1, and thus the probability of it appearing first is 1/1, or 1/2, and so on and on. expected size of this set I is equal to the sum over vertices V in G of the probability that this V lies in I. And we just computed this probability as such. This is what happens on average. And therefore, there must be some ordering in the set I. For example, there is a probability of 1 in 1,000,000 that a vertices I is in the same place as the vertices G in G. And this is the expectation for the size of the set. that induces an I so there is some I with the size of I at least the quantity that we just produced. So that finishes the proof of the Caro-Wei theorem. Again, it says-- the way to think about this theorem is that if you are given a graph g, there is an I that induces an g that is the same size as the g we just made. That's the Cara-WeI theorem. It says that if g is a graph, then there is a I that is equal to g. such that typically one does not have large degrees, then it must contain a large independent set. By considering the complement of this graph G-- by considering the graph complement-- theGraph complement means that we switch, flip the edge and non-edges. So this is a graph G. And then the graph G is called the "graph complement" of G. The graph complement of G is the set of all the independent sets of a graph that has a large number of degrees. this will be the complement of G, So flip the edges and non-edges on G. Independent sets in G become cliques in the complement. The cliques are complete graphs with all the edges present and vice versa. So we can read Caro-Wei's theorem for the complement to deduce this. We can then use this to find the complement for a graph of a set of edges. The result is that the graph of the set of all edges is called a "clique" the following corollary. It says that every n-vertex. of a graph G contains a clique on at least this many vertices. So the expression inside the summation is the clique of-- is the complement or the degree in the complement. And this turns out to be a very interesting result. It turns out that the corollaries of the above are not mutually exclusive. They can be combined to give a more complete picture of the structure of the graph. The result is that the graph G can be viewed as a series of n- vertices with a single clique. Turan's theorem says the following. If an n-vertex graph has more than the following number, 1 minus 1 over r n squared over 2, then the graph contains clique on more than r vertices. Turan's. theorem gives us some bound on the maximum number of edges that a. graph can have if it doesn't have a large clique. And here let us restrict to the graph shown in the figure below. And furthermore, this bound here is best possible in the following sense. case when n is divisible by r, you need to do a similar construction, turns out to be best possible. This bound can be improved slightly, but not by too much. So here's the example. Let us take the n vertices and the vertices of n- vertices. Then we can say that n-vertices are equal to 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 68, 69, 70, 72, 73, 74, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 94. split them into equal parts. And there are r parts. So here in this illustration r equals to 3. And let's put in all the edges between parts, but no edge within a part. So this is called the complete r partite graph. So you see that this graph here, here, is a graph of the r parts of a triangle. And here in the illustration, r is the length of the triangle, and the length is the number of vertices in the triangle. one can do a quick calculation to see that it has exactly this number, 1 minus 1 over r times n squared over 2 edges. On the other hand, it does not contain a clique on more than r vertices. The biggest clique you have comes from taking one vertices away from the rest of the vertices and adding it to one of the other vertices to form a new clique. The number of vertices that make up the clique is the same as the number of edges. in each part. So by the earlier corollary, G has a clique of size, at least sum over the vertices in G. So this is an example showing that the statement of Turan's theorem is best possible. Let us prove Turan’s theorem as a quick Corollary of the earlier result. We show that G has at least one clique that is at least twice the size of the previous clique, and that this clique is the same size as the previous one. 1 over n minus the degree of v. And here, let us use the convexity. So this is a convex function, which allows us to lower bound the sum by 1 over n plus x. So in this step, let's use the convexity of the function, sending x to 1 over  n minus x. We can then lower the sum of the two numbers by 1 over n plus x, or 1 over n plus x, or 1 over  n plus x. n over n minus the average degree of G. On the other hand, if the graph has more than this many edges, then the averagedegree is bigger than some corresponding quantity. And putting this into the expression, we can have a final expression strictly bigger than n over n. The expression is: N over n plus G over G is the number of edges in the graph. It can be written as: N over n minus G over G is N over N. The result is: n over N is the size of the graph with most edges. minus 1 minus 1 over r times n. And this quantity here equals to r. So there's a strict equality sign here. In particular, G has a clique of size strictly greater than r, and that finishes the proof. Turan's theorem is a important and foundational result. For more information on Turan’s theorem, see: http://www.turan-theory.org/Turan-Theory-Phenomenon-G.html. in graph theory. And it's a start of a subject that we now call extremal graph theory, concerning what can you say about a graph that has certain properties, like not having a large clique? And this proof that we just saw is a beautiful illustration of the probabilistic method, which is used to prove that a graph doesn't have a large group of cliques. And this is a start to a subject we now called extremalgraph theory. It's a subject which is very important in graph theory because it shows how a graph can have certain properties. to graph theory that allows us to prove this wonderful result. Turan's theorem, along with many other results that I hope that you will learn in the future. I hope you will also learn many other interesting things from this book. I'm looking forward to seeing you in the next few weeks. I'll be in the U.S. and I hope to see you soon in the UK. I will miss you all. I love you all very much. Back to Mail Online home.