So now that we've combined pulley A, string 2, platform, and washer as our system, we can now address our question. If we measure the acceleration of the person, what is the force that the person pulls the rope down with? Well, of course, that will just be the tension. We can use this to measure the force of a person pulling a rope down on a pulley. We'll show you how to do it in the next episode of "This is Life with Lisa Ling" in the string. And with this simple system, we can now apply Newton's second law, F equals ma. But recall, we need some directions. So suppose we expect that the acceleration of the platform and person is up. So we'll choose a unit vector j hat in the positive direction. And we can apply the law of gravity to the situation. The result is that the person is moving in the opposite direction to where the platform is moving. The acceleration is now in the negative direction. And now the problem becomes tension one, three different tensions, 3T1, and gravitational force minus mp plus mw times g. Now, what is the mass that we have to consider? Well, the platform and the person, and we assume the pulley and the system. And we assume that the mass of our system is the same as that of the person and the platform. And so on and so on. And now we have the problem of how to make the system work. the string, too, were massless. So we have simply mp plus mw a. And so we can now solve for the tension in the string, which is equal to mp + mw times g plus a divided by 3. And recall that this tension, that the string is pulling, this is the tension that is pulling the string. And this tension is the same as the tension of the string that is being pulled by the string itself. So the tension is just the tension between the two. is what we called the force that the person [? of ?] the string on the person. And by Newton's third law, that's also, on the washer. So this was our goal. It's theforce that the washers applies to string 1 and string 2. And it's the same for string 3 and string 4, too. So that's what we were trying to do with this video. We wanted to make it look like a washer and dryer. to string 1 by the third law. And so by thinking about how to choose a system, what could be a very complicated problem, with lots of equations, is simply one equation. To solve a complex problem, think of it as a series of equations with a single solution. The solution to the problem of how to solve a complicated problem is simply a single equation. The answer is simply to solve the problem by solving the equation: 1 + 1 + 2 = 3 - 3 - 4 - 5.