The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open CourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. To see more videos from MIT Open courseware, visit iReport.com/MIT-Open-Course-Ware-2014-05-05. For more information about MIT OpencourseWare, visit opencourseware.org or call the support team at 1-800-273-TALK (8255). of stuff to go through. So hopefully we'll get to the actual game playing, but if not, don't worry, you'll actually get to play the games. The games that we'll end up playing today are games from last year. A lot of them are actually the final semester-- the final week of the semester. We'll be back next week with a look back at the games we played in the first half of the year. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter. project, which means they are not answering the same question that you're trying to answer with your very first project. But it should give you a sense of what the scope of this class actually is. Last week, a couple of you played the LEGO game, Block Party. That was the first project of the class. The second project will be the final project. The third and final project is the final one of the school year. The final project will take place on the last day of class. a two week project, and that was just without staff. These were more like four week projects. And we'll design my students with larger teams and probably closer to the kind of game that you're going to end up making. I want you to keep in mind that you’re not going to be able to make the game you want to make, but you can make a better version of it if you work together with other people who have the same goals and are willing to work on it. constrained to building games that look exactly like those. In fact, after you've got a chance to play some of the games from last year, I hope you actually have a chance. to think a little bit about what did they not do. All these games are like this sort of thing, it's just that they don't look as good as they used to. It's a bit of a shame, because they're really good games, but they're not very good at it. of board game. And you will see a lot of them are this sort of board games. You find out what this is. You'll be able to do-- you can think a little bit about what would it be like to design a game that's not that. What if it was not a board game at all? You can think about what if it were a different game. You can do that with this book. It's called The Book of Board Games and it's published by Simon & Schuster. you just wanted to make your car game, for instance? You can. That's no reason why you couldn't. What if you want to do a live action game where you actually move around with your body, that sort of thing? That's totally doable. I really, really hesitate not-- try not to try to do that. I don't know why I hesitate, but I do. I just don't. It's like, 'Oh my God, what am I going to do?' to put any live digital components in your game. I know some people-- unless it's something simple like a timer that you can run off your iPhone. OK, maybe that's fine. By actually writing code, then the scope of this project just went through what I expected you to do. By writing code you're doing what I expect you todo. You're writing code. You are writing a game. That's what you're supposed to do, right? You're not writing a video game, you're writing a computer game. And the possibility of failure is-- go back please. Audience: Very much. PROFESSOR: But not failing the class. But your project just failing during runtime. So that's probably something you don't necessarily want to do. We had two readings today, one for last Wednesday and then one for today. So go back to the page you came from and read the other one. Back to Mail Online home. Back into the pageyou came from. Back To The page you were from. I want to-- I try to cover quite a bit of it from the first reading during class itself. Was anyone here not here on Wednesday? OK, all right. So we need to make sure that your name's on the attendance sheet. And you should come and talk to me after class. And we'll make sure you get a copy of the syllabus and everything like that. Make sure that you get expectations for this class. So hopefully you found your name on the Attendance sheet because I had to manually add a few of you. I hope you got-- I got it all right. One of the points that I tried to get across on Wednesday was-- all right, who's the most important person when it comes to actually playing. Now one of the point that I try to get. across-- is this recording? Yeah. I'm trying to get that across, I'm sure, to you. I hope you get it. I've been trying to do it for a long time, and I hope I'm getting it right. a game? AUDIENCE: (COLLECTIVELY) The players. PROFESSOR: The players, right, not the designers, not you. But you when you actually play someone else's game. Then you're the most important person. If that person's experience is problematic or exciting or engaged or outright hostile to other players, or something like that, that's a problem. That's not a game. That is a person. It's a person who is trying to make a difference in the world. that's making it the way that they want to take it. And then you as the designer are are going to run through a number of different challenges trying to be able to give them an experience that you're trying to create for them. But you also have to acknowledge that they also want to make it their own way and that's where the challenge is for you as a designer to get them to make the right decision for themselves. It's not always going to be easy, but it's always worth it. that if somebody wants to take your hardcore strategy game and turn it into a lighthearted party game, or vice versa, that's their prerogative. And if they say, hey, I really, really wanted this to be a. lighthearted game, and you gave me this hardcore game. And it made me happy, then that's what I want to do. And that's how I feel about the game. I feel like it's the right thing to do, and I'm happy to do it. hate the people around me, the table. And I don't like it, that is fine. It's OK for them to not like your game based on my criteria like that. However, one of the things that comes up in the Brathwaite reading is this concept of meaningful decisions, right? Well, well, that's what I'm trying to get at here. I think it's a good idea to try and get people to think about what it means to make a meaningful decision. what's-- Sid Meire how many of you heard of Sid Meier? Yeah, what games can people remember from-- AUDIENCE: (COLLECTIVELY) Civilization. Railroads? I think he also did the first Rollercoaster. Pirates? yeah, yeah. Mostly a computer game designer, although if you actually play his games, if you're a gamer, you'll probably know him better than anyone else in the history of the game industry. If you're not a gamer yourself, you might not know who Sid Meier is. like digital board games a lot, especially Civilization. And he has a code, which just says games are a series of interesting decisions. Not necessarily meaningful but interesting-- the decisions. And what are some of the ways that a decision can be meaningful? What are some the things that a game can do that are meaningful to you? He says, "I don't know if I can explain it to you. I don't think you can understand it to yourself." He says that games are about making interesting decisions, not necessarily meaningful ones. might come up in the reading or occur to you right now? That a decision in a game can be meaningful-- what does it mean? What does it means to be meaningful? Couple hands? AUDIENCE: When you make that decision, the game's status changes or code that meanders the change? What do you mean by "meaning" in that context? What is the meaning of the word "meaningful" in the game you're playing? What are the meanings of the words "game" and "meaning"? Professor: If you make a decision and the outcome hasn't changed, it wouldn't terribly be meaningful. Audience: That's what I was going to say. Professor: I guess a lot like doing. I guess I guess it's like making a decision, and then the outcome actually has changed. That's the corollary. It's not meaningful if the outcome is the same, but if the decision is different, it's meaningful. It could be a lot of different things. something and, I don't know, getting money in a money based game. So getting money? So getting some sort of quantitative reward based on the decision that you've made. Audience: Also you can get sort of awesomeness award even if it doesn't affect who will win or not. It can be a lot of fun. It could be a little bit of fun, too. It's just a fun way to have a little fun with your friends. It doesn't have to be a big deal. could be something really awesome in the game, and you make a decision-- PROFESSOR: So kudos or something like that. It's like, wow, that was an amazing-- like in football, for instance. That was anAmazing play. It didn't necessarily complete, but it would have been awesome. But maybe it wouldn't have been as complete as you'd like it to be. That's the kind of thing that happens when you're in the NFL, I think. was an awesome defense or something like that. That could be a meaningful decision. How about if you decide to roll a die? Game state has changed, usually. Is that a meaningful thing? AUDIENCE: It could be if it's like a choice you have. You roll a dice in one or two, is that a choice that's meaningful? Is it like a decision you have to make when you're playing a game? Is that one of the things that makes a difference in the game? direction of the game or do you not, and choose different that's meaningful. It's like, do I roll the die now, or do I wait a minute before I take my turn? That's not really a meaningful decision. Audience: I would say most games that the die roll would be most meaningful would be the roll of the die, not the choice not to roll it. The professor: "If you had a meaningful alternatives as well, you would roll it" meaningful but not a decision. So the die roll basically tells you what to do. You're not actually thinking about it. But it's still meaningful. You can still change the game state and the fact who wins or whatever happens to me. But you can't change the outcome of the game. It's just a number. It doesn't mean you're going to win or lose. It just means you have to do what the numbers tell you to do, and that's what you do. is usually meaningful, but you may not have had to decide to do that. (Starting with you, We'll go that way.) In a game like Yahtzee where-- do you roll the dice you're trying to make room. But it's about the die rolling where it's needed, not where it isn't. We'll be back in a few minutes with the next episode of "This Is Life with Lisa Ling" on CNN at 10 p.m. ET on Thursday. like something not Monopoly. It's not really a decision. You have to do it every turn. Yeah, and that's an interesting thing. I talked a little bit about mechanics on Wednesday and the idea that if you think of a mechanic as something a player does to change, that's a mechanic. That's what we're trying to do in this game. We're not trying to make a game that's like Monopoly, but that's what it's like to play. the game state, the roll die-- the die rolling thing is a weird thing because game state is changing it's something a player does but a player didn't decide how to do that, right? The player is just told to roll this die. Well, they kind of covered [INAUDIBLE]... The die rolling is something that a player doesn't decide to do. The player just rolls the die and the game state changes. The roll die is something the player does. PROFESSOR: OK, yeah that's good. AUDIENCE: We can choose like a different type of roll. PROFESSor: Oh yeah, again like Yahtzee-- which die, right? Yeah? AUDience: I learned this definition of [INAUDIBLE] series decisions, like the card game War, for instance, or the board game Candy Land.PROFessor: That's a series decision. That's what we do in the game. version of Candy Land which lets you choose which pile of red cards to draw from. But is that meaningful? A stack of randomly shuffled cards? Audience: Yeah, it has to do with [INAUDIBLE].. AUDIENCE: If there a random pile [INAudible].. ... AUDience: If you shuffle them and take the top, it's not a game. It's just a way of playing Candy Land, I guess. I don't know if that's true, though. card, it's doesn't really matter. It just means that these things aren't games. And-- AUDIENCE: It's seems okay actually. PROFESSOR: I feel you something else that you wanted to add on to that. It seems like it's going to be a good day. It looks like we're going to have a great day. We're looking forward to it. We hope you'll join us for the rest of the day. Back to the page you came from. It's possible that in the entire game, maybe you don't get that many meaningful decisions. That doesn't necessarily make it not a game. It might make it a very different game. That's what I'm trying to get to the bottom of. It's not a very clear-cut answer, but I think it's a good one. I think that's what we're trying to find out. It doesn't mean it's not meaningful. It just means that the decision may not be meaningful. good game, which is a different thing. That's a qualitative and often subjective experience, right? To a two or three year-old it maybe an awesome game. You get to play in a land of candy. A few more hands I thought I saw? AUDIENCE: Yeah, on that topic. I think I saw some more hands that I thought were a good number of hands. I don't know what they were, but they looked like good hands to me, so I'm going to keep playing. there's a reason why people who over a certain age never really wanted to play Candy Land anymore because they realized that they don't really do anything, so they get really bored with it. For kids or some other targeted thing going on more than the meaningful decision, making it can be very difficult. It can be really hard to make the right decision for kids or for people who want to make a difference in the lives of others. It's not just for kids, it's for adults as well. fun to actually just doing something and moving-- or winning cards that makes it fun. War and Candy Land let you do-- if, for instance, it gives a five-year-old a winning chance against an adult, right? That could be huge for a kid. It's like, wow, it's like a game that's really fun to play. It gives you a chance to do something that you've never done before, and it's fun to do it with your friends. I can actually play this with an adult? Learning how to take turns is one thing that people have actually get good at the games like Candy Land. I believe Candy Land was invented to keep kids from getting polio. I can't remember if I brought this up last time. I think Candy Land is one of the most popular board games in the world. It's been around for a long time, but it's never been as popular as it used to be in the '80s and '90s. from each other. That might be urban legend. There's polio going around at the time it happened. If you stay indoors with other kids, it keeps kids indoors. It might be true. It's a myth. I don't know if it's true or not. But it's a legend. I'm not sure if it really is true. If it is true, it might be an urban legend, or it might not be. It could be a myth or it could be real. I can't be sure. the people you already know you know aren't infected, you're going to be OK. Audience: With polio, you can't do much of anything. PROFESSOR: There's a huge inversion from the get out and get some exercise. It's a serious game. It has health benefits. Let's get out there and play some football. It will help you get over it. It'll help you feel better. It won't hurt you, but it will help your health. play in the land of Candy. I would like to go back a little bit to this idea about changing the game state, right? You make a decision in a game, and you've changed a game state. It wasn't a decision-- it wasn't-- I get to try to roll in the Land of Candy, which is where Candy is based. It's a fun place to play, and it's a great place to have fun with your friends. I'm looking forward to playing there. from three identical dice. Which die do I roll, OK? All right, that's not real-- a real decision. Unless they are loaded and there not identical. But anyway, so what do you need to be able to communicate to the player that their decision actually changed anything? OK, actually let's actually let the player decide, shall we? Let's roll the die and see what happens. OK, which die do we roll? We'll roll the dice and see if anything happens. If you don't let the player know what changed the game state, is it that meaningful a decision anymore? You did something. Some numbers changed inside the system. It's good to affect how things go out later. But it's also good to let people know what you did before it goes out. You can do that by telling the player what happened before the game starts. You don't have to tell the player all the time, but you can let them know what happened first. you don't actually know what happened. Has anyone played a game like this? Does that sound familiar? AUDIENCE: I feel it's very much potential to player and the system because a lot of times something like that will happen and whatever most people say, oh, nothing really changed. My decision is to play the game and see what happens. I don't know if I'll be able to do it, but I'm going to try my best to try and do it as best I can. didn't matter at all. Whereas someone that takes the game more seriously might actually realize something changed just from probabilistic analysis, something ridiculous. And also if you expect players to get very into your game, this is the stuff that you can leave with because they will understand it and they will be able to take it in. It's a great way to get people into the game, and it's a good way to make them feel like they're part of the team, too. figure it out on their own. And that has to be part of the game. Whereas if you expect players to pick it up and play it three times in their life and then move on, then it probably won't help them that much. And you should you should probably stop doing that to your players. It's not going to help them any more than it is for you to stop doing it to your own players. That's the way it's going to be for a long, long time. give them more feedback socially. If you have an adventure game where there's a story or something. And you tell some guys to just not help the guy. And then he becomes an evil warlord later. There are some interesting things that can happen in that kind of situation. It's a little bit of fun, but it's not a big deal. It doesn't have to be a big thing, though. It can be a small thing, or it could be a really big thing. In Dominion, oftentimes you can draw cards that don't help you. There's a long term consequences, so a lot of immediate consequences. Immediate feedback, which is a term that you brought up. You can do with that what you want. You're not going to get it all the time, but you can try to get some of it, and that's what we're trying to do here. We're not giving you all the answers, but we're going to try to give you some of them. just pointlessly causing a reshuffle. But normally if I were to do this without thinking and thinking doesn't matter. Would it actually be slightly beneficial or slightly [INAUDIBLE] that actually do this? But unless you really think about it, you won't even notice that it caused any sort of change. It's a very simple thing to do, but it can have a huge impact on a person's life. It can change the way they look at their life, and it can change how they see things. there. Thinking of the Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy game. There's a specific point where you must-- if there's a dog, you need to give it a sandwich. Otherwise you're doing it yourself 200 turns later, like hours later in this game. Right, and that hurts, right? AUDIENCE: Yes, yes, it does, and it hurts, and you're going to have to go back and do it again, and again and again, until you figure out how to do it. What's the game called? AUDIENCE: The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy text adventure. Another really straightforward example is competitive games where you get only some of the [? stateness ?] information, like Starcraft or something. You can't really see what your opponent is doing. It's interesting because you don't really know what they're doing. You're just trying to do your best to win the game. That's what you're supposed to do in a competitive game. usually not [INAUDIBLE] changing what your opponent does based on what you can't see. And I say usually because it does happen. Occasionally, your opponent sees something that you didn't see and they changed their strategy based on that. I've played a number of adventure games that actually have this in them, and it's very common. It's a very good way to get a feel for how the game is going to play. It can be very unpredictable, but it can also be very, very effective. more as a puzzle solving thing. So it's not like 200 turns later something changes. It's like something changes right away, and you need to figure out what changed. There's feedback somewhere in the world. But I want to say I probably didn't enjoyed those those games. I'm not sure if I would have enjoyed them if I'd played them. I don't think I would've enjoyed them as much as I did. I think I'd have liked them a lot more if I knew what I was doing. You have to be careful that it doesn't have too much complexity or some sort of unanticipated change that there's too steep of a learning curve to actually enjoy it, but you play it and it takes. Something-- Do you want to ask it? AUDIENCE: Well, you have toBe careful. You have to. Be careful. Maybe someone does. Something -- Do you Want to Ask It? Maybe Someone does. It's a good question. It could be a good answer. It can be a great question. two hours. And you realize something you did, screwed you up, you might not want to play again. PROFESSOR: Yeah, it's like-- AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] PROFessor: --I got the wrong ending because I made this decision five hours ago or something like that. OK, how about the alternative, when something-- my choice is to say, 'I don't want to be here anymore. I want to go home' game state changes, and you're not really sure how your decision came up with that outcome. So not random exactly, but overly complex maybe. Well, you don't end up with a good mental model of how the game works. And so even though you make meaningful decisions,you don't don't really know how they came to be. You don't have a good idea of what the game is about. You just don't know what the outcome is. So you just kind of go with it. know what the meaning is. And so any time you're making another decision, you may be able to select, actually choose in a way that you want to. It prevents a chess style of approaching the game. Right, in chess you see the board and in this case, you can choose the direction of the arrow in the middle of the board. It's a way of thinking about the game that is very different from chess. It can be used to help you with other aspects of your life. you-- a lot of the really good players will see X number of moves in advance. But when things happen, they just randomly appear. You have to react on the fly. You can't just plan out all of your moves. This-- reactive play. I think this one's a good one. It's a great way to test your knowledge of the game. And it's a fun way to get to know your opponent. It can be a little bit nerve-wracking, but it's also very rewarding. lot bigger issue than the other one because this could lead to a lot of frustration with players. If they can see the game state changing and know that they're effective but don't know how they're affecting it, I just feel as a player, that would frustrate you to no end. If you can see that the game is changing but you can't tell how it's changing, that's a big problem. That would be frustrating to a player. I feel that that would be a big issue for players. "It kinda turns it into a Candy Land game even if it's not. And that would make you think that everything you do doesn't really matter and that you're going to win or lose regardless of what you're doing," he says. "Sometimes I've occasionally I've won the game," he adds. "But I've never been able to do it." "I don't think I've ever won a game in my life," he admits. "I've never won anything in my whole life." played some word [INAUDIBLE] games that are hard to understand. And the mechanics aren't intuitive like Village. We sort of did stuff, but we had-- and then afterwards, we didn't really understand. We didn't understand how we were changing it, but it took awhile before you really-- you don't understand. It took awhile to get used to it. It was a long process. It's been a long time since I've played a game like that. I'm glad I got to do it. what's happening. And there are many games where you can do very poorly or very well. And it takes a while to understand exactly why you're doing very well or very poorly. So sometimes even success can be bewildering, right? Yeah? AUDIENCE: I feel like this sort of [INAUDIBLE]----.----  ‘I’m sorry, I’ve got to go,’ she says. ‘It’s just the way it is.’ ‘Yes, it is,” she says, ‘but I don’t want to leave it at that.” it's easier to deal with from a digital game and a board game because in a digital. game, usually people have to take their turns and have to play out more slowly. In a good board game, you change something and-- if you do something and something changes, maybe it's a good idea to change it. It's easier for people to take turns in digital games because they don't have to wait as long for their turn to be played out. It just happens. It doesn't last as long in a good digital game. you can just start over and do it again like it's a different thing. So in a digital game? AUDIENCE: Yeah, trial and error. Some games let you save state and then reload state. So you can. You can save state, reload state, and then save state again, and you can do it all over again. It's like a game, but it's also a real life game. You're playing a real person and you're trying to do something different. say, well, what if I tried this decision? And then there's an interesting phenomenon that goes with that in a lot of strategy games called save scrubbing. And that is where you know that the outcome of something is based on a probability. And so if you save and reload, you can change the outcome. That's what happens in strategy games. It's called 'save scrubbing' and 'save and reloading' It's a way of changing the outcome in a strategy game. often enough, you will always be successful. This is completely aside from what I wanted talked about today. But it's an interesting strategy that game designers use. And that is to-- in a digital game, save some random number seed at the time when the game starts. It's called a "random number seed" and it can be used in a number-based game. It can also be used as a random number generator in a computer game, such as a game called "Fortnite" save is made so that outcome's always the same. I expect tech support calls when people when you implement that, though, because people are like this-- your random number is broken. I tried this thing 15 times. And it's supposed to have a 90% success rate. And I always fail. And this is supposed to be the first time I've done it. But I've tried it 15 times and I've always failed. I'm like, 'What am I going to do?' when I do this one attack. And it's like, yes, because you saved the random number seed. So that is actually a problem because people have this concept about how the mechanics of what does 90% probability of success mean? And I am specifically thinking of XCOM right now. If If you do this attack and it's successful, it's because of the fact that you have saved theRandomNumberSeed. And that's a problem for people who are trying to make games like XCOM. anyone wants to play that. 90% probability of success to a lot of people means that most-- means that it's going to succeed. Now for a lot. of people, probably a lot in this room, this means you will probably succeed. But for a game whose pushed the boundaries, it's a tough game to play. It's a very difficult game to get to grips with, and it's very difficult to understand, but it's also a very fun game. random number seed has been saved and you fail and then you reload from the start, it means you will always fail. That's a different concept of how the random number generator works. It makes a lot of sense to people who are game designers or computer scientists but it doesn't make sense to the rest of us. It's a very different concept to the way that random number generators work. It doesn't work in the same way as we think it does in the first place. We don't know why it works the way it does. may not make a lot of sense to a many of players. I get to re-roll again when I save in those, right? But now you get tore-roll exactly the same time, exactly thesame way, which means you've got to come. So this brings me to the second. I'm going to say it again: I'm not going to let you get away with anything. You're going to have to come and do it the same way again. And I'll tell you what, it's not easy. reading, which is Don Norman's first chapter in the design of everyday things. The book used to be called The Psychology of Everyday Things, which had a nice little acronym him of POET. But then people had trouble finding the book because he was looking for design books. And it was shelved in the psychology section. So he changed the name to The Design of Everyday things, which I think is a really interesting application of the kinds of things that he's talking about. Do you expect to find this book somewhere and is not in that section? make a change and you iterate on it. And if you look at the copyright, it actually still Psychology of Everyday Things. He talks about visibility. And what does visibility do in a syst-- in a design? AUDIENCE: It helps people understand the qualities of what they're doing or what what they are trying to do. It's important to make sure that people are able to see what you are doing and how you're doing it, and what you're trying to achieve. they want to accomplish. And it gives them a clue on what they could do to accomplish that. So already, that's a direct application to games, right? You have a goal in mind. It's like I want to do something with my life. I don't know what it is, but that's what I'm going to do. I'm not going to tell you how to do it, but I'm just going to say that it's going to be different. That's the way it works. accumulate more cash in this game. I want to-- I'll produce my opponent or something like that. All right, what are all the things that I can do? What's telling me might-- what's in front of me right now? Maybe in a board game, maybe in a card game, perhaps in a game of poker. I don't know. I just want to do what the game is telling me to do. I'm going to try to do it. in a visual game, that's telling me visibly, right now, that this might be the way I get to do that. In a lot of strategy games, some of these things are very literal, right? So and so technology gives you this bonus. It's very-- I guess a little of it is a bit of strategy, as well as a little bit of art. I think that's what's going to happen in the future, too. I'm looking forward to seeing what the future holds. the role playing games also have this, right? I want to hit things harder. Oh, look, this thing just needs plus one to attack. All right, OK, that that's a very literal thing now. How much effort you need to go through to actually find that. How many attacks you need, how long it takes, how much effort it takes to find it. How hard you have to hit it to get it to attack you. How long it will take you to reach it, how many attacks it has. piece of information and whether plus one is actually a meaningful difference at all. It's depending on the design of the game. But visibility has something to do with the intent of the player of the user in Norman's case. But he's not talking about games. He's talking about the way we use information in the digital world in the 21st century. We need to be able to see what we are saying to each other in a digital world that is more or less visible to us. design of everything. And what the system can actually do, the actual operations of the system. So I'm playing a game like-- I'm Playing a real time strategy game, and I have a tank. And I want to make it do doughnuts. And it's like, well, the system doesn't actually do that. And so I'm like, "Well, well the system does not do that." And so that's what I'm trying to do with this game. support that. There's no physics simulations to this tank. So I need to be able to convey to the player that this is not something you can actually do in the game. You can tell which hex to move your tank, but that's it. Maybe the tank doesn't even turn, maybe the tank Doesn't turn, Maybe the Tank Doesn't Even Turn. I don't know how I'm going to get people to play this game. I'm not sure if I can do it. "Mapping" has to do with the player's intent of what they want to do. "Mapping, instead of the actual operations of the system, actually has toDo it for you" "Mapped" is a term used to refer to the process of mapping a game's content to a computer. It can be used to describe how a game is mapped, for example, or how a map is used to show a map of the world. " Mapping" can be a term for describing the process that a game goes through to create a map. what you can see of the system. So there are affordances and there are constraints. These are both words that are introduced in that reading. I think affordances is introduced in this reading. What's an example of an affordance? AUDIENCE: If you can sit on a chair? PROFESSOR: You can. It's a chair. You can sit in it. It is a chair, it's not a table. It doesn't have to be a table, it just has to have a seat. sit on a chair? What about this thing tells you that you can sit on it? AUDIENCE: It seems sturdy, and it's got a place for your butt. PROFESSOR: Yeah, it's Got a nice little butt-shaped thing, here right? It's not made of spikes. It's got at least three legs, It's Got at least Three legs, it has a seat for you to sit on. It has a chair seat. It is not a chair. which may help, and evenly distributed, which means that it's not going to tip over. You can also measure it related to other objects to [INAUDIBLE] also. And that you-- PROFESSOR: OK, there's a little bit of cultural familiarity with other chairs that you've seen. AUDIENCE: What about a chair that looks like a person? PROFessor: That's a good one, too. It looks like someone who's sitting in a chair. handle on a door? PROFESSOR: What does a handle on a doors allow you to do? It's like-- it's a place for your hand. It's hand-shaped. If you hold your hand out in a natural way, you grab-- looking at the text. Oh, I wasn't thinking of that handle. I was thinking of the vertical type of handle. Audience: The one that looks like a U-shaped tube-- like that. PROFessor: So yeah, it's kind of the right shape. It’s one of those door handles or something like the size of the door. of a supporting column. You wouldn't necessarily think that you had to grab it, right? Audience: An outlet is for sticking things into. You can see these holes thing. PROFESSOR: Like fingers? AUDIENCE: They're not finger-shaped.PROFESSor: Yeah, although it has a kind of weird happy happy happy. It's a little bit like a human hand, but it's not a real hand, you know? It's more like a hand that's made out of metal. face on it, which I always thought was a little bit strange about-- that might have been designed, too, actually. That might have something because if you-- this won't kill you, really. So you should put it in your home. I want to find out more about the history of the face on it. It's been around for a long time, but I don't know how long it's been in existence. It was probably designed to look like a human face. the Edison plug. Audience: It's actually-- the design with the ground on the bottom is a bad idea because if something starts falling out that are too exposed to it, it will not be the ground one. So it would be better to flip it. PROFESSOR: Where's the ground in? The ground is in the bottom of the plug. The ground in the plug is the ground of the device, not the ground inside the plug, the professor says. The Edison plug is a design by Edison. the mid- up top? AUDIENCE: Yeah, because then even if it starts coming out a little, then something falls down between the-- PROFESSOR: So it's bad design. It's badDesign because you want to put it on your wall in a way that it smiles at you all the time. The design of a wall should be based on a person's personality, not their environment, the professor says. For more on this story, visit CNN.com/Design. But when it's the other way around, it's actually a little more stable. It's actually like a mo-- British plugs, actually, have the pin usually on top and-- AUDIENCE: The British just have the eyes [INAUDIBLE] pin. Right? PROFESSOR: That would be the-- what would it be? Audience: The eyes pin. There's [INAudIBLE]. Right? Right?PROFESSor: That's what I would say. Professor: "You could stick your finger in a circle" Audience: "For two round circles" Professor: "Yeah, yeah, the tworound circles, yeah" "They're using--" "The original size is flat. But they are twice the width of the thing. You could stick a finger in one of them," he says. "You can't do that," the audience responds. "I think you're thinking of your pins, which are round. The original size of the pins is flat" British pin, which means they have to design all kinds of protection mechanisms, plastic springs, and things like that, just to be able to prevent you from sticking your finger in it. It does have-- yeah, this one's actually nice because the biggest hole in there is the lethal hole. It's a British pin, so it's a little bit different than the American pin. It has a different design, but it's the same basic design. It doesn't have a hole in the middle. It just has a hole at the top. in there, is the one that doesn't have any current running through it. So an affordance is something which suggests this is how you can use it, right? Something that you can get hand around suggests you can grab it. Something with a movable hinge suggests that's the direction that you want to go with it. It's all about how you use the device, not what it looks like, so make sure you're using it in a way that makes it work for you, rather than just looking at it. you move it in. So they talk about materials like wood and glass, right? Glass is for looking through. Wood is for holding things together. And wood is possibly for writing. You've got this porous material. It paints very easily, that sort of thing. And in and in and out of the room you go. You go in and you go out. And you go in again. And so on and so on. You get the idea. It's a very different kind of way of working. games-- let me just bring in an example. Let's try to identify the components of-- how many of you have played put before? Really, really-- this is the box. Let't talk about things in here that's a rule sheet. I guess it affords reading, but I'm not going to talk about it. I'm going to let you do your own research. I'll be back in a few minutes with an example of what's in the box for you. about. It has this thing. Actually, what you do with this thing? AUDIENCE: Ring it. PROFESSOR: Slap? [BELL RING] Yeah, that's what it does. OK, all right, so now that you've seen what this thing does. What is one of the things that this-- not in the rule book -- does not do? What does it do? It rings. It hits. It slaps. It rings again. completely. If you have this in your game, what is this thing good for? Audience: Getting attention, yeah. It's loud. PROFESSOR: You could use it to annoy people. You want to lock out what they're trying to say or something. It could be used to get people to pay attention to you. It can be used for a lot of different things, like getting people to listen to you more, for example, or to get them to pay more attention to other people. and just keep hitting it. Audience: Signalling that you're the one that completed the objective. PROFESSOR: OK, yeah, so the completion of something, the end of-- because it's very percussive, right? It's not just a loud-- like an air horn. It goes eh. This one actually has-- [BELL] This oneactually has a sound that's different than an airhorn. It's a little bit more like a bell. RING] --very, very sharp [INAUDIBLE] sound. What else? What else about this? AUDIENCE: It's shiny. PROFESSOR: It is shiny. Makes you want it, right? Audience: You can hold it in your hand. And so you might be able to conceivably pass it around. This. This is a very, very good way to start the day, I think, and I hope you'll try it out as well. could be controlled by different people. It doesn't necessarily-- it's not a huge thing for anyone. If you only had one, so then that becomes even more desirable because it's the only-- [LAUGHING] AUDIENCE: Seriously. PROFESSOR: There's only one of them. It's not that big of a deal, but if you only have one, it's a lot of fun. It makes you feel like you're doing something right. It gives you a sense of accomplishment. may might be able to stand nicely on a flat surface. But it's not rubberised or anything of that. So if you put it on an incline surface or something like that, it won't stop sliding. So this implies that it's going to sit on a table somewhere. It also may not stand well on a surface that is too high or too low for it to stand on, such as a desk or a chair, or even a chair. It may not even stand up on its own when it is placed on the floor. comes with a bunch of cards. Ooh, whoa. What happened to these cards? Good Lord. OK, now the paint could rubbed off or something that. So don't worry too much about the text and the graphics. But just look at the card. What do cards allow you to do? What are they for? Let us know in the comments below or on Twitter @CNNOpinion. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from.. are the affordances of cards? Hm? AUDIENCE: You can hold a couple of them in your hand at once, OK. PROFESSOR: Because there's two sides. There's a side that you can put no useful information on, and there's another side you can't put any information on at all, because it's not the same side. It's a different kind of card, but it's the same card. It just has two sides, and they're different sizes and shapes. right? Besides the brand of the game, sure. But all identical, so you don't know what it is. You can have a bunch stack onto each other. What else? What else about this? AUDIENCE: Pattern. PROFESSOR: You can hold a lot of them in your hand at once. And you can have them stack on top of each other, so they're all in the same pattern. And that's what you do with them, right? recognition is really easy. The way how they've been designed makes it possible for you to do pattern recognition. Something which they didn't do is use different colors, which might make it even easier, at least for people who are not colorblind. But they've arranged similar elements in the same way as in the book. The book is published by Hodder & Stoughton, priced £16.99, and is available in English and Spanish. For more information on the book, visit www.hodderandstoughton.com. same place. And they didn't use colors to denote the numbers. What else about these cards? AUDIENCE: Just cards in general-- you can exchange them. PROFESSOR: Yeah, I guess that's up to you. And in fact, Pit does that. Pit's one of those games where exchange is a real time. Pit is a game where you exchange cards in real time, and you can do it in any order you want. It's a very fun game. thing. We're probably play it later in the semester because it's so light. And so easy. Yeah? Audience: It's easy to have a deck and then draw from it. PROFESSOR: Oh yeah, you can have this randomizing thing where you just have a whole stack sitting on the table. And you can just have the whole stack.thing. And we're probably playing it later this semester. Because it is so light and easy to play. then you don't know what you're going to get. Amazingly, it's actually pretty easy to just grab one as opposed to five at the time. AUDIENCE: It's easy to mix them up too if there was a really good random aspect to the game. PROFESSOR: And you just grabbing one. It's really easy to do. It doesn't take a lot of time to get the most out of a game like this. It just takes a little bit of time. Because of this? Because of shuffling? Yeah. Or 52-card pickup. It fits in a hand. It's a little bit smaller than it needs to be in order for you to hold it comfortably like that. But these particular cards are a very, very good size for shuffling. They're black. And they're a little smaller than they need to be, but they're still a good size to hold in your hand. The cards are black. They are a little bigger than they should be. You can put them on tables. You can flip them upwards and downwards, sure. It's also the fact that then you have to put either face down or face up, you can't really place them. You've got to deal with it, that's the way it is, you've just got to get used to it. That's the thing. You just have to get use to it, it's the only way you can do it. You're not going to be able to do it all the time, but you can try. on their side. It's possible but really hard to make something, to make a card stand up. So it makes it really obvious that it's either this or this. Other orientations other than that face up or face down aren't the same as face down or face up. They're really terrible for building things out of. It is really difficult to make them stand up, but it's possible to do it. But it's not easy to make anything stand up that's not face down, face up, face down. really considered, aren't really part of the game. Audience: I was going to say that they're rectangular? PROFESSOR: Yep. AUDIENCE: So going back to the point of orientation, maybe they're vertical and horizontal-- PROFessor: Mm-hmm, it's a [? tap ?]---- the path it [? Tap ?]. It'd be hard to say. It's a rectangular shape. It doesn't have to be. to do with a square or circle card, but a regular shape, an elongated shape. Conversely, a square card could afford full rotation in any direction, rotation. We'll get that, actually, in the next one where you can just rotate things around. Stiffness and shininess of them distinguishes them from regular cards. They're not the same shape as regular cards, but they're the same size and shape as they used to be, so they can be used in different ways. them from stacks. In some games you have papers that you write on them that are disposable. Pass a paper. This is supposed to last a little bit of time. Multiple play sessions at least. So yeah, a bunch of things that cards do are already that you've identified. They're not going to do anything that you haven't already identified, so don't worry about them. They don't do anything new that you didn't already know. They just do it in a different way. which are all very accurate. Cards do a lot. And when you're designing a game, you need to think about whether cards are the right thing for your choice, for your game. And you've gone through a pretty deep analysis about what this thing does that that. And that's a lot, and that's what a card game is about. It's a very, very complex game, and you have to be very careful about what you're doing with the cards you're using. might make it appropriate. The rounded corners actually make it much easier for you to do things like this. If it wasn't around the corner, it's actually pretty uncomfortable to do a fan. It's not like you couldn't. You totally could. There are plenty of ways to do it, though. You can even do it with a ball or a ball of string. You could do it in the middle of the room. You don't even have to be in the same room as the fan. stationary stores actually do sell punches, corner punches around of your cards. It is not something that I would actually recommend that you do during prototyping because it takes too damn much time. But if you were to design a game for home, for your family, or something like that, it would be a good idea to do it that way. It would be great for a family game, for example, or a game that you could play with your friends and have a good time with. and you want to make it a pleasant experience. You might just want to spend $2 on a punch and just punch the corners out. It's really, really hard to do it consistently when using your hands, by the way. So it could take away the whole information hiding things. It could also make it easier for you to get the most out of your punch. It can be a lot of fun to do when you're not trying to get all the information out at the same time. But oh, the one that was badly punched, that's the joker. Let's see what else I talk about? So mapping, so back to the idea of mapping. You've got your intent. Here is something that you want to do as a player, maybe hide. That's, oh, that’s next. That’ll be the next one, I’m not sure what else to talk about. I think we’ve got a lot of work to do. information from other people. And then there's the affordances of the system. Now if I wanted to hide my cards from you, then I will hold my cards in a way that only you can only see the side that doesn't reveal any useful information. So that's a very, very very difficult thing to do, but it's worth it in the long run. I'm very proud of what I've done, and I'm looking forward to the future of the game. It's going to be very exciting. direct, clear what he calls natural mapping, although I am not quite sure that phrase is very easy to use in practice. It gets a little bit more complicated when you actually look at the system that the game is trying to reproduce, right? So far I've just been talking, but it's a lot more complicated than that. It's a very, very complex system, and I don't know how to explain it to people who haven't played it yet, but I think it's going to be very interesting. about cards. I haven't been talking about what the rules of the game are. How many people play Carcassonne? OK, a couple of people. We should be able to get a chance to play this later this semester. I'm pretty sure it's already in the syllabus. So there are a number of ways to play the game, but I'm not going to go into all of them right now. I'll let you know what I think about it later. couple of things in this game that is this board. There's a back of the board, which is not colored. And it has a design on it. We could just pass this one around. It's got little playing pieces that are referred to as meeples by the hardcover board game. The hardcover game comes in black and white or blue and red. It comes in a box of five or six pieces, or four or five pieces in a pack of six or seven. fact base, I guess. They look like little people. Actually, there's probably enough in that for everyone to grab one or two. And then you can just take a look. I want them all back, but you can take aLook at them. Whoops, and a bunch of tiles that are not tiles. They're not tiles at all, they're just pictures of pictures of people. I don't want them back, I just want them to go back to their rightful place. I will also hand out. half to that table. Some of you have gotten just the meeples. Some have gotten the tiles. What do you think? Take a look at the pieces, and let's start with the tiles and see what you think. [INAUDIBLE] PROFESSOR: Just take aLook at the Pieces, and Let's Start With The Tiles. What Do You Think? Take A Look At The Pieces, And Let's start With The tiles. the tiles suggest, just by looking at them? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. Terrain? PROFESSOR: Terrain, all right, something to do with land. What else? AUDience: The various terrain features seem to match up. PROFessor: TheVarious terrain features such as the --rivers and roads. You can match up the tiles. The tiles suggest that the tiles suggest the terrain features that you are looking at. The tile suggests that you can match the tiles that are on the screen. line up nicely when you put the tiles in a grid with other tiles, right? Yeah, there was a hand back in the back room? No? AUDIENCE: You can rotate them. PROFESSOR: Yeah you could ro-- AUDience: Squares.PROFESSor: Yeah, squares, because unlike the cards, which is taller and than cards, this is shorter and than them. It's a little bit like playing cards, but it's a lot more fun. it is wide or wider than it is tall. This one is the same length-- more or less the same size from all directions. So the idea is that maybe you could freely, just freely rotate these things. They're identical with a back. They are all identical with each other. They all have the same shape, the same color, and the same weight. The idea is to let people rotate them in any way they want. It's a very simple idea, but it could be very powerful. The fact that you've got a back? And that tells us about these tiles, something that we already know about cards. You want to hide the information? Or. Or-- AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] PROFESSOR: Or you want to shuffle it, yeah. The fact thatYou've got. a back. And that tell us aboutThese tiles,Something that we Already know about Cards? And That Tells us about These tiles, Something That We Already Know About Cards. hidden back gives you quite a lot of different possibilities. This rule-- this game in particular uses mostly because of this shuffling and this randomization. You don't know what tile you're going to draw. So for people who haven't played this game, and you're looking at all these tiles, what do you think you're doing? What are you going to do? What do you do with all of these tiles? How do you get them to work together? What kind of rules do you use? do you think you do with these tiles? AUDIENCE: You match them up [INAUDIBLE] on them? PROFESSOR: Congratulations, that's Carcassonne. You figured out they game. You match things. You make big things. That track that's going around, the board that'sGoing around, I've got one. That's the game. That board is going around. You put people on them. You've got to make it bigger and bigger. that is probably a little bit less insightful for this particular lecture. Anyone want to guess what that is, someone who hasn't played the game? Audience: [INAUDIBLE] PROFESSOR: You haven't playing the game, right? AUDIENCE: Yeah, I've played some other games, but it's probably just a scoreboard or something. PROFessor: Yes, that's right, you haven't played it, but you've played other games. There's a scoreboard. You do something to move you along the path somehow. And then the first person to reach it probably wins. It looks like it connects back. So it makes me think that maybe instead of winning by just winning, we should try to win by helping each other along the way. It's a good way to start, and it's a great way to finish. It just takes a little bit of time, but it's worth it, I think, because you get to do it together. getting around, maybe every loop, you get a new tile or something like that. It's a combination of all three. It is a scorecard. If you loop around, I think it means that you've got 100 points or 50 points. So you get 100 points if you go around and get 50 points for going around and getting 50 points when you get to the end of the game. That's what it's all about, right? It's like a game. It keeps going on and on. just add 50 to your score every time that you go around. And what fits on those things? What would you place on that board? AUDIENCE: The little people? PROFESSOR: The meeple. You place the meeples on the tiles. And you place themeeple on the board. You placed the meespele. On the board, you placed themeespeel. And then you added 50 more to the score each time you went around. You wouldn't place a tile on that board because there's no hexes there. So you've already got a mapping of probably what intent that you've got. Let's make some big things and put our people on them. And the affordances of what you can do with these tiles that suggested. That's what we're trying to do with this board. We're not going to be able to do all the things we want to do on this board, but we're going to try to do some of them. that to you. This is a game about making large patches of similar things and then putting people on them. Oh, my notes are over here. Why does that keep coming on. I keep giving private information. So there's a problem. I'm sorry you keep being close to my family photographs. There's aproblem. I've given private information to you, and it's not going to go away. It's going to get worse and worse. I don't know how to stop it. a whole bunch of ways that you can help people with these sorts of mappings. We've be talking a lot of visual and physical. Spatial mostly to describe things like driving in a car and driving in the air. I guess Donald Norman would describe a lot. of these as spatial, metaphors to use. It's a very different way of looking at the world, but it's very similar to the way we look at each other, and we can use it to help each other. you turn the wheel to the left specifically toward the top of the wheel. And you car it's directed to turn left, that sort of thing. There are sort of bodily metaphors as well. Things that are high are either supposed to be good and happy, things that are low are bad and mean something to you. It's a bit of a paradox, but it's a very good one, I think, because it makes you think about things in a way that you wouldn't normally think about. that are low when you're feeling depressed. And you can't pick yourself off the ground, making you sad or bad. A lot of these metaphors are actually arbitrary. But that means that these might be things that are low for you when you are feeling depressed, he says. "A lot of us have learned them through culture and socialization in a world," he adds. "That means that they might be Things that are Low for you. That might beThings that areLow for you." We'll revisit the idea of user design in about two weeks. He talks about things like single control, single function where if you've got something that you can play off. And we're going to do a little bit more detail. We'll give you a couple of more examples of what he's talking about in the next few weeks. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @jennifer_carpenters. Back To the page You Came From. does something, you might not want to make it do yet another thing on top of it because that starts to get really, really confusing. The meeples, for instance, yeah you place them on the map, but you also place them in the scoreboard. I personally think this game will be a success, and I'm looking forward to seeing how it pans out on the big screen. The game is set to be released on September 14. It is expected to cost $30. be a little bit easier to learn if they just gave you a different piece for the scoreboard that was the meeple-- the same colors, just a slightly different piece-- because pieces never move from the scoreboard to the tiles or back. The other thing that I want to talk about is that you can't just use the same piece for both the scoreboard and the tiles. You have to use a different one for each of the two sets of tiles, and you have to learn how to use them separately. about is what do these tiles not let you do? Well, they did let you doing that, but was it easy? AUDIENCE: No. PROFESSOR: No, OK, all right. They're also not very good building materials, just like cards aren't. Holding them is kind of hard. Holding a whole lot of tiles is a lot of work, though, so don't expect it to be easy. It's not easy, but it's not impossible, either. bunch of them is hard. They're really thick. And you saw the difficulty I had just trying to pull half of them out of the box. They were unwieldy. Shuffling's tough. You can-- all right, maybe I'll do this once a game. AUDIENCE: Put them in a box. PROFESSOR: You can't do that. You've got to put them in the box and move them around. You're going to have to do it a lot. bag maybe? PROFESSOR: Hm? If you had them in a bag, yes. A bag is its own affordance, right? It affords its own like me picking Scrabble, for instance. So if you wanted to randomize things, yeah, you could totally. You could totally do that. It was really, really well in abag. How then ScrabBLE was really,. really well. in a backpack. It's like a bag. just put the whole back hiding thing and just put them all into a bag and then just pull one out of random. So these are constraints. You're not really supposed to have more than one tile at a time in Carcassonne. You are supposed to draw one, figure out what it is and then pull it out of the bag. And that's what I did. I just drew one and then pulled it from a bag. I didn't know what it was, so I just pulled it out. where it goes, put it down. You're not supposed to ever hang on to two. So it's OK that the tiles are designed in such a way that it makes it hard for you to hold on to do. For the cards, for instance, you're not really supposed to stack them. It's a bit of a challenge, but it doesn't mean you can't do it. It just means you have to be more careful about what you do with the tiles you pick up. them. They are not very useful to you when you've got them face down because you can't really see the information. To get a small number of cards, like in poker or something like that, maybe you could remember what you had face down. But if it's a large number, it's not as good. It's a bit of a waste of time if you have a lot of cards. You don't really want to use them all at once. You want to get the most out of them. In Pit, you don't really ever put that face down. I think there might be a rule about placing them face down right at the end of the game. But you don’t want to do that in Pit. In Pit, like in Pit,you really want then held face up, facing you. So the idea of-- in Pit,. you don'st really ever putting that face Down. Butyou don't want todo it in Pit too much, either, I think. actually-- no, that's not even true. You don't ever have to place them face down. When they're face down, they're not interesting to you. You should have had that information in a minute. So these are constraints. These are things-- this is another way that the visibility of the system can be increased. It's a way to make the system more visible to the user. It doesn't have to be perfect, but it can be better than it could be. can help you with those mappings. You're looking at the system and the pieces that it's giving you, and you're thinking, what can't I do with these things? And that's probably not what the game wants you to do. If the game is designed well, it can help you get the most out of the pieces it gives you. It can also help you figure out what to do with the pieces you do get, and how to use them to your advantage. be designed poorly. That's a caveat. Everything that I say is a qualitative, subjective statement. And that goes back to something that was brought up earlier about mental models, right? As you play around with these pieces-- of course when you read the rules and you see the illustrations, maybe maybe they're not as good as you think they're going to be. But that's a subjective statement, too, and that's part of the fun of playing around with them, too. when they read it at the back of the box, I would suggest that usually you start trying to figure out what a game is when you pick it up off the shell and you start looking at it. And it says, hey, this is a game that I want. That's what I like about this game. I like that it has a little bit of a different feel to it than some of the other games I've played in the past. I think that's a good thing. to play. It says Deluxe Pit, over 100 years of--100 years of card game fun, geez 100 years. The front says 1904. So this is probably not a science fiction game, all right? Actually, for people who haven't played this game, what do you think this is about? I don't know. I've never played it, but I've heard it's a lot of fun. It's a great way to spend an afternoon with your friends and family. don't think I've talked about it. AUDIENCE: Maybe about the stock market or something. There's a bowl on it. PROFESSOR: There's also a trading pit maybe. It isn't like a commodity trading game. On the side, on the side of the game, there is a bowl. There is also a bowl in the middle of the floor. There are two bowls in the center of the field. There appears to be a bowl between the two bowls. It looks like a bowl with a hole in it. it says, "Corner the Market." AUDIENCE: And it's got a bell. PROFESSOR: I wonder whether they included the bell and over 100 years of card game fun intentionally. This is like, this game back in the time when stock market are run with bells. I guess they still are but. I mean, they still have a bell, don't they? It's just a little bit different. It's a little more subtle. It doesn't look like a bell at all. mostly just run with computers nowadays. I'd love to see Pit done on some sort of updated 21st century thing. Audience: [INAUDIBLE] with insider trading. PROFESSOR: So there are, of course, the text at a back that tells you not only what the theme of this game is. Shout your Shout Your Outrage! ShoutYour Outrageous Outrage!! Shout. Your Outraged Outrage!!! Shoutyour Outragedoutrage! deal and trade your cards to corner the market, et cetera. And then it also says, family age seven plus, 30 minutes, three to eight players, just to tell-- to give you a better idea. And when you look at this thing, I'm immediately forming a mental model of how to do it, and it's a lot of fun," he says. "It's a great way to have fun with your family," he adds, "and it's fun for the adults as well" is this game plays. You know that you're supposed to collect cards because they show you a whole bunch of cards. And then you're just reading the rules. All right, so when do I do this? It's a little bit of a game. It's just like a card game, but it's a lot more fun. It has a lot of different levels. It can be played in different ways, depending on how you play it. It doesn't have to be the same way every time. pretty easy. It's a math intensive problem. It does largely map on to how many of the meeples that. that are in the game. Carcassonne is one of the most popular board games in the world, but scoring is actually pretty difficult to do. There is actually a deep, deep problem with this game. Despite how popular it is, it is actuallypretty difficult to score. It is a mathintensive problem. The game is very popular, but it is also very difficult to play. you have of your own color on large patches of things. But how much those things are worth, those patches of thing are worth,. requires a lot of counting, a lotof counting. And that's why you need a scoring track. So that is a big problem with that game. It's very hard to figure out how much something is worth, and how much it's worth to you. And so you have to count it very carefully. And it's very, very difficult to do. on how the mapping works. It doesn't really give you a good idea or a good conceptual model of how much something is worth. But you've got a large patch of thing. You've got your dude somewhere in there. You can at least make the mapping. That's worth something. And that's a lot of work, but it's worth it in the long run. It gives you a sense of the value of what you're trying to do. It's a good way to start. then that's-- the feedback that you get back from games when it's Pit. There's a huge ding sound. That's the feedback you get when you try to fit a piece that doesn't fit into something else. And there's also the feedback when you hit the bell, right? That's when you're trying to hit a button that's not supposed to be hit. And that's what Pit feels like when he hits the bell. It feels like he's hitting a button, but he's not. a couple of board games where you have to put pieces together, and that gives you an idea of maybe those two pieces don't go together. What others things look for in the realm of feedback when it comes to board games? Maybe a track? PROFESSOR: Hm? You mean a board track? AUDIENCE: Yeah, you want to stay on the track. PROFessor: OK, all right, that's-- actually there are games where the only legitimate places that you can put your pieces can be is literally on the pieces that they provided you. you are no longer-- that's not a legal place for you to place your token. So it depends on the game. But for a very easy example, in a game like Risk would have-- you can very quickly look at the board and say who has the most soldiers. You can't put your token in the middle of the board if you're not in a position to do so. You have to be in the right place at the right time to put your tokens in the correct place. It doesn't necessarily mean anything but it's a good indicator. Just something like that would usually be nice to see you just quickly look at it and say, oh, this person's winning for this reason. So the sheer quantity of similarly colored things. Audience: Yeah, it doesn't even have to be a lot of color. It doesn't have to even be a very large amount of colors. It just has to be something that looks like it's going to be used in some way. to be [INAUDIBLE].. In Monopoly, if you look at the board, whoever has the most houses. Similarly, in Catan, you can see if somebody has massive roads or a lot of settlements or cities. You can usually tell that they're doing pretty well. That's, again, a direct answer to the question, 'What is the best way to play Catan?' The answer is to be as good as you can be, and that's what Catan is all about. visual metaphor. And, of course, in that game, you earn points by having the longest road to emphasize it's a good thing. Other players can give you feedback, right? If people remember playing Code 7 7 last, they'll be able to tell you what to do next, too. And you'll have to wait until the end of the game to find out if you've done it right or wrong. And if you did, you'll get a chance to do it again. week, there's information that other players can provide you that you need. But other players have to provide you. So what other games can you think of where other players are your primary feedback mechanism on whether you've done a move that's OK or not? AUDIENCE: Mound Builders? PROFESSOR: Mounds. Mound? Mounds? Mound. Mounds! Mound builders! Mounds Builders! Mounded Builders?! Mound Building! AUDIENCE: The only feedback you get. PROFESSOR: It is the only Feedback you get, OK. AUDIENCE: Poker? PROFessor: Did you make a bet that is good, you know when everyone else folds? PR prof: OK, yeah, for a poker bet, I did make a good bet. I'm a poker player. I like to play poker. I don't like to lose. I love to make good bets. If you're bluffing and you make an good bet, everyone folds. You know when. certain kind of bad, it's like, I won it. Everyone folds, and it'slike, wait what. I had a royal flush. Why'd you-- That was a bad idea, right? OK, that gives you some sort of feedback for a very specific kind of thing. Audience: [INAUDIBLE] PROFESSOR: Oh, yeah. You. You know what I'm talking about, don't you? It's like you're like, "Oh my God, that was a really bad idea" stick a card with something written on it. It's like Code 7 7. Everything that you know about the thing that you are trying to guess is something that only other people can see. The game Mafia. All the All the Game Mafia is a game of guess what the other person is thinking. It is based on [INAUDIBLE].. PROFESSOR: Mm-hmm, again, it’s like Code7 7. It’ll be a little bit like that. feedback is filtered through the hosts. So yeah, all the information you're getting in the game is through other people in Mafia. There's again the hidden-- information that's hidden from you, but it's completely available to you. And both useful and possibly confusing feedback, right? SoYeah, all of that is in Mafia, which is a game that's like Battleship. It's a game where you play against other people and try to beat each other. And there's a lot of information you can get from other people. your opponent and vice versa. There is a computer battleship. It's not as fun. Charades and Pictionary-- usually your teammates are the ones who are guessing. So I wouldn't necessarily call that feedback because it might not be as fun as you think. And you don't need me to tell you the mechanics toTell you that. It might be more fun for you if you know what you're doing, but it's not always as fun for your teammates. It could be a lot more fun if you're the one who's guessing. be good feedback on whether your clues are getting across to your teammate. But your opponents are also usually some sort of feedback mechanism that's keeping time. If they hear you say something very Pictionary, they could be listening for illegal things, like if you said something very illegal. If you're playing a team game, your opponents could be keeping an eye out for or listening forillegal things, such as if you are playing a game of Pictionary and you are saying things that are illegal. something, they go ah, ah,ah. You can do that. And are there a few more hands or something like that? So just always remember that you can employ other players into your feedback mechanism. It doesn't always have to be your game alone. There is a game I play that is very similar to the one you're playing. It's called 'The Game of Life' and it's a game that's very different from the one I'm playing right now. The game is called The Game of life. It’s a game where you play a game of life with other people. played a long time ago called Scotland Yard. The player positions is almost never known. You get some feedback about what he's doing, sort of what he is doing. You have that in terms of the information the gamestate that's hidden from you, feedback on whether or not you have achieved. It's a very different game to the one we're used to in the Premier League. We're not used to playing a game where the player positions are not known. We don't get that in this game. your objectives from the player that knows the information. The person who's running knows where they're going at any given time. The detectives are chasing one fugitive going through London's mass transit system basically-- buses, cabs, underground, yeah. It's like something like four or five detectives chasing one Fugitive going throughLondon's mass transport system basically -- buses,. cabs and underground,Yeah. The detective is chasing the Fugitive. The Fugitive is running through London’s Mass Transit System. are working on partial information to try to corner and close this dragnet. So I think that's on the list. Do you remember it? That was on the syllabus. It used to be-- Scotland Yard. But we may have changed. I'll double check it, I think I saw it. But I think it was Scotland Yard, but I may have been wrong. I'm sorry, I didn't see it. I was looking for Scotland Yard and I saw that. I thought that was what it was. the game-- PROFESSOR: Yeah, so we might get a chance to play that. But that also falls in the mastermind category of games where it's like, here's this person with all the information, only that person is changing the information as the game goes on. That's a big difference in Scotland. The game is called "The Game of Life" and takes place in a pub in Glasgow, Scotland. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. Donald Norman ends his very first chapter on why is it so hard to play the game. He asks this question in his book, "Why Is It So Hard To Play The Game?" The game was removed this year, but we do have a copy of the book. It is a good game. It's a good book. We'll bring it in. We've got a copy. We're going to play it. We don't know if it's going to be good or not, but let's see. CNN's Jarrett Bellini talks to CNN iReport about Obama's new book. He says Obama will talk about light switches, cars, clocks, doors. Bellini: Obama has a long list of things he wants to talk about in his book, but he hasn't talked about them yet. The book is scheduled to be released in September. It will be published by Simon & Schuster, a division of Penguin Random House, for $20. For more on Obama's book, go to www.jarrettbellini.com. this question-- why is it so hard to actually make something right? Anyone remember? Or anyone thinking of-- AUDIENCE: Doesn't the designer never really communicate one-to-one with the user? They're communicating through the object that either was designed or being used. PROFESSOR: That is definitely true. It is a second. It's definitely true that the designer is communicating through an object that is either being used or designed. That's the way it works. order problem. You're designing something that then becomes this manifestation that somebody else uses. And that's actually when all the problems occur. You first, then. AUDIENCE: Well, he was talking about how like at first when something is invented. At first it's very complicated, and then your iteration comes up. And then your iterations come up, and that's when the problem occurs. And so that's how you get to the end of the story, isn't it? That's how it works. with something very simple. But then people want more functions. And they start this whole process over again where you keep adding new things. But it becomes less and less intuitive. Market forces push you to add things, to do additive design in order to distinguish yourself from the others. It's a very, very difficult process to get your head around, but it's worth the effort and it's very rewarding when you get to the end of it. It can be a very rewarding experience. competition. And that naturally leads to complexity in interface. And a lot of products, you said, don't get through that process because it'll take five or six times to get it right. But if it's not good by the second time, people just won't buy it. And so that's what we're trying to do with our interface. We want to make it better and better every time we make a new product. We don't want to have to go through the same process again and again. get back to iteration. 5 or 6 times means five or six times at the same problem, right? So iteration is the reason why design starts off as being very clunky. But it can eventually become something that works well, communicates well, or something that people can learn and maybe maybe even use in the future. That's what design is all about, I think. It's about iteration, and it's about learning from the mistakes you make in the first place, so that you don't repeat them again. even enjoy in the case of the games. One thing that's funny about the book is that it talks a little bit about the clock radio that could do-- make phone calls, and be used as a desk lamp, and keep track of your appointments, and use as a TV. The clock radio could also be used to make phone call, and was also used to record music and play music on the radio. It could also make a phone call and record music, as well as play music. CNN's John Defterios has a new look at the iPhone 5s. He says it's exactly the same as the phone he was talking about. Defterio: "It's interesting because he described a phone that can only be used with two buttons, right? Here's a button. And then here's a huge button. You get to select things" "I'm still thinking, this isn't that this, right?" he says. "I don't think it's that different" what he's talking about only, I doubt that actually imagined that this was something to be possible at the time when he wrote it. That was 1980. It wasn't that long ago. And cell phones obviously have gone through a lot of criticism. iPhone, of course, has a lot to answer for, but it's not as bad as some of the stuff he said he was talking about. It's a long way from the iPhone to the cell phone he was referring to. criticism because people who criticize it for being a lock-down system where you can't really do all that much. It's certainly not as customizable as Android system. But then, arguably, by locking out a lot of things that you might want to do but can't, it's expensive for what it does. The iPhone 6 is expected to go on sale in the U.S. later this year. It will cost about $500,000, with plans to roll out to other countries in the future. maybe don't have to do, they are trying to make it easier for you not to do the wrong thing. So depending on-- there are different ways to fall on this camp. But it is it has been successful through a number of different reasons. Don't discount marketing as being a good way to get people to buy your product. It's not just about selling products, it's about getting people to do what you want them to do. That's what marketing is all about. something that the does sell. But what I want you to think about now is actually the process of prototyping. Actually you know what, I'm not going to go right into prototyping because they will probably make more sense once I've actually got the prototyping materials out. What I am is what I am: I'm a guy who wants to make a product that people want to buy. That's what I'm trying to do. I don't want to sell. I want to make. going to do is to give everyone a five minute break. We're actually going to come back and play some of last year's games. I think there's enough time for it now for about an hour. And then the last hour of class, what I'm going to do, is what I've been told to do. I'll give everyone an hour to do what they need to do to get ready for the game. I'm not going to give them an hour of time to do anything else. I'm going to go into brainstorming. So then you can start forming your teams, thinking about what kind of game that you want. Prototyping might be something we'll leave up to Wednesday. So that there'll be a little more time for you to work in your teams. So I'd like to give you a little bit of time to get to know each other a little better. I'll be back on Monday to talk to you about the rest of the game. I'm looking forward to hearing from you. to get all the Carcassonne bits back. So and then we'll pick this up in about five minutes. We'll be back with the rest of the story in a few minutes. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript of this article. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to Read the Full Transcript of this Article. Backto the pageYou came from the page You were from, Click Here to Read The Full Transcript.