okay folks let's get started how's everybody doing pretty good Santa Claus has come to town and you know Santa does with naughty kids Hees them finals he gives them finals. He gives them very evil finals is what he does okay so look out for Santa Claus he's really. He's really a good guy. He really is. He is a very good guy and he really does love kids. He does. He loves kids and he loves them very, very much. He wants them to have a good Christmas. a really a bad guy uh let's see let's think about a couple of things in terms of announcements and we have a couple surprises today. One of which is standing in front of you with all this on and there's more surprises as well um let'ssee first of of the announcements. A couple of surprises today one of which was standing in Front of You with All this on. A two-minute clip of one of the most memorable moments in the history of television. A one-minute video of another of the greatest moments in television history. all uh this is not a surprise it's been announced on the web page but I'll remind you that we have a review session tonight at 6:30 in ALS 401 so I will videotape that and I will uh get it posted uh maybe later this evening but most likely later this week. "I will videotaped that," he said. "And I'll uh get the results posted later this night" "I'll videotape it and I'll post it," he added. "Most likely" sometime tomorrow okay um and that's there for those of you who had regrades on exams um they are available for pickup in the BB office and you can pick them up there so that's available to you. Last but not least we have a final exam I.sometime next week. I'm looking forward to it. I'll see you all next week! I'll be in the office. I hope to see you next week and I'll talk to you all about what's going on. have heard and the final exam is in this room on Monday at 9:30 a.m. so uh get here in plenty of time remember to position yourselves with seating as I said before so we SE sit in theice odd-numbered seats number one right here number oneright here and. right here and so we can all sit together in the same place at the same time. So we can sit together and be in the right places at the right time. That's what we're trying to do. number one on that row over there same thing is true if you sit up above okay um and uh you will get a full hour and 50 minutes to take uh the exam. Um and uh what was it going to say um it's got 150 points okay so so yeah so that's what the exam was going to be about okay so yeah that's the exam and it's going to give you 150 points. That's what it's supposed to do. So that's why it's called the 150-point exam. I've written the exam it has 150 points it has um the first section which is the short answer has 75 points that's half of the exam. The second section is the problem solving section has 36 points and the last section which are the longer answer has 39. That's half the exam the second section which. is the Problem Solving section has36 points. That’s half the Exam. The third section is. the longer Answer section has 39 points and that's the third section. And the fourth section, the longer question, has 40 points. So that's what the exam is. points now it hasn't been duped yet so there may be some changes. One of those changes I'm kind of got to decide today is will we have an extra credit question or not. I don't know so maybe you guys can help convince me today that we should. It may be a little different. It might be a lot different. I'm not sure if we'll have extra credit questions or not but we'll see. It's going to be a very different show. It will be very different. have an extra credit question I see well nodding yes doesn't do it it's got to be no that's okay I'm not. I I think you know what I like to to have when it comes to extra credit right so we'll. Have a question? Send it to us at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk and we'll feature it in next week's edition of iReport.com. Follow us on Twitter @CNNReport and @jennifer_smith and @MailOnlineReport. we'll see how that plays out there might be some music today I don't know so that's that's possible okay um let's see so that'm basically it uh the the the format as I said is the same as before the point changes are different there are three questions in there. There are three question in there that will be answered in the next few days. We'll be back in a week or so with a new episode of The Daily Show with David Letterman. See you then for the next episode. section two and there are three questions in section three okay. There are 25 Questions in section one that tells you anything and um people always say is it hard is it easy do I make them harder Etc. And the answer is I I can never tell I. I can't tell you what's going to happen in the future. I don't know what the future is going to look like. I'm not going to tell you anything right now. I just want you to have a good day. never would have guessed the last exam that the average would be 76.5 so I was very pleased so I'm probably the last person you want to ask if an exam is hard or easy. I always try to write them in the same way I always do okay and. never would have thought the last exams would be so hard. I was so pleased to see the average was so high. I'm always trying to write my exams in same way so that I can do them in same style. I think this looks like a like an average exam in that respect if you did not get a note card on uh Wednesday when I passed them out uh I don't have them here you'll have to come to my office to get them from me I will remind you. If you don't get the note card you will have to go to the office and get it from me. I'll remind you if you do not get the card you'll need to go back to the classroom and do it again. you that with the exam you have to turn in a note card that you got from me okay. You need to turn that note card in with your exam with your name on so if you don't have one make sure that you get one. If I told you how I knew they were mine then that would kind of give it away wouldn't it yeah so I know which ones are mine all right so make sure you bring an a note cards that I gave you to the exam if you didn't or use a different card. or something you will lose points and again I need to make sure that you're using these cards and you're not passing them on to your roommates. That's that's important um for them to have the benefit of filling out their card s next term or next year whatever. It's important to fill out your card s in the right way and not miss out on any points. It is important that you don't miss any points and that you fill it out in the correct way. okay we don't have an awful lot more to do that's very good so we'll have uh in fact if I finish early which I uh might I don't know we will U I'll take a few questions relative to the review session and we will have a nice surprise and we'll be back in a few minutes. We'll have a little bit of a break and then we'll go back to the next session. We will be back on Monday at 9 a.m. ET. at the very end so that's uh all in in store today okay now um I've had several questions from I'veHad several questions about this rather confusing regulation of glycogen phosphor and so I just want to take a couple minutes and sort of summarize that for you. At the end of the show, we'll talk about the role of the phosphor in the body and how it affects the body's immune system. We'll also talk about some of the things we've learned in the last few months. Glycogen phosphor is U an enzyme that's regulated in several ways. It exists in two forms. The form that has the phosphate on that people describe as the phosphor form is the one that is used for coent modification. It's a type of enzyme that is regulated in a number of ways. The phosphate on it is the form that is the most important. It can be used to make coent modifications. It is also used for the production of the protein glycogen. more active and it has the form without the phosphate known as the glycogen phosphor B that people describe as less active Okay um the reason people describe glycogen. phosphor ASE a as the more active form is that usually in the cell when it's present it'spresent in the. cell. When it's not present, it doesn't get as much of a role in the body as it does when it is present in the cells. It's a very important part of the immune system. r State because only when glucose is present will it get converted to the t-state if glucose is not present or glucose is is present in very very low quantities then there will be no gluc glycogen phosphor as a in the T State. R state of course being the much more active form glycogenosphor B on the other hand okay is much more likely to be found in theT State right to convert glycogen phosphate a b into the r State requires what am okay it requires am and that isn't again very common inside of cells. only when cells are really really low in energy are they going to have much in the form of am on the other hand ATP and glucose 6 phosphate convert it into the Tate quite readily and those are usually fairly abundant okay glucose 6 phosphates okay now so those are the ones we're looking for. We're going to be looking for ATP, glucose 6osphates, and then we'll be looking at the Tate. We'll see what happens when we get to the Tate part of the process. things all come together now again. I'm not going to ask you to rank them or do complex scenarios with these that's not the point of telling you all that information. It is important that you understand all those different types of Regulation it's very important thatyou understand. It's not about how you rank them, it's about how well you understand them. I don't want to make it too complex, I just want you to understand what's going on. I'll be back in a few minutes with more information. those different types of Regulation and what's there so the phosphorilation of course involve a kise or phosphatase right the r&t involve allosteric affectors okay all right okay so that's uh where we start now um there's a couple things about regulation that we haven't talked about and we'll talk about them in the next few minutes. We'll be back in a week or so to talk about some of the other things we've talked about in the past.  phosphorilation of proteins is favoring the breakdown of glycogen and the stopping of synthesis. We phosphorate glycogen in general okay we phosphorate. glycogen. phosphorilization of proteins favors the breakdown, breakdown, and stopping of the synthesis of glycogens. We phosphorilation of proteins favors the breakdown of glycogen, which is a type of protein. The breakdown of glycogen is known as glycogen breakdown. phosphor first all we we phosphorate phosphor chinise what does it do well it turns around makes it active and it phosphates glycogen phosphor as B to a. Def phosphorilation on the other hand favors okay in general again these are General things in general def phosphOrilation favors synthesis of glycogen and inhibition of glycogens breakdown now lay out the schemes yourself and see that and it will make sense I think to you all right well well well what we haven't talked about hardly at all is that Def phosph orilation and Def phosph Orilation. has to itself be regulated just like everything else has to be regulated. If we don't regulate it then everything's going to be def phosphorated all the time and cells aren't going to have energy like they need okay so we need to think about that Def phosphorilation and everything else must be regulated, says Dr. Richard Branson, president of the American College of Cardiology. "We need to regulate it just like we regulate everything else," says Branson. "It's the way we get our energy. It's the only way we're going to get the energy we need" that's the wrong slide okay here's what we're after okay now what you see on the screen is a um a scheme that shows the regulation of phosphoprotein phosphatase that's the pp1. What we're looking at here m stands for muscle so what we are looking at is a muscle. That's the slide we were looking at. That is the slide that we were trying to see. That was the screen that we wanted to see, and that is the page that we showed you. scheme that exists in muscle all right well what does this tell us it tells us first of all that pp1 is bound to another protein and the unfortunate name is called G subm in this case and we'll call it g subm that's not a g.scheme. We'll call the protein that's bound to pp1 a protein called GSubm. This protein is called gSubm and it binds to the protein pp1. This is a protein known as GSubM and it's the same protein that bound to the nucleus of the human body. protein we've used the term G protein before to refer to proteins that bind to guanosine nucleotides this is not a g protein it's just holding on to phosphoprotein phosphatase. okay now what happens well this phosphotase has to be regulated okay when this phosphat enzyme is in. When this phosph atase is in the body it's called a G protein. It's a protein that holds on to a nucleotide by binding to a phosphot enzyme. linked to GM as you see it here it is the most active okay it isThe most active so we're starting out over here. We're in a situation where we haven't been doing anything and then all of a sudden we get our epinephrine. So we're going to follow from GM as we go through the course of the game. We'll see how it goes over the next few days. We don't know how long we'll be in this position. It's going to be a long time. left to right what happens when epinephrine gets uh Bound by the cell surface receptor all right so we've got an active pp1 and we're going to ultimately convert it over here on the other side to an inactive form. This is the most active form all right well and well and this and this are the inactive form allright well and and this is the active form and this one and that one and the active one all right and that's what we're doing here. We're converting this one to an active form. And we're converting the inactive one. again we're looking in muscle what happens is when we have epinephrine being synthesized we see that this protein GM gets phosphorilated. phosphorilation of GM causes it to let go of pp1 now that actually makes pp1 less active it's phosphorilization of GM makes it less active. We see this happen in the body as well as in the brain and in the cells of the nervous system. We also see this happening in the liver and the pancreas. most active when it's bound to GM it is less active when It's been released it's still active but it's not as active as it was over here okay what else happens well look what protein kyes a does protein kye a phosphorites the inhibitor this is an inhibitor of phosphorite. This is an inhibitors of the protein phosphoritic protein. It's a protein that binds to GM and is then released into the environment. When it's released from GM it's less active but still active. the enzyme over here no inhibition over here the inhibitor gets phosphorilated and that makes it a perfect binding molecule for the phosphatase in this state over here it's blocking the active sight. The phosphat enzyme is completely inhibited so why is this significant? Well let's think about this when we think about it when we're in a state where we're not inhibited. We're in the state of being able to bind to a molecule that is a perfect target for the enzyme. I said we do phosphorilation we want to favor the breakdown of glycogen. We sure as heck don't want phosphoprotein phosphatase one on taking phosphates off of things right because if this is active we. If we're putting phosphates onto things we're not going to favor glycogen breakdown. We don't do that. We want to help glycogen break down. That's what we're trying to do. We're not trying to take phosphates out of things. We just want to make sure glycogen breaks down. put a phosphate onto glycogen phosphor a this guy is going to turn around and take it right off so this one system protein kisee a by going out in phosph forting all these proteins is favoring completely the breakdown of glycogen. It's stopping the reversal of that process that happens when you put a phosphate on glycogen and then take it off of it. That's what's going on in the body here. The phosphor is helping to keep the phosphate on the glycogen so it can breakdown. is the removal of the phosphates from those proteins now I know that's a little confusing okay so I'm going to stop and take questions relevant to that or give you a moment to digest it perhaps nobody has any questions yeah the break of so this is consistent with so this was consistent with this. The break of. So this is inconsistent with. The removal of. the phosphate from these proteins now is the removal. of theosphates fromthose proteins now. I know this is a little. confusing okay. So I'mgoing to stop. the breakdown of glycogen and it's stopping that is the reversal of that breakdown those breakdown enzymes are favored by phosphorilation. As long as those phosphates are sitting on those enzymes we're going to be breaking down glycogen. The synthesis enzymes are inhibited byosphorilation as well as the breakdown enzymes. It's stopping the breakdown of the glycogen that we're breaking down. The reversal of the breakdown is stopping that breakdown as well. The reaction is called phosphorilization and it stops the breakdown. this keeps that reversal from happening that is the taking the phosphates off now when insulin comes along. I don't have a scheme to show you insulin is going to stimulate a different phosphatase it's going to take this phosphate off and everything's going back over to the body. This keeps that from happening. I'm not going to tell you how to do it, I'm just going to say that it's a good way to prevent that. I think that's the best way to go. left when everything goes back over to the left you can see what's going to happen we're going to start taking phosphates off of everything. glycogen synthesis will be favored glycogen breakdown will be inhibited okay we're almost there. There's one other surprising thing that happens when you remove phosphates from everything. When we take phosphates out of everything glycogen production is inhibited. When you take phosphate out of all of the glycogen, it's inhibited glycogen metabolism. When glycogen is inhibited, it can't be used to make new glycogen. thing that shows up yeah Connie insulin from the and the or just insulin doesn't do anything except stimulate processes in the cell. insulin is binding to the to a receptor outside the cell so insulin is stimulating a process that will ultimately result in the death of a cell. "I think it's a good thing we're doing this," says Connie. "It's a really good thing that we're trying to do this. It's really good for the future of the human body" "I don't think there's anything wrong with the way we're going about it," adds Connie. removal of this phosphate but not that one this one is well yeah I'm sorry I'msorry yeah sorry I didn't say that but this this phosphate is well sorry maybe I misunderstood your question yeah okay so that's pretty cool pretty darn cool now there's one last really interesting thing to add to the list of things we've done in the lab. We've removed a phosphate from this phosphate and we've also removed another phosphate from that phosphate. We're going to do the same thing with the other phosphate. and odd thing about glycogen metabolism and then we'll actually be done with the regulation all right and that's right here this was a really big surprise somebody takes out and they're really interested in studying glycogen phosphor ASE a they'reinterested in studying U uh glycogen synthes and they they're interested in studies of glycogenosphor. And then we're done with all the regulation and we'll be able to move on to the next phase in the study, which is the next stage of the glycogen cycle. put them in the same tube I've got purified pure glycogen phosphor. I've also got Pure glycogen synthes. I put them together in a tube and I want to see what happens I add glucose and something very odd happens I see that by the addition of glucose the breakdown of glycogen is broken down. It's a very strange thing to see, but it's very interesting to see the breakdown. I think it's a sign of a better understanding of the glycogen cycle. glycogen phosphor I'm the conversion of glycogen phosphors ASE A to B. What does it take to convert this guy to this guy or this person to this person? What do you need to do to convert a person to another person? How do you get it to happen? What is the difference between a person and a substance? What does a person need to be a substance to convert it to a substance. How do we get the conversion to occur? What are the steps to achieve it? what's happening there the first person that answers that gets a free metabolic Melodies calendar for 2012. Are they different active sites in the same nope what' you say def phosphorilation come by and get your a calendar okay this Santa Claus is here okay all right so def phosph orilation. What's going on there? The first person who answers that will get a free metabolism Melodies Calendar for 2012 are they different Active Sites in the Same nopeWhat's Happening There? What's Going On There? is happening but I only had two enzymes here how do I get DEF phosphorilation I have a free metabolic Melody CD for the person who answers that what's that one of them does whates one def phosphates the other answer is no if anybody read ahead their notes they don't know what the other one does. If you want to know how to do it, read ahead to the next section of this article. For more information on how to use the enzymes in this article, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/23/science/chemistry/top-10-techniques-for-def-phosphorilation.html. know yeah read the question say the question again okay how does that def phosphorilation happen nobody read ahead in the notes oh man okay I'm gonna have to tell you you guys are G gonna miss a valuable you you could sell this on eBay CD you have you. You have to read ahead to the next question. You can't read ahead. You're going to have to listen to it again. You've got to listen again. It's going to be great. You could sell it on eBay. have does um does it synthesize glycogen us the does it. glycogen phosphor a in the liver carries the phosphorus it needs to make glycogen using the phosphorus no it doesn't okay all right boy that's I figured somebody would jump up at that one it's actually on the next slide okay it turns out glycogenosphor a is used to synthesize the glycogen. It's used to create glycogen by synthesizing the phosphorus from the phosphorus in the phosphor. around with it look what it's holding on to it's actually holding on on to this G in the liver that has the phosphoprotein phosphatase all right when this guy is in the r state State this is blocked nothing can get in there and the phosphat enzyme is inhibited when this happens. When this. is in a r state state the G is blocked and nothing can getting in there. Nothing can get into the liver. and when this is. in a state of r state, the phospho-phosphatase is inhibited and this is when this occurs. is in the r State that's what happens what does adding glucose to glycogen phosphor a do. When it converts it to the t-state look what happens it lets go of this guy so when it letsgo with this guy this guy is in the state of t- state. The r State is the state where glucose and glycogen are bound together. The t-State is the place where glycogen and glucose are released into the air. It's also the state in which oxygen is released. It is also the place in which the human body is formed. is just like the one with the GM it's completely active and what does it start doing it starts taking those phosphates off now glycogen phosphor a gets converted to glycogenosphor ASE B glycogen synthes b gets converted into glycogen synth b. Def phosphorilation that's pretty darn good. It's just like a normal phosphorilization. It takes the phosphates out of the GM and turns it into a different type of glycogen. It can be used to create a new type of GM. cool all right now why is that important why is it that important that this thing carries this thing around with it any thoughts about that should I put a c out for that? There's a very important reason why this guy carries this around your book actually talks about it. There's also a reason why he carries it around with him all the time. It's very important that he has it with him at all times. It is very, very important. It has a very big impact on his life. nobody's read the book this is quiets a Class B all term all right. So why why are cells breaking down glycogen why are they doing thisy they need energy and why do they what's their typical needs for energy quick quick running from running from the grizzly bear right. Right so why do cells need energy? Why do they need glycogen? Why are they breaking it down? What's the reason for it? What do they do to get energy? What does it do to the body? or the teacher that has is wearing a hat that's right either way okay I want this quick which means I want to break things down quick and what did we learn earlier in the term about enzymes with respect to speed they work very fast. Yes okay that's good that's a good question. Yes that's what we learned about enzymes. Yes, we learned that enzymes work at a very fast rate. Yes. We learned that. We learn that enzymes are very fast and that they work in a very specific way. what else did we learn what did I say about driving your Maserati to Fred Meyer? You got to control them right if you turn something on and it's really powerful and it'm going to break things down really quickly don't you want to be able to turn it off. We learned that if you're going to drive a car, you have to control it. We also learned that when you're driving a car you need to control the speed. We'll be back next week with a look at what else we learned on the road. really quick carrying this carrying around its own inhibitor is the most efficient way that it can turn itself off really quick. Now notice this happens in the liver this is happening in the Liver. The liver is producing what what's one of the things that the liver produces that is called a liver enzyme. This is a protein that is produced by the liver and is responsible for many of the functions of the liver. It can also be found in the pancreas, kidney, and other parts of the body. only one other tissue produces glucose glucose okay so let's think what the what the liver is doing. The liver is sitting there this guy is dumping epinephrine it's making I'm sorry is is yeah is um I've got to get it right now he's he's U making epine cortisol. So what is the liver doing? It's sitting there and it's doing this. It's making this stuff. And it's dumping it. So let's see what it does. We're going to see what happens. two things are happening one is glucose one phosphat is being produced by the breakdown of glycogen. The other thing that's happening is gluconeogenesis is being stimulated. Both of those converge in the synthesis of glucose. One's a break down one's a synthesis process but they're both producing the same glucose. The two processes produce the same amount of glucose, which is the building block of protein. The process is known as phosphatolysis, or phosphoryl phosphatase. thing which is glucose what's the liver doing with that glucose where's where's the glucose going exporting it's exported it's dumping out of the liver into the bloodstream. What's happening when it gets in the bloodstream tissues that need it it goes to tisues that need to get it. When it gets into the blood vessels it goes into the tissues that are in need of it and when it's in the blood it's released into the body. What happens when it goes through the body and into the cells? I stop exercising my tissues don't need it what happens blood glucose levels start going up. This stops the liver from making too much glucose and it stops it very very quickly. I don't want to push out anymore right so now the liver stops pushing out glucose. What happens to the concentration of glucose in the liver cell up and that's what we see right here. I stop exercising and my glucose levels go up right do I want my blood sugar levels to go up no. I'm going to stop exercising. My glucose levels will go up. glucose is a poison we're avoiding the poison with this very very Rapid Control that we've got here it's a very very important Point okay everybody understand what I've just told you so being able to carry around its own off switch allows this guy to merily go along its a very, very important point. Being able to. carry around a device that has an off switch is a very important. point. It allows us to avoid the poison of glucose with this. very very rapid control that we're getting here. way cutting through that glycogen like butter but once this starts to accumulate it literally gets turned off by the very thing that it's carrying that phosphatase the phosphat enzyme in turn activates glycogen synthes and what's that going to do with the glucose it's going to make it into glycogen. It's a very, very complex process. It takes a long time to get it to work. It can be very difficult to get to the point where it's safe to use. ultimately right and what's that going to happen to the concentration of glucose in the cell it's going to fall we've just reduced the amount of poison okay make sense clear as mud yes sir clear as Mud you knows how you get the end of the term and your end of your term and you know how to get to the other side of it. You know how you go from the beginning to the end and back to the beginning of it again. It's all part of the process. voice starts going up mine does I don't know I'm not sure what that means but that's what happens to my voice okay I've got one last thing to show you and maybe one more chance for somebody to win a SE a very valuable CD. I will autograph these and I will give them to you if you want to win one. I'll autograph them and I'll give you a chance to win them if you'd like to. I'm looking forward to it. for you you can sell them on eBay I you know you don't know how much you might make from your knowledge here okay so knowledge is power knowledge may be money so you might meet some exciting people from having these things too you never hey come over to our house and have a look at these things. For you you could sell these things on eBay for you youcan sell them online for you. for you, you neverhey come over and look at them. For me, I will have them on my bedside table. my house we can listen right or come Watch Me Turn the page of the calendar over that's what you're going to say right so okay um glycogen storage disease all right so we think about enzymes and we Think about Metabolism. We always think about reactions we always think. We think about metabolism and we think. about reactions and we always thought about glycogen. storage disease. It's a disease that affects the body's ability to store glycogen, which is a type of protein. There are a variety of what are called glycogen storage diseases. These diseases arise as a result of efficiency of certain enzymes either in that pathway or related to that pathway. About what happens when things don't work. What happens when we have problems well it turns out that there are a number of different types of glycogen Storage diseases. What are some of them? Tell us in the comments below or on Twitter @CNNOpinion. Back to the page you came from. Visit CNN.com/Opinions. This one lacks a glucose 6 phosphatase and affects liver and kidney. What happens to the glycogen well it's got an increased amount of glycogen but it has a normal structure. It's got a normal body structure well that sort of makes sense because it's a voner disease. It has an increased number of cells in its body but it's not a cancer. It doesn't cause any problems with the liver or kidney. It causes problems with other parts of the body like the pancreas and the liver. Glucogenesis can affect glycogen metabolism all right so we may see some problems arising from it.this doesn't build glycogen is involved in doing other things what's this guy involved indoing anybody remember nobody's going to say until I say how about a CD right glucogenesis that's right okay so glucogenesis can Affect glycogen Metabolism all right. this doesn't builds glycogen, it's involved in other things. what's he involved in do anybody remember. nobody's gonna say until we say howabout a CD. that here's Pomp's disease it's lacking alpha1 14 glucosidase okay and my this is not going here um the one I think is the most interesting is actually mcardle's disease gunite wow uh it's it's a deficiency of glycogen phosphor now you think now you're going to hear about this one? You're not going to be able to hear this one. It's actually a very interesting disease. It is called mCardle's Disease Gunite. The disease only affects muscle cells that is deficient in glycogen phosphor. The disease is um makes it's possible for a person to be alive by virtue of the fact that it only affects Muscle cells. It is called glycogenosphor deficiency disease. It affects the muscles of the body, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, liver, pancreas, bones, joints, skin, joints and skin cells. There is no known cure for the disease, but it can be treated. only the muscle cells are lacking the glycogen phosphor all right lacking glycogenosphor. What happens when we look at the glyc there it's got moderately increased amount not surprising because this is what breaks glycogen down. It's got a relatively normal structure meaning we've got branching enzyme and all. We've got a branching enzyme to break down glycogen. We have to break it down into its constituent parts. This is what we do with glycogen, which is the building block of the cell. that other stuff that's there okay but what's surprising is it has fairly limited effects limited ability to perform strenuous exercise because of painful muscle cramps otherwise patient is normal and welldeveloped. A person lacking glycogen phosphor in their muscle loses ability to do strenuous Exercise but that's the main main effect of lack of phosphor. That's the most common side effect of not having phosphor, which is found in the body's cells. It's found in cells in the liver, pancreas, bones, joints, skin, and skin cells. thing if we look at what happens with the thing here's here's a a plot of the concentration of ADP that's what we get from the breakdown of ATP okay um for a person who has uh mardal disease all right and uh this person is doing this this is a people who doesn't have marda disease this person has mardan disease look at the levels of ADp you rest your levels are low you do some exercise your ADP levels stay fairly constant. The person with McArdle disease sees ADP Levels go high and then it falls meaning that that person has McArDle disease. the cells are catching up and making ATP now for that last chance at a CD my question to you is what's making this possible. It's something we learn during the term something we learned a very important process. I'll give you a hint a veryimportant process we learned. I'm looking forward to hearing what you have to say about it. I hope to hear from you in the next few days as we get closer to the end of the season. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. during the term that allows these people who have this disease to lead a fairly normal life. "It could be slightly but no that's not the right answer the it's," he says. "I don't think there's a cure for this disease," he adds. "There's no cure for it. There's no treatment for it." "It's a disease that can't be cured," says the doctor. "You have to live with it. You have to get through it" the Cory cycle right what does the Corey cycle do glutose the liver has a normal enzyme right and so when the muscles start running out of energy what happens oh wow we need some glucose they can't get glucose from breaking down of glycogen but the liver sure as well as the liver. The Cory cycle does glutose. The liver has an enzyme right. So when the muscle starts running out, what happens? They need glucose. They need to break down glycogen. But the liver can't do it. he can do that and the Cory cycle kicks in okay so in essence it's a a backwards thing to the lactate that you talked about but it's the fact that the phosphor in the liver is perfectly normal. That makes sense you guys are looking like you're ready for the next round of training. It's a good sign that you're doing so well in the gym. You're getting stronger and stronger and you're getting into a better shape. That's a sign that things are going well for you. the surprise or something okay yes sir is this something that's easily diagnosed. I think it' be fairly easily di I I'm not a physician so I don't know I I would think it'd be fairly easy to diagnose because it would manifest itself. I would like to hear from you if you have any questions or concerns about the show. Please call the show's production team at (844) 472-8255 or email jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. pretty readily in the fact that you're really just you know as as a kid you're going to have problem with exercise and you're just worn out with this. So yeah I think it would be fairly easy to to detect that other questions I need to look in the other way around, he says. "I think it's fairly easy, to detect ... I think there's a lot of things I can do to improve my body," he adds. "It's just a matter of finding the right way to do it" back of the room and see if my surprises are ready yet or not are the surprises ready are the surprise ready oh okay are you ready for a surprise okay at this point you can put your pens down and your pencils down because we're not going to do it. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. Click here to read the rest of the interview with the author. Back into the page to read more from the author's collection of interviews with famous people. anything more that's going to be on the exam it'll be fun and if you really don't want to hear some bad singing you can leave also so I I will tell you that there'sgoing to be some singing well this is a little bit different singing than you've ever heard before. Anything more. that's Going to be On The Exam is on the BBC Radio 4 website and the BBC iPlayer. For more information, visit www.bbc.co.uk or go to www.thebbconline.com. heard before okay so um you guys know I like the Beatles I write a lot of stuff to Beatles music and you know the Beatles were like this but I really think they should have been like this you know I mean if this were an ideal world that's what I want to do. I like to write about the Beatles. I write about them a lot. I think they're great. I love them. I'm a Beatles fan. I just don't think they were like that in real life. That's all. what it would have looked like. "I sat in I thought about you know the Beatles and so forth and then I thought you know you know," he says. "They may not have sold as many of billions of records as they did but anyway so as I was putting this together I sat in and thought about that" he adds. "Then I thought of you know what it would've looked like and I thought that that's what I wanted it to look like. So that's how I came up with it" that's really odd you know there's all these things out there that relate to music that involve the letter B okay so the Beatles I mean they were wow what awesome things and you guys aren't old enough but what succeeded The Beatles was this group called The Beggs anybody. That's really strange you know. There's all this music out there. that relates to music involving the letter A. okay so The Beatles were awesome. What succeeded The Beatles was this band called Thebeggs. anybody. hear the bgs oh you heard the BS okay Night Fever Night Fever right okay so anyway and what succeeded the bGS was a really important group known as right the back street boy what a group huh and of course what succeeded them we know of of course was um was um Night Fever. Night Fever was the first hit song of the '60s and '70s. It was a big part of the pop culture of the time. The song is credited with launching the careers of David Bowie and Prince. yeah low moment in music I think but if you thought you've seen low moments in music You Ain't Seen Nothing Yet let me introduce the next bees that are going to turn the music world upside down through the bio comical choir. Please come down I have some people. I have a lot of people to talk to. I've got a lot to tell you. I'm going to talk about music. I'll talk about all kinds of things. I just want to talk. I don't know what to say. to help me sing today so they're going to drown me out yes Applause is appropriate yes thank you thank you let me introduce our participants including one person in the class starting with Santa on the end this is Bonnie this is Heather this is Ki Shannon and this is Andrea and they're all going to sing today. Yes Applause was appropriate yes Thank you for your participation. Yes the applause was appropriate and the audience was loud enough to hear each individual's voice. yes the audience applauded and the group sang. Valeria and Linda so uh thank them all for uh thank you all for coming to help me with this. I thought about you know introducing them you know we think about flash mobs I thought maybe we could just call these guys the world's first flush mob you know. So thanks to all of you for coming and helping me out with this project. It's been a lot of fun and I hope to see you all again soon. I love you all so much. I'll see you soon. but that might be a little mean so I didn't do that so okay so we're going to do some of Britney's favorite hits we're oops we'reGoing to do it again and you guys know the rule about singing loud right okay. So we have four songs for you. We're doing four Britney songs. We have four Britneys. We've done four Brits. We'll do four Britches. We will do some Britney hits. We are doing some Britneys songs. today that we're going to sing yeah and are you going to have sing with us they'reGoing to sing with you yes this this this group has questions you you guys don't ask me questions my group up here ask me question question so this is this is good now. This is this good now this is a good now so we're good now we'll go on to the next one. We'll go to the second one next week and then we'll do the third one and the fourth one. the first song that we think about is the fact that how many people in here are really sick and tired of that Sunshine there we go okay these are the real oregonians in the room okay so we're sick and sick of that sunshine. We don't want that Sunshine. The first song is "How Many People in Here are really Sick and Sick of That Sunshine" The second is "We're Sick and Tired Of That Sunshine". The third is "I Don't Want that Sunshine" anymore please join us in singing our first big hit known as Let It Rain. oh the Oregon weather's Dy the is mostly cloudy you can't stop it if you complain so let it rain let itRain let it Rain let it raining it doesn't show signs of slowing and it's RAR. RAR is the band that made the song "Let It Rain" a big hit in the '70s and '80s. The band is currently on tour in the U.S. and Canada. right for snowing and driving some folks insane. Let it rain let it rainLet it rain when it finally turns out dry will be put away our reer it will probably be. But I'll surely miss the Reindeer cuz the sound of the Falling Rain P down the makes is the best sound in the world. Right for snow, driving some people insane let itRainLet it Rain Let It Rain let it Rain when it Finally Turned out Dry will be Put away Our Reindeers. music inside my brain so let it rain it rain let itRain okay I couldn't quite hear you guys Heather is going to pick the key for Heather will pick the keys. I've been told I'm not picking the key on the next one so okay we have. Let it Rain Let It Rain let it Rain. Let It rain Let ItRain. LetItRainLetItRain. For the rest of the show, listen to "Let It Rain" on iReport.com. someone here who's much more musically talented than I in fact I should put the microphone with her perhaps we do that who I'm destroying all my equipment here all right somebody put oh I'm not I don't want youDon't want that. okay all right maybe I'll just hold. Maybe we should do that. All right maybe we'll just do that maybe we will. okay. all right. maybe we can do that? All right we'll try that. We'll try it. We're going to try. it close to you all right wrong one here anyway all right the next song um we learned a lot during the term about hemoglobin you heard a lot about what happens in the blood and how all those things work it's appropriate that we talk about the bloody things. It's appropriate to talk about bloody things like hemoglobin and blood vessels and all the other things that make up the human body. That's what we're going to focus on in this song. We're gonna talk about blood. okay this is an old song that many of you may not know and some people here may not generation I grew up with this ad it's an old Coca-Cola ad it goes Heather S put some oy. ring Yank on his the globe and shapes will change. [Applause] [Music] ring Yanks on his his globe and shape will change and it's a song from the '50s and '60s. It's an ad for a Coke called "Heather S Put Some oy" a bit what a sight to see the way they toy cooperatively and as I exit from the lungs to swim in the blood stream metabolizing they allpress their needs to to them. I give upy change from R to [Music] while the [Applause] protons but that's not all the not all the  that's not all the way they toy cooperatively with one another. It's a great thing to be part of. tricks I know more [Music] G when [Music]. C the protons andat from L2 that's the way it is when are at go all right two down okay the next one may sound a little familiar to you and with good reason so I I this one I'm expect to. I'm expecting to do something that you don't normally do. I know this one. I expect to do this one that you normally don't do. This one is for you. hear a lot of voices on it's about sering proteases all right okay okay hea Heather started go for SES work almost identically Amino a TR tight changing their structure when they S1 then there are elect shs at the AC as theaction next [Applause] theide elak without ACH so. theideElak without aCH so theide Elak without an ACH without an elak so. Theide elk without a CH without an ELK without a ELK so. one piece is bound to it the get set free has to act next to it. where it started waiting for a pepti chain that it can itself to go and start all again. okay now I don't know about you guys but I don’t I can't really hear that much. I can only make out a little bit of what is going on. I’m not sure what’s going on but I can hear more than I think I do. I just want to go back to where I was. out out here you know do you notice and I don't know I didn't tell but they got on the final exam if they want to have an extra credit question that one of the rules was I had to really be able to hear you know like loud like. "I don't think I've ever been in a car that was so loud," he says. "It was like a car with a lot of people in it. It was really loud. I was like, 'Oh my God,'" he adds. "You know, it was just like like a really loud car." louder than you've sung before okay you do know you will know the last one. It's a it's a very easy Christmas tune it's to the tune of winter wonderland okay it'sA song I wrote about this class we sang it last year and I can tell you the. the. last one is a song that we sang last year. It is a Christmas song that I wrote for this class. We sang it in class and it was a big hit. group that sang it last year they were Magnificent the bar is very high very high okay are we going to Belt it out I can't hear you all right all right let's go with it it's called BB Wonderland Heather take us no we're all starting all right ready. "BB Wonderland" is one of the most popular songs of all time. The song was written by Neil Young and was recorded by The Beatles and The Rolling Stones. It was written for the film version of "The Wizard of Oz," which was released in 1973. one Anna two mil Hall dirty and they gety he walks to and not louder [Music] started MP3's got added to my iPod some sometimes were and exams when the Cur turned out I don't think it's so my scores are too low sliding by finally there's examination on December. One Anna two million Hall dirty  and they getY he walks to and not loudly [Music started MP3s got added to my iPod some sometimes were and exam times when the Cur turned out. 5m I'll have my car pack with information so I don't have to memorize it and I'll feel like aart with my party just one to go and then ho I'll be all right. I think you got it thank you thank you. thank you see you on Monday not. not. I'll see you in the office on Monday. Not. I will see you at the office in the morning on Monday on Monday morning. See you on Sunday on Sunday night on Sunday. soon thanks guys [Music] [Applause] oh yes thank you thank you [ music] sh if if if you're too crowded for the final and I don't get a chance to say it I hope you have a great holiday and I will see you next time thank you indeed you too study. Soon thanks guys thanks guys. soon thanks guys thank you guys.soonThanks guys [music] [applause) oh yesThank you thankYou too study you too.soon. hard okay it goes how you doing uh they're back in my office come back and see me my office there now uh I'm going there in a minute yeah I got to take everything down but [Music] yeah e e e. hard okay it went how youdoing uh they were back in his office. Come back andsee me myoffice there now.hardOkay it goesHow you doing? How you doing.hard? How are you doing?""I'm fine. I'm fine," he says. "I'm going over to my office. I've got to get everything down"