On August 28th, 1963, Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his “I Have a Dream” speech at the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom. That day, nearly a quarter million people gathered on the national mall to demand an end to the discrimination, segregation, violence, and economic exclusion black people faced. The march was led by the Rev. Dr. Martin LutherKing, Jr. and was organized by the National Urban League. The March was held on the National Mall in Washington, DC. Bayard Rustin grew up in a Quaker household, and began peacefully protesting racial segregation in high school. He remained committed to pacifism throughout his life, and was committed to peaceful protest. Rustin was the chief organizer of the March on Washington in 1963. He died in 1998, and is survived by his wife and three children. He is buried in a plot of land he donated to the University of California, Los Angeles, where he was a member of the Board of Trustees until his death. jailed in 1944 as a conscientious objector to World War II. During his two-year imprisonment, he protested the segregated facilities from within. Wherever Rustin went, he organized and advocated, and was constantly attuned to the methods, groups, and people who could help further messages of equality. He joined the Communist Party and became a member of the Socialist Party of America. He died of a heart attack at the age of 69. He was buried in a plot of land owned by his family. Party when black American’s civil rights were one of its priorities. In 1948, he traveled to India to learn the peaceful resistance strategies of the recently assassinated Mahatma Gandhi. He returned to the United States armed with strategies for the civil rights movement. He soon became disillusioned by the party”s authoritarian leanings and left. He died of a heart attack at the age of 75 in 1998. He is survived by his wife, two children and a step-granddaughter. peaceful protest, including civil disobedience. He began to work with Martin Luther King Jr in 1955, and shared these ideas with him. As King’s prominence increased, Rustin became his main advisor, as well as a key strategist in the broader civil rights movement. He brought his organizing expertise to the organizing expertise of the civil rights Movement. He was also a key figure in the formation of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, which later became the Southern Poverty Law Center (SCLC) 1956 bus boycotts in Montgomery, Alabama —in fact, he had organized and participated in a transportation protest that helped inspire the boycotts almost a decade before. His largest-scale organizing project came in 1963, when he led the planning for the national march on Washington. The possibility of riots that could could be sparked by the march was a major concern for the civil rights movement. The march was the largest demonstration of its kind in U.S. history, with more than 100,000 people taking part. Rustin not only worked with the DC police and hospitals to prepare, but organized and trained a volunteer force of 2,000 security marshals. In spite of his deft management, some of the other organizers did not want to undermine their message of peaceful protest, Rustin says. Rustin: "I think we're going to have a very, very successful march" in Washington, D.C., on Saturday. He says he hopes it will be a model for the rest of the country. Rustin to march in front with other leaders from the south, because of his homosexuality. Despite these slights, Rustin maintained his focus, and on the day of the march he delivered the marchers' demands in a speech directed at President John F. Kennedy. The march itself proceeded smoothly, without any problems, and Rustin was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal for his services to the South in 1961. The award was the first of its kind in the history of the U.S. Congress. Rustin was credited with helping pass the 1964 Civil Rights Act and the 1965 Voting Rights Act. His positions on certain political issues were unpopular among some members of Congress. He is survived by his wife, two daughters and a son-in-law. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. his peers. Some thought he wasn’t critical enough of the Vietnam War, or that he was too eager to collaborate with the political establishment including the president and congress. Others were uncomfortable with his former communist affiliation. But ultimately, both his belief in collaboration with the government and his membership in the Communist Party were key to his success as a member of the House of Representatives and the Senate. He died of a heart attack at the age of 69. He was buried in a private ceremony in New Jersey. to the communist party had been driven by his desire to maximize tangible gains in liberties for black Americans, and to do so as quickly as possible. Rustin was passed over for several influential roles in the 1960s and 70s, but he never stopped his activism. In the 1980s, he became an outspoken critic of President Ronald Reagan's handling of the Iran-Contra scandal. He died of a heart attack at the age of 80 in 2009. He is survived by his wife, two daughters and a son. publicly came out as gay, and was instrumental in drawing attention to the AIDS crisis until his death in 1987. In 2013, fifty years after the March On Washington, President Barack Obama posthumously awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom. President Obama praised Rustin’s “march towards true equality, no matter who we are,” and said Rustin was “one of the greats of our time.” Rustin died of AIDS in 1987 at the age of 48. are or who we love.” “I’m so proud of you,” she says. “You’re so beautiful.’ ““I love you, too,’ I say. I love you so much.“” I’ll always love you. ”I will never forget you. ””“We’ve been through a lot. We’d rather be here than there. ’’”