The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open CourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. To see more content from MIT Open courseWare, visit ocW.MIT.edu/OpenCourseWare. For more information about MIT OpencourseWare, or to order a copy of any of the courses available, visit opencourseware.org or call 1-800-292-8255. We're going to be taking this IV curve that we've so laboriously set up and understood-- sorry about that. And now we will subject it to illumination. So that's the essence of our lecture today, the diode under illumination. And as part of today's lecture, we have some wonderful little diodes that we'll be showing off in the next few minutes. We'll show you some of them in the second half of the lecture. We hope you'll join us. kits over there in the corner where we'll actually be testing IV curves of solar cells. So I hope some of you brought the computers today, and if not, we have some extras up here as well we can use. So again, just to situate ourselves, we're here in fundamentals. We're here to talk about solar cells and how to make them more efficient, more efficient and more cost-effective. So that's what we're going to focus on here today. We're approaching the end of our fundamental section, but we still have a few really important lectures to get through. After we get through the fundamentals, we'll be in a good position to understand the different technologies and finally the cross-cutting themes. And our goal is to, at least for now, be able to understand all of them. We hope you'll join us for the rest of the week. We'll be looking forward to seeing you in the next few weeks. Back to the page you came from. the fundamentals, to understand solar cell conversion efficiency, which is the ratio of output to input energy. And for most solar cells, this breaks down to the following progression, from the solar spectrum to charge collection. And we're going to be focusing on charge separation, incorporating elements of either side of the cell to create a new type of photovoltaic cell. We'll also be looking at how solar cells can be used to generate electricity in the future, and how this can be done in a variety of ways. but mostly focused on charge separation today. reminding everybody, of course, that the total system efficiency is the product of each individual efficiency. And if any one of these is low, the efficiency for the entire system is low. And since folks are tired of looking at this chart, I'll show you a different one. It's a chart of the efficiency of the U.S. electrical grid. It shows how the grid has evolved over the years, and how it's improving. It also shows how much more efficient it is as a whole. now, every single lecture I intend to introduce something new that follows a similar pattern. Does anybody recognize what this is about? So you have over here some H2O going into an oxygen-evolving complex, and light is coming in, essentially exciting up an electron, which is being stored in some of the molecules in the complex. Do you see what I'm talking about? Do you know what I mean by that? If you don't, I'll explain it to you in a minute. form of chemical energy. And just like a solar cell, the photosynthesis conversion efficiency of the entire system is dictated by the efficiency of each individual part. Roughly it can be broken down to this little pie chart up here. The total of the total energy produced by the solar cell is called the photovoltaic cell. The photovolcanic cell is a type of solar cell that converts light into energy. It's a cell that can be used to power solar cells or other solar cells. system efficiency in blue is somewhere, depending on the plant, somewhere around 1%, maybe as high as 7% or 8%, depending on very specialized plants. And that, in part, is largely due to optical losses. If you can see the blue, the plant is converting sunlight into usable chemical energy. And if you can't see it, the power plant is not converting it into chemical energy, but rather, it's capturing the light to create electricity. If it's not converting the light, the electricity is being used to power the plant. absorption spectrum of chlorophyll. You'll see large portions of the solar spectrum that go underutilized. So again, another system that's similar to a solar cell, that the total system efficiency is the product of each individual component going on here. All right. So far, we've seen some interesting results, but we'll have to wait and see what the results are in the future. We'll keep you posted as we learn more about the technology in the coming months. Each of you should have on your desk these sheets. Oh, we don't have them on the desks. We need to pass those out. Now what we're going to do is just quickly revisit the diode in the dark and construct the energy band diagram for pn-junction in thedark. Now we'll look at it in the light. Now it's time to look at the light in the darkness. Now, we'll see the light and the dark in the same way. We need to pass those out. So we should have sheets that describe essentially the equivalent circuit diagram, the IV characteristics, and the energy band diagram for our pn-junction in the dark. We laboriously filled this out last class. We're just going to refresh ourselves to make sure we're all on the same page. We'll pass them out in the next class, and then we'll do the same with the rest of the class. That's the way to go. on the same page and redo it this class right at the beginning because it's that important. "We really tried to get this across. For those who came to our office hours and for those who come to the recitations, and we really trying to get it across," she says. "Thank you, thank you,Thank you for thosewho came to the office hours," she adds. "For those who. who came for the recitation, we really try to get that across" are still struggling, let's make sure that you get this sometime between now and, say, the next two weeks. This will feature prominently on the exam, and it's pretty important for understanding how a solar cell works. So if you would not mind working directly with your partner, the best place to start is at the bottom of the page. If you would like to work directly with a partner, you can go to: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/2013/01/30/how-to-make-a-solar-cell-in-the-workplace.html#storylink=cpy. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. person who's sitting directly next to you. Let's walk through the diode in the dark and construct the energy band diagrams. I'll walk you through it as soon as you've done. Maybe I'll give you three minutes to complete that. And then we'll progress to the next step. We're going to do the same thing with the other side of the room. We'll do the next stage in the same way. And we'll do it with the second side. And so on. to the diode under illumination. Should be a lot of fun. I see convergence among several of you, so let's move forward. Just to review quickly, the way I typically think about it, if we set up in the model circuit right here, we have our pn-junction. We have our diode-to-diode. We've got our junction. And we've got the junction. We're going to have some fun with this. I'm looking forward to it. space-charge region, also known as the quasi-neutral region, or depletion zone. So we have this region right here that represents the space- charge region. So this is in the dark. Now we have the energy band diagram shown right here, where this dashed blue line represents the chemical. This dashed blue lines represent the chemical, and this dashed red line is the space charge region, which is where the energy is coming from. And this dashed green line is what the energy comes from, and that's where the chemical is. potential, also called the Fermi energy, throughout the entire device right here in cross-section. And just to be very, very clear, we've so far described the solar cell as like coming in through the top. And now we've rotated this structure by 90 degrees to represent the pn-junction. That's been a big step for us, and we're very proud of the results we've been able to get so far. We're going to keep working on it. a little confusing for some folks. So just to be totally clear, in a device like this one, if it were subject to illumination you would have light coming in from the side, right, either from the p side or from the n side. So to transfer this into what we have here, we need to change the light to come in from either the p or n side of the device. That's what we're trying to do here. We're not trying to turn it into something that looks like a phone. The solar cell devices are facing up toward the sun. The drift and diffusion currents for electrons-- electron currents-- are created by the Fermi energy. The solar cells will be used to make solar panels in the future. The technology is still in its early stages, but is expected to have a big impact on the solar system in the coming years. It's the first time the solar cells have been used in such a large-scale way. It will also be the first demonstration of the solar cell's ability to store solar energy. diffusion, electron drift-- there is an abundance of electrons over here in the n-type side, and so they want to diffuse over to the p-type. That's why the diffusion current is pointing left. Once they do to a certain degree, they set up a field, the electrons and holes, the holes and electrons, the current is set up. The current is then directed in the opposite direction, to the right, to create a current that is flowing in the other direction. mobile charges set up a field, and that creates a drift current that counteracts the diffusion. And once these two are in equilibrium, there's no current flowing through our device. That's why current is equal to 0 right here. And there's also no potential difference because the Fermi energy, the Fermani energy,. the energy, is the same as the current in our device, so we don't have a potential difference. We don't even have a current difference at all. We just have a state of the art device. chemical potential, is the same on either side of that device, and so the voltage output of that solar cell would also be 0. When we forward bias our device, now we're forcing a separation, or we're forced a separation of the chemical potential onEither side of the device. The voltage output from the solar cell is also the same, so the separation is forced. The device can then be used to make solar cells with different levels of power, for example, or to make a different type of solar cell. If you connected this to an external circuit, the electrons would want to flow from this side to that side. But since we're forcing this condition here with a battery, we are reducing the barrier height here. Electrons can now diffuse over from the n-type into the p-type side, and this is a big step. It's the first time we've been able to do this with this type of device. We hope to do it with other types of batteries in the future. they do. And the diffusion current increases. And that's why we have current now a positive value. We've defined the electrons traveling to the left as being a positive current. We have now electrons traveling from the n-type to the p-type material. When we reverse bias our device, notice the increase in the current. That's the reason we have a negative current. It's because the electrons are traveling from n to p. And they're traveling in a positive direction. separation of the quasi-Fermi energies. Again, we have here one sign of voltage. And now the right side is lower than the left, so our voltage sign flips from right to left over here from positive to negative values. So notice that the voltage sign of the Fermi system is now lower than that of the CERN system, which is higher than the Cern system, and so on and on. The voltage sign is now higher than it was before, and now it's lower. The drift current will outweigh the diffusion current in this particular case because now the barrier for electrons to diffuse from the n to the p-type is very large they'll have difficulty going from that side to that side. Whereas the drift current is larger because of the larger electric field. And so now instead of electrons flowing from n-type to p- type, where we had defined as positive current, electrons are flowing from p- Type to n- type in that, which we defined as negative. Current.current. width of the space-charge region changing as we forward and reverse bias our device. Over here, notice that we're in positive current territory, and over here,notice we're In negative current territory. As the barrier height decreases, current.current width decreases as well. And that's why our current has changed signs. Also, you'll notice the size of the current. current region changing when we reverse bias the device. As we reverse the device, the current width changes as we reverse it. we have a decrease of the built-in electric field. We have a decreases of the amount of charge on either side of the junction. That's why the depletion width decreases. And the opposite happens here under reverse bias. So getting to the point where you can set up a pn-junction is a big step. It's the first time we've seen this kind of junction used in a car. We've never seen it used in the car industry before. We'll have to wait and see. and understand how drift and diffusion currents come into being in the first place and then being able to bias your diode under different conditions is a really important fundamental skill for understanding how a solar cell works. Question. On the forward and reverse bias, does the Fermi energy do the same thing for the solar cell? We would like to hear from you, the audience, about your experience of bias. If you have any questions, please send them to jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. actually continuous, or does it actually [INAUDIBLE]? PROFESSOR: So the Fermi energy, which we defined here as the chemical potential, notice we're avoiding talking about what's happening here in the middle until a couple of lectures from now. That gets into a gray zone where we talk about quasi-Fermi energies, and that's where we're going to be talking about this week. We'll talk about how we get into that gray zone. We'll get to that in a minute or maybe a couple of lectures. But yes, the Fermi energy in the extreme sides right here near the contacts, so your contact in your device over here and your contacts over here. Those Ferm i energies are different on an individual device. We'll talk more about that in the next few minutes, but it's important to know that you're using a device that has a different energy than you are using on another device. It's important for you to understand that. absolute energy scale. So there is an energy difference when you're driving the electrons from one side to the other. Notice in this case right here, you would think that the electrons would want to travel through an external circuit to come back to this side because their energy's higher. But in fact, they're going through an internal circuit to get back to the opposite side of the room. And they're doing it because they're trying to get to a point where they can't get to the right side. We're essentially forcing the electrons from the n-type into the p-type material. We're pushing.in this side and lower over here. But we're not illuminating the solar cell yet. We are biasing it using a battery. And this is why we have current flow coming from this side into that side. We have to push this side to get the electrons to go to the right place. And we're pushing that side to the left to get it to go the right way. them up that hill with a battery. And that's why we have this diffusion current dominating in the dark. So we have a current flowing from right to left. In the illuminated case, we'll have all of our carriers traveling from left to right. And in the darkened case, they'll be traveling from the left to the right. That's what we're trying to do in this case. We're not trying to create a new type of car, we're just trying to make a new kind of car. dark, this is the only case in which we have carriers traveling from right to left. And it's happening because we're using that battery in the dark to change the chemical potential on either side, which, in effect, reduces this barrier height and allows carriers to diffuse from the n-type to the p-type. It's the only time in the world that we have this kind of carrier movement. It is a very, very rare phenomenon. It happens very rarely, and it's very exciting to see. into p-type. So you can think about it as forcing carriers up the junction. And this is a very useful technique because, in effect, what it's doing in a real device, when we you have a two-dimensional device within homogeneities, the current will travel through the weakest point of that. In this case, it's the junction between the two sides of the device. It's a very, very powerful technique, and it can be used in a variety of ways. pn-junction. Wherever the barrier height is lowest, current will begin crowding through that spot. And so it's a way of probing or testing the quality of your junction characteristic in the dark. OK. So this is the basics of pn-Junction in the night. Let's flip our page over and now go to the next page. The next page is the next section. The third and fourth pages are the last and final pages of the series. The fourth and final page of theseries is the final page. let's try to imagine what will happen under illuminated conditions, and let's start out in a very simple case. We'll assume that the principle of superposition applies here, that the photo-excited carriers-- in other words, when light shines into our device-- I'm looking at this one right now or this one or this. In a simple case, we're looking at a photo that is either this or this right now, and we're superpositioning the two. one right here-- and light's coming in and generating electron-hole pairs, essentially exciting electrons across the band gap. What will happen to those electrons now that they're in the conduction band? Where will they go? We don't know yet, but it's a good question. We'll have to wait and see what happens in the future to find out. The next lecture will be held on November 14. The lecture will take place in New York City and will be broadcast live on CNN. they want to go? AUDIENCE: To the right. PROFESSOR: to the right, right? OK. So what you'll do is set up what's called an illumination current. Notice now at the bottom of the second row here, you have electron diffusion, electron drift, and IL current. IL stands for illumination current, and diffusion is called electron diffusion. electron drift is also known as electron drift. electron diffusion is also called electron drift and it's known as the electron current. So you have a third arrow here that will have to be implemented in some way. And that will-- by the principle of superposition you should think what happens to your IV curve as well. So let's make an estimate of what we think should happen, and then I'll confer with you on what will happen. And then we'll talk about what we want to do with the data that we have. And we'll be able to make a decision in the next few days about how to proceed. some notes, and then we'll measure what actually does happen under illumination. Why don't we give it a shot? What does forward and reverse bias mean when there's no battery? This is a very interesting question. So once you start illuminating your solar cell device and you start injecting carriers we'll see what happens. We'll see if there's a change in the behavior of the solar cells. We're going to see if we can find out if there is a difference in the behaviour of the cells. into it, what will happen is, very naturally, this band alignment that you see right here will begin to shift toward the forward bias condition. You'll be generating carriers. They'll be swept over into this region here. One way to think about it is that you'll be creating carriers that will be swept into the region here, which is the front of the band. It's a very natural thing to do, but it's not a very rational one. It doesn't make sense. increasing the number of electrons over here and the number. of holes over here, which will naturally cause the energy of those electrons to increase on this side. So one way to think about it is, as you're illuminating your solar cell, you're increasing the chemical potential on the other side, which is why you're getting more light. It's a very simple process, but it can take a long time to get to the point where you're seeing more light than you think you are. more and more and more, you're forcing a forward bias condition on your device. To get the solar cell to go into reverse bias, you really do need to bias your devices. You physically need to biased it. Yeah. So when I mentioned illumination current here, we're really talking about illumination current. We're reallytalking about light current here. It's a very, very important part of solar power. It really is a very powerful tool. It can be used for a lot of different things. The electrons would be traveling from left to right. Current is generally described as a flow of positive charge. And in the absence of a definer or, say, a definition of current, this is very astute observation. The electron illumination current, right, what direction of travel the electrons are taking inside of our system. So yes, the electrons would have been traveling from right to left. Very astute. observation. It's a very good way to see what's going on in the system. electrons or holes, you rightly could assume that it would be the flow of positive charges. We're assuming electrons are flowing here in the illumination. current. All right. So This is very positive. I see everybody has settled on the notion that illumination will shift our IV curve down. I think that's a very good idea. This is a very positive thing. It means that we're going to be able to see more of the light that we normally see in the night sky. That's a good thing. Because of the way we've defined current, that if current flows from left to right that lands us in negative current territory. So that makes sense. If we shine light on our system, we have electrons flowing fromleft to right here. That'll put us into negative territory. That's what we're trying to do here. We want to make sure we don't get into negative current. We don't want to be in negative territory, we want to get out of negative current, so that's where we're going. shifts the entire thing down. And we would add illumination current, an arrow pointing to the right right here, which would mean that we would have current flowing through our device, but there's still no difference in the chemical potential on either side. There's still a difference in Fermi energy, and that's what we're trying to get at with this project. We're going to try to get to a point where we're able to do that, and we'll see if we can do it. in the p-type and the n-type, which means our voltage is equal to 0. So it's really just a superposition. Great. Now what happens if we forward bias our device either either in the p or the n type? Well, our little x should be marked right down here. So we're intersecting the y-axis right here, and our little z-axis should be down there. So that's what we're trying to do here. OK. because we're adding a resistor in series to our solar cell? So instead of a battery there, you would replace that with a resistor. Or if we're applying a bias voltage as well, we could also do that under illumination. So we'd still have the illumination current, right? And we, we would still be able to use the solar cell as a source of power. We'd still be using the solar cells as a way to power the solar panels. We could still use them for other purposes, too. through superposition, shift this entire curve down, we'd be operating somewhere in this quadrant right there, right? So this we call IV quadrant, typically I, II, III, IV, IV quadrants. This is where power is coming out of the solar cell device. Because if we imagine instead of having a solar cell, we would have a device that could generate power from the sun. We'd have a system that could produce power from a sun that was in this area. battery there, we have a resistor, the electrons will travel from the n-type material through that external load to get work the p- type material where the chemical potential is lower. And as a result, they'll deposit that power across that resistor, right, because they'll desire to minimize their free energy. And that's what we're trying to do in this case. We want to get the electrons to work in a way that minimizes free energy, so that we don't have to use as much power. across that external load, in order to get back to this other side because that's the only path that they can travel easily, right? And so this entire curve shifts down. You have your red x somewhere in the quadrant over here. And power is flowing out of the solar panels. And so that's what's going on here. It's a very, very complex system, but it's working as planned, and it's going to continue to work as long as we have enough solar power. cell across that external load. So in the next slide, pretty much everything is right, except that, mea culpa, I forgot to replace the battery up there with a little resistor. So you'll want to correct that in your notes. Instead of having the little batteries up there, you can have a little resistors up there. That's a better way to do it, and it will save you a lot of time in the long run. It will also save you from having to change batteries every time. replace those with resistors or a resistor in series with a battery, if you prefer. Since depending on the illumination condition, the intensity we may have natural for a bias condition, we may need to apply a bias voltage. OK. So we have our IV characteristic like this. We have We have Our IV characteristic. we have Our V characteristic. We had our V characteristic, we had our VI characteristic, and we had a V intensity, and this is our V intensity. This is our IV intensity. our red x under forward bias conditions in the IV quadrant, denoting that power would be flowing out of this solar cell device. And now the bias is inverted. We have reverse bias conditions. And notice that the current still has the same sign. So the current is still the same in the current quadrant of the solar cell. But the power is flowing in the reverse direction. The current is now the reverse of the current in the forward quadrant. This is the reverse bias. is negative here, negative here and negative here. So the net current is always flowing in the same direction in all cases because we have this illumination current. That's pretty cool. That wasn't the case when we had the previous generation of carriers inside of the material. It's a pretty cool thing to be able to do, I think, and I'm glad we've got this new generation to do it with. I'm looking forward to seeing what the future has in store for us. device in the dark. But under illumination, now we have all of our carriers traveling from the p-type into the n-type. What's varying is the potential that the carriers have and, of course, the total amount of current. Eventually at some point, if you keep forward biasing here, the current will be 0. There will be no net current flow because there'll be no driving force for the carriers to go from the P-type to the N-Type. we're beginning to wrap our heads around what's happening to the electrons and holes during solar cell operation. Let me put a little bit of mathematics to this. These are your IV curves. The blue is in the dark, and the red is under illumination. And we're focused on this. We're trying to understand what's going on in the solar cell. We don't know if we're going to be able to do this for a very long time, or if we'll have to wait and see. IV quadrant right here because this is the quadrant in which power is coming out of our solar cell device. This is the usable power that we can power an external load. Why? Well, first off, the voltage is such that weCan power an External Load. We have the voltage in this quadrant that we have the power to power anexternal load. This quadrant is called the IV quadrant. It is the area in which we have usable power. It's the area that we use to power our solar cells. We can use it to power external loads. charge separation. The electrons are accumulated over here. And they have higher potential than they do on the other side, which means that there's an incentive for them to go through the external circuit, deposit the power across that external load to get back to this other side where their potential is higher. It's a very complex process, but it's working as planned, the company says. It will take a few weeks to get the full effect of the separation, it says, and then it will take another few months to get it working properly. potential is lower, right? So the voltage is favorable. And the current is also favorable because now we have light coming in. And this generation current is driving the carriers-- well, or is creating carriers here in the p-type. That can then be driven toward the n-type because of the voltage. Because of the current, the carriers can be driven to the n type. And that's what we're doing here. We're driving carriers to the p type, and we're creating carriers for the ntype. built-in field. So the conditions are just right under illuminated forward bias conditions to drive power through our external load. Under all other conditions of operations of the solar cell, we're putting power into the device, not getting power out of it. This IV quadrant over here, this forward bias. This forward bias is the one that drives power through the external load, not the other side of the cell. It's the one where we're getting power from the device and not from the outside. illuminated case is the only case in which power is coming, usable power. So that's why we focus on this IV quadrant right here. The illuminated IV curve is, to the first order, is just your dark IV curve. It's not a sign of a solar cell, it's just a sign that we have a cell that we can use, and that's what we're trying to do with our solar cell. We want to make sure that we're using it to the best of our ability. with a superposition, which we call the illumination current, I sub L. And that's what shifts our entire curve down by this ISub L right here, so this Isub L, that one right there or that right there. Kind of cool. All right. What do we think will happen next? We'll have to wait and see. We've got a long way to go, but I think we're on the right track. We're looking forward to the next few years. happen if our light intensity goes down by a factor of 2? So now if the amount of sunlight falling on our solar cell drops by 1/2, what will happen? What do we predict will happen based on this right here? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: The curve will shift, the red will turn red, and that's what we're going to see in the solar cell. We'll see what happens in the next few years. curve will shift up by about 1/2, right, because the illumination current is now cut in half. What will happen to the voltage intersect right here? What is the relation between voltage and current? It's the logarithmic relation, right? So it won't necessarily be cut in HALF, but it'll be shifted up a little bit. It won't be as big as you think, though. It'll just shift up about a quarter of a degree or so. "In the dark is important because we can test our devices in the dark, and we can still learn a lot about our solar cell device characteristics," he says. "We can force carriers from one side of the junction to the other the wrong way and probe for weaknesses in our solar cells," he adds. "So we're beginning to develop an intuitive understanding of where electrons are flowing inside ofOur solar cells in thedark and under illumination. So OK. Be cut by whatever this would be here, a log of 2. the pn-junction regions. That's helpful. And in the illumination condition, obviously we're testing the total amount of power that's coming out of our device. It's off of this red curve here that we defined the efficiency or the performance of the solar cell. So again, this is very useful because it's a good way to measure the efficiency of a solar cell and how much power is coming from it. And it can also be used to test other types of solar cells, such as photovoltaic cells. So what I'll ask folks to do now is to-- we'll begin passing around these little tools. David Berney Needleman to come up to the front. David is our lab guru. He's the one who helped build these, really was the driving force behind getting them built. And he'll be the one to show you how to use them. He'll be in the front of the room as you use them to test them. And then you'll be able to see how well they work. These are IV testers that will allow you to measure the current voltage characteristics of solar cells right here in class. And he's going to-- well, we'll pass them out while maybe he comes to the front here and explains how they work. So now that we have the basic, we're going to move on to the next part of the class. We'll be talking about how to make solar cells into solar panels. And we'll talk about how you can make solar panels into solar cells. IV curves rolling in, what I'd like you to do is modify the height or the intensity of the light. And the easiest way to modify theintensity of light is to move the light position up and down. Note the y-axis scale, which might change as well. It might rescale depending on the condition. Give that a shot. All right, folks. Why don't we circle back real soon? We'll be back with the real deal. Back to the page you came from. quick. This has been a good experiment. I am very much in favor of multitasking and browsing. So if you want to keep your experiment running over the course of the remainder of the lecture, I will certainly have nothing opposed to testing a few different illumination conditions. And if you don't like what you see, you can always go back to the page you were looking at and try a different set of images. I'll be happy to show you how to do that. Back to Mail Online home. there's anything really, really important I'm going to emphasize, this is a really important wake-up, folks. The I sub L, just to really recap here, we have this ideal diode equation, the illumination current coming in from our light source. And in our little set-up,. how many batteries did you do you use? We're going to show you how to do it. We'll show you what we've done in the past and what we're doing in the future. see there? AUDIENCE: One. PROFESSOR: Look closer. How many batteries do you see total in our set-up? Look especially at that light source. There's a 9-volt and a 1.5-volt. All right. So one of them is powering the light source, and we have, as well, a 2-volt power source. And we have a 3- volt power source, too, to power the lights. And so on and so on. to the solar cell device, right? So we have a bit of a combination of the last two slides. In this case, in the dark, we were biasing our solar cell using the battery. And in the illumination conditions, the light itself was causing the solarcell to become forward biased. But we can add a battery to sweep the bias condition of the device. So that's effectively what's happening right here is you have a combination. of both simple scenarios that we just looked at, and we're building on those components to really understand the larger system. device. But that solar cell might be connected in series with a bunch of other solar cells in a module, right? And those other solar Cells might be biasing that one solar cell. So that's why we have to think about the solar cell device both from the perspective of the device and of the module. And that's how we can make the most of our solar cells, we can use them in a variety of ways, including as part of a larger solar cell system, for example. what bias condition is it under, what illumination is itunder, and of course, what's happening around it. Is it just powering an external load? Is there a battery connected in series to it? Are there other solar cells connected inseries with it? OK. Yes, Ashley? Yes, yes, Ashley, I'm listening. What is the bias condition of the solar panel? What's the illumination it's under? What is it doing around it? What are the conditions it's in? What does it look like? don't understand still why having a load would bias the device. PROFESSOR: So let's imagine under illumination conditions right here, what I'm going to do very, very quickly is replace this battery manually in my slides, if PowerPoint auto save will allow me, with a resistor. So if you'll excuse me, I'll be back in a few minutes with the rest of my slides. I'm sure you'll be happy to hear from me again. I've got a lot of work to do. my quick introduction here of the resistor. Now, sorry about the little artistic license. OK. So now I have my resistor here. And my illumination is coming into the device from-- say one of the sides is generating electron-hole pairs. I have a multiplicity of electrons that have now gone. Now I have an illumination that is coming in from the side that's generating the electron- hole pairs. OK, so now I've got my illumination. I'm going to turn it on. down the hill, right? It's more energetically favorable for these electrons to be on the other side. It's raised the chemical potential of this side, it's difficult for them to get back the other way. "It's not impossible, but it could be more easy for them," he says. "I think it's a good thing that we're doing what we are doing," he adds. "We're trying to make the world a better place for all of us" them to flow through an external circuit to get back to the other side. And as they flow through that external circuit, they're depositing their energy across that External Circuit. So that's why the solar cell can be so powerful. It's the potential difference from this side to that side. So it's the reason why it's so important to have a solar cell in the first place. It can be very powerful, but it also needs to be able to transmit its energy to another part of the world. be thought of, as in forward bias conditions, under illumination with an external load attached to it. Of course, the load has to be well-matched to the output of the solar cell device. Audience: And is the biasing because there is a voltage drop across the resistor? PROFESSOR: Yes. The biasing is due to the fact that the voltage drop is caused by the external load being attached to the device. The load must be matched to the solar cells' output in order for it to work. biasing is because you have a shift in the chemical potential of this side up relative to the n-type side. That's a bias. Anytime there is a difference in thechemical potential in one terminal versus the other terminal of a chemical system, that is bias. That is a change in the potential of the chemical system. It's a shift of the n,type side higher than the p, type side. And that is a bias as well as a change of the potential in the n and p sides. your solar cell, you have a bias. Whether that's generated by light, whether it's generated. by a battery, right, that's a matter of detail. Whether it's the energy input to create that bias is coming from the sun or if it's coming from an external battery. That's a detail. So is the solar cell's bias. Is the bias generated by the sun, or is it coming from a battery? Is it generated by a solar cell or is the bias created by a external battery? sun forward biasing the cell? PROFESSOR: Yes. One can think about this as-- AUDIENCE: I thought you were talking about the difference between light and the LE-- OK. So the LED, in this case, could forward bias your device, too. I mean, it's just photons. Photons are forward. The LED is forward biased. The cell is forward biased. The device is forward-biased. It's a cell that's forward-biased. biasing the device. What you could do, though, is have a bunch of solar cells connected in series with this one, right, that are producing forward power. You could shade this device, and then power it from the other side. That would be very difficult, however, and it would have to be done in a very controlled way. That's what we're working on now. We'll see if we can do it in the next few years. It's a long way off, though. could be flowing backward through it, right? In other words, it could be in the dark right here, in a dark condition. And you could be. in a reverse bias condition just because of the way the other solar cells around it are behaving, if you have a shaded solar. Could be flowing back and forth through the solar cells. Could. be flowing forward through it. Could even be flowing backwards through it if it's in a very dark place, like a dark room. cell, for example, in a module. So imagine a seagull lands and kind of covers up one of the cells. That will be under reverse bias, and that could present problems if the solar cell can't withstand the reverse bias. No, this is a very ideal condition. What happens in the module is very different from what happens in a solar cell. The solar cell is not covered by the module, but by the solar module itself. The module is then covered in a layer of solar cells. the real world is that at some reverse bias condition, you'll just have biased it so much that electrons will be able to tunnel through from the p-type into the n-type right here. The electrons in the valence band will be can to Tunnel through into the conduction band. And that's what we're going to see in the next generation of quantum computers. That's what's going to happen in the future, and it's not going to be as simple as we think. what happens to this IV curve is it goes zoom, begins dropping. So if the solar cell reverse bias-- let's see, the reverse bias current, or the current at reverse bias voltage, is not low enough. If the pn-junction is not strong enough, you could have a solar cell that is not working properly. If you have a cell that's not functioning properly, it's not going to work properly. It's going to be very, very bad for you. catastrophic failure of your module by just shading one of your cells. Thankfully, this is one of the testings that are done with the solar simulator to prevent that failure mode. I'll try to keep the lecture focused on the solar cells and the solar panels. We'll entertain deeper dives with questions if you have any questions about the solar cell. We hope you'll join us for the rest of the lecture. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. the broader general topics. But if somebody is interested in learning more, I'm happy to kind of dive into there. All right. So readings are strongly encouraged. I have interacted with several of you. Joe has interacted with probably 3n, n being the number of people I've interacted with so far. So if you'd like to get in touch with me, I'd be happy to talk for a few minutes. I'd love to hear from you. I've got a lot to talk about. far, and really tried to impart the wisdom of pn-junctions. Please, please, please come to us if still things are going over your head. You should be able to explain to your roommates exactly what is going on in a pN-junction. Define parameters that determine solar cell efficiency. So please, Please, Please come and see us if you're still not sure what's going on. We'd love to hear from you. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. now we have a qualitative sense about where current is flowing, where electrons are moving around, what defines the power output. We're getting an intuitive sense of all this. Let's start putting some discrete variables to all of that. And there are some interesting things we can learn from this. We can see how the power is changing with illumination condition. And we can also see how that changes with illumination conditions. It's a very interesting set of questions to try and figure out what's going on. How is solar cell conversion efficiency determined from that illuminated IV curve? That's our first question. And what I'm going to tell you is a bunch of two-letter or three-letter acronyms with some subscripts here that we'll get to know and we'll become very familiar with over the next few lectures. That's what we're going to talk about. We'll talk about solar cells and how they're used in the solar power grid. And we'll also talk about how to make solar cells in the future. Do is start with our source IV curve right here. This is just the IV quadrant. So notice the current starts at 0 and goes to some negative value. So we're looking in the IVquadrant. Voltage is going from 0 to a positive value. so again, IV quadrants. So again, the current is going to be 0 and going to apositive value. The current is then going from a negative value to a Positive Value. So it's going to go from a Negative Value to aPositive Value. We have our ideal diode equation here. And oh, notice one thing. I just changed I to J. What just happened? Well, I and J look very similar, but they're, in fact, two different variables. Most often, PV researchers will report a current density, in other words, a current per square inch. But that's not what we're looking for here. We're looking at a different type of current density. We call it a "current per square meter" unit area instead of the actual current coming out of a solar cell device. So what you've been measuring here off of the DAC has been current, total current output from that device. And it might be a really tiny number, and it may be difficult to compare against other-sized solar cell devices. It might also be a very tiny number and it might not be easy to compare with other-size solar cells or other solar cells in the world. It could also be very, very small. devices. And so what solar cell researchers often do is they say, OK, let's normalize the current by the area to get a current density. And we'll call current density J, and we'll calls current I, right? So for calculating power, we'll have to use I. We'll need to multiply that by J to get current density I. And that's how we calculate power for solar cells. We need to use current I to calculate power, so that we can use current J for power calculations. I times V.I is a convenient way of comparing one solar cell versus another. OK. So the illuminated IV curve looks something like this, right? It's in the IV quadrant. It goes out. But if we're just looking at one solar cells versus another, we can use J as a very convenient way to compare one cell to another. Cool. That's the way to look at a solar cell. It's the same thing as saying, "I'm looking at a light bulb. I'm going to turn it on." a certain amount, then it the curves up. We just determined that here in class. And that's essentially the ideal diode equation with a superposition term, this J sub L right there. So let's parse through this. We have the y-intercept over here. At the y -intercept, there is maximum current. And at the y, there's maximum current, and that's what we're looking for. We're looking at the ideal Diode equation. flowing through the circuit but no power because voltage is equal to 0. So there's no energy gain of the electron traveling through the external circuit. So remember, the Fermi energy is the same on either side of the device. The chemical potentials are the same in the device, so there is no power gain from the electron going through the External circuit, but there is an energy gain from traveling through it. The energy gain comes from the electrons passing through the internal circuit, not the external. there's a maximum current. And no power flowing through that external circuit because there's no potential to be dropped across the external resistor. The opposite happens over here at this point called Voc, which we'll call open-circuit voltage. The oc stands for open circuit, V, voltage. Open-circ circuit voltage is just. just the voltage of an external circuit. It's not a power source or a voltage source, it's just thevoltage of an internal circuit. as you would think it is. When your solar cell is in an open circuit, when you-- say you took a pair of scissors-- please don't this-- and cut the leads so that your solarcell wasn't outputting the current through an external load, there would be a bias voltage. There would be no bias voltage at all if the solar cell was connected to an external power source. It would be just like a normal solar cell, but it would have a different voltage. built up across the p and the n side of the solar cell. And it would be the maximum voltage that could be supported by that solar cell device under illumination conditions. That's the open-circuit voltage, open circuit because there's no current, again, traveling through the external circuit. that's why it's called an "open circuit" and not a "closed circuit" It would be used to power a solar cell in the event of an emergency, for example, when the device needs to be switched on. current is 0, open circuit. voltage is the maximum voltage here represented in the IV quadrant. Short-circuit current, again, because you're short circuiting your device-- current is flowing. And somewhere in between the point of open-Circuit voltage and short-circuits current-- short- Circuit current is 0. Current is flowing, voltage is maximum voltage, and voltage is open circuit, or open circuit voltage. The maximum voltage is represented by the open circuit's open circuit current. through, but there's no resistor. There's no external load. Somewhere between these two extreme conditions, you have a maximum power point where there is a power being deposited across your external circuit and there is no power flowing through the external circuit. This is where power is being deposited on external load, but no power is flowing through an internal circuit. The result is a device that can't be powered by a resistor or power from an external circuit, but can be powered from an internal one. a lot of it, right? That's the maximum power point. This is the point at which the solar cell is producing the maximum amount of power output. And to represent that slightly differently, what I've done-- so if I were to take current times voltage right here using IV quadrant, that would be the power point of the solar cells. That's what I'm trying to show here, that's the peak power output of a solar cell. And that's what we're looking at here. Voltage is positive, but current is a negative number, right? So I'd multiply a positive and negative number together, you get anegative number, and that just sounds weird. Who talks about power output from solar cells being negative? It's not a big deal. It's just the way solar cells work. It doesn't make any sense. It just makes sense that when you multiply a negative and a positive number together you get the negative number. That's how solar power works. almost sounds like power's going into the device. So this is another convention that you're going to have to get used to is looking at the IV curve in the I quadrant. So all we've done is taken the y-axis and multiplied by a negative 1. So we flipped it. We flipped it so that the x-axis was the same as the y, and the y was multiplied by the negative 1, so that it looked like the y axis was the X-axis. up, right? So bear with me here. It's a bit tricky to keep all this in your RAM. But here's our short-circuit current point now. Here's our open-Circuit voltage point. Our IV curve now is pointed down. Before it was going up because we were in the IV quadrant. Now, now, it's pointing down. We're in the V quadrant now. We've gone from the IV to the V Quadrant. We have gone from IV to V. we flipped, essentially just done a-- we've done a flip vertical, if you will, on our IV curve. We have our current increasing here going to higher bias voltages. Now we can take the product of the voltage and the current to determine the power, and we obtain a power figure. It's a function of the current and the voltage, and it can be used to determine how much power is being produced. It can also be used as a measure of how much electricity is being generated. curve that looks very much like this blue curve right here that you can see. And the maximum power point is truth in advertising. It's where this blue Curve reaches a maximum. That is where the solar cell is outputting the maximum amount of power. And so at thismaximum power point, there is a voltage and a current associated with it. And this we call Jmp, or current density at the maximumpower point. That's where the current density is at the highest level. and Vmp, which is the voltage at the maximum power point. So, so far, we've learned essentially four variables here. We have our Jsc, our Voc, and our Jmp. And our Vmp at that data point right there. To ensure that the data point is correct, we ask you to point out the variables that we have learned so far. Questions, since I know you have them? If so, please send them to jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. device is working in the maximum power point, does an external voltage have to be applied to it? PROFESSOR: So to ensure that the solar cell device is operating right here, a couple of things need to happen. You need to have the right illumination conditions, and you need to be able to see the solar cells in the right light conditions. For more information, visit: www.solarcell.org.uk/solar-cell-illustration-and-development. have the right load. So the two need to be matched to each other. And that's where some of the power electronics come into play. Yeah? AUDIENCE: So in the last problem set, where [INAUDIBLE], we assumed that output voltage would be [INAudIBLE] volts. PROFESSOR: Yeah. Is that, that's what we were trying to do? Yeah. That's what the problem set was trying to achieve. Yeah. It's a very complex problem set. in general, a safe assumption for [INAUDIBLE] solar cell? PROFESSOR: Yeah, yeah. So it's a very interesting question regarding the homework question. Let me repeat it so that the microphone can hear it. The homework question in the last homework, there was one question that inquired, assume that the voltage is the same for all solar cells. In general, in general, it's the same, and that's what we're going to try to do. at the maximum power point is the band gap voltage equivalent minus 0.5 volts. The open-circuit voltage, this point, is generally between 0.35 and 0.4 volts. So you have the band. Gap voltage equivalent, or lower than the band gaps. The band gap is the voltage equivalent to the open circuit voltage. This point is generally 0.3 to 0.6 volts. It is the maximum point at which the power can be passed into the power supply. gap energy minus 0.4 volts. It essentially has to do, in part, with losses inside of the solar cell at thermodynamic limits of conversion inside of a solar cell device. Then what we've done is we've been able to create a device that can convert that energy into electricity. And I can show you a very nice little paper that describes why that is, but it's very complex. It's a very, very exciting time for the solar industry, and I'm looking forward to seeing what's next. we've done another additional discounting from the Voc to the maximum power point, which we've assumed is around 0.1, maybe 0.2 volts. Notice the shape of the IV curve right here. The maximum powerpoint is interesting because the voltage at themaximum power point is almost the Voc, in a good device. And the current at the Maximum Power Point is almost Jsc, but not quite. All right? So the discounting is not that much, as is the discounted from the short-circuit current to the minimum power point. good device. In a bad device, this maximum power point here could be dragged all way down here. You could have an IV curve that looked something more like this instead, almost like a resistor, at which point the maximum power output would be a lot less. At which point, you could have a device that looked a lot like this, but with a much smaller peak power point, and a much lower peak power output. It would look something like this in a good device, but it would look a lot different in a bad one. than what's shown here in blue curve. The efficiency of the solar cell. Eta, this Greek letter eta, is our power out versus power in. Our power in is the illumination intensity given in units of watts per meter squared. So we have power out and power in, which is the difference between power in and power out. All right. Cool. So let's continue moving on. Let's go to the next page for a look at the next step in the process. calculated this in our very first homework assignment and realized that the AM 1.5 spectrum is around 1,000 watts per meter squared. So that's our input power right here. Our output power is the voltage at the maximum power point times-- whoopsy-- times the current at themaximum power point, and that's what we're looking at here. We're using the power of 1,200 watts per square meter squared, or 1,300 watts per meters squared, for this example. not the current density, the current at the maximum power point. So take this current density and multiply by area, and that's effectively-- the units work out better that way. So it would be either V times I at themaximum power point or V times J times the area, which is the unit's current density. The units work better this way because of the smaller size of the area and the higher the current, the better the unit works out for a given current. The current density of the unit is called the "current density" the area of the device, the area of a solar cell, at the maximum power point. And that's the total power out. Actually, yeah, yeah. So as long as the units are in units of watts per meter squared-- yeah, down here-- if this is not total watts but, watts, that's what we're talking about. That's the power in, that is the power out, and that's where we're at. We're not talking about total watts, we're just talking about watts per square meter squared. per meter squared, you could still use current density. Those units would still work out. So be very careful whether you use total power in or normalized by unit area power, right? Just keep track of your units. Don't do like the professor. OK. So we have efficiency here as as well as current density, you can still use both of those to get the same amount of power. You can still do that, you just have to be more careful about which one you use. power out versus power in, the power out being the maximum power point power and the power in being the illumination from the sun. Now we're really talking. This is starting to get interesting because it's beginning to click. Pieces from lecture number 2 come together with what we're seeing. We're beginning to see the light at the end of the tunnel. It's time to take a break and have a drink. We'll be back in a few minutes with the next installment of the show. now. So this is solar cell output power at the maximum power point and sunlight coming in. OK. So what I'm going to do next is I'mgoing to take this maximum powerpoint and I'mGoing to draw a box that starts at the origin here, and the kitty-corner. And the box is going to go from the origin to the corner of the box. And it's going to look like this. And that's what we're going to see. corner of my box is going to end at the maximum power point. So it'll have some rectilinear shape. And that box looks like this blue one right here. The area of that box is the area that will comprise the maximumPowerPoint and 0, 0, the origin, as two of its corners. It will have a shape that will be similar to the shape of a circle. The shape of the box will look like the shape that a circle would look like. box is Jmp times Vmp. OK? And notice I have another box around here. I have this clear box that starts at the Voc point and the Jsc point. And now I have two rectilinear shapes, this blue one and the clear one right here, the bigger one. The bigger the box, the better the shape it has to be in order to be a box. So the bigger box is the better shape it can be in, right? OK? The bigger one is the best shape. one has an area of Jsc times Voc. And I'm going to define a parameter called fill factor, which will be the ratio of these two areas. The ratio of those two boxes, the Vmp times Jmp divided by the Voc and Jsc. If this is 1, which is virtually 1, it is virtually a perfect score. If it's not, it's a bad score. It's a score that's not a good enough score, and it's going to get worse. impossible to do, but if this were 1, it would mean that these two boxes were the same size. In real life, this blue box is smaller than this red box. And the current and voltage at the maximum power points would be thecurrent and voltage under short-circuit and open-Circuit conditions respectively. Inreal life, the blue box was smaller than the red box, and the redbox was bigger than the white box, but this is not the case in the video. the square box right over here. So the ratio of the two boxes is defined as the fill factor. And so the Jmp Vmp product is less than the Jsc Voc product. And by consequence as well, the JMP is less as well as the JSC, Vmp isLess than Voc. The fill factor of the square box is also known as the "jmp fill factor" or the "fill factor" of the "Jmp" box. It's the ratio that determines the "vmp" or "vac" of a product. fill factor indicates the quality of your diode. If your fill factor is very poor, that means that that sun right over there at its maximum power point is being dragged toward the origin. That means that the area of this blue box is growing smaller relative to the area it is covering. If you have a very poor fill factor, you may have to use a different type of diode to display the sun. For more information on how to fill a diode, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/diodes-fill-factor-and-sun-power. of this clear box. The fill factor is going down. That means you're filling less of this maximum square box function defined by the Voc Jsc. OK. So we have defined efficiency as power out divided by power in, power out being the current voltage product of the maximum power. That's what we're trying to achieve here. We want to make sure we're getting the most out of the power we're putting into the device. We're also trying to get the most efficiency out of our device. point divided by the solar insulation, fill factor being defined as the ratio of Vmp Imp product divided by Voc Ioc product. Notice that here I've written this in terms of total current, here in terms Of current density. The areas essentially just cancel out because you have an area that is much larger than the rest of the area. The fill factor is defined as the ratio ofVmp Imp ProductdividedbyVMP Ioc Productto create the fill factor. in the numerator and denominator. They cancel. These ratios should be identical. Thus we obtain an expression for the efficiency in terms of fill factor, Voc, and Ioc. Why do I go through the effort of this little numerical manipulation? I do it because these parameters right here are fairly easy to measure using numerical manipulation. I go back to that top equation and say my Vmp Imp is now going to be substituted by fill factor times Voc times Ioc, and that's how I get to this equation right here. the solar simulator that you just put together. So I can measure the point at which my voltage is at open-circuit condition. And simply by taking the ratio of those boxes, I can determine what my fill factor is as well. And so on and so on, until I get to a point where I can do something with it, which is a little bit of a process, but it's a long way off, I'm not going to give up on the idea of doing it. These break down roughly into the current is going to be a function roughly-- again, I'm really painting broad brush strokes here-- the current will be roughly a function of illumination condition and bulk material quality. The Voc will beroughly afunction of the interface and the interface will be about the same as the current. It's going to have a lot of different characteristics. It will be a very diverse set of things that are going to go on in the next few years. I'm looking forward to seeing what happens. diode characteristics. And the fill factor is going to be a function of the interface diode characteristics but also of the resistances within the device. And so from an engineering point of view, when we break the solar cell output down into these three parameters so that we can better understand what's going wrong with our solar cell. If we have everything lumped in terms of Vmp Imp, it becomes a little bit more obscure to figure out what exactly is going wrong. Ashley? Ashley? The fill factor would be measured by doing a voltage current sweep. Mm-hmm. OK. So we have an expression for efficiency in terms of fill factor, Voc, Ioc and our incoming. The fill factor is the amount of energy that is absorbed by the device. The efficiency is the sum of the fill factor and the incoming energy. Thefill factor is a measure of the efficiency of the device, which is the total amount of electricity that is injected into the system.  conversion efficiency determines the area of solar cells needed to produce a certain peak power. So power out, this right here again is power out,. divided by power in. Why does efficiency matter? Why do we care so much about efficiency? Well, the conversion efficiency. determines the areas of solar cell needed to. produce acertain peak power, or to think of it differently, to. think of power out as power in, power in as power out. power.power.power, or power out to power. the area of solar panels that is necessary to produce a certain energy per unit time. And many costs scale with area. You have glass, encapsulants, the absorbent materials within the solar cell devices themselves, the metals that are used to make contacts. The labor that's used to install the panels is also a big part of the cost of a solar panel. The cost of installing the solar panels is a big component of the solar panel's cost. The solar panel industry is still in its early stages of development. panels. If you have a larger panel area, you need more labor to install it. The aluminum and racking and framing materials that go into holding the panels up in the field either on a roof or out in the fields. So efficiency affects pretty much everything but the inverter. If your panel area is too big, you may need to add more labor. If it's too small, you might need to replace the entire panel with a smaller one. If the panel is too small or too large, you probably need to install more panels. and possibly some of the soft costs of the project. That includes the architect and the people who you pay to handle the money, financing, and the lawyers perhaps. So pretty much all of the real material and labor costs are scaling with area. And so efficiency determines that to be the key to building a high-quality building. The cost of building a new home in the U.S. can be as high as $1.5 billion a year, according to the National Institute of Standards and Technology. a large degree, and hence it's a highly-leveraged way to reduce the costs of solar energy. If you do a sensitivity analysis, which you will do in the second and third parts of the class, and look at the costs and how it scales with efficiency, you'll see the benefits to be seen to a large degree. It's a very, very low-cost way to get the most out of solar power, and it's also a very efficient way to do it. that efficiency is one of the determining factors for cost in a solar cell device. And that's why we focus on it a lot. To put it into perspective, if the efficiency up there is determined by the output power versus the input power, if we had 100% conversion efficiency, that would be a big deal. That's what we're trying to achieve here. We want to get to that level of efficiency as soon as possible, and we're working on it as fast as we can. which is impossible to achieve, thermodynamically impossible to achieved, with this panel. If we had a 33% efficiency cell, which is closer to the goal, we would produce a certain amount of energy per unit time. Say that's the size of our field installation. We would be able to produce that amount of peak power, or a certain Amount of Peak Power, with that panel right there. That's what we're trying to achieve here. We're not there yet, but we're working on it. to the space-grade solar cells, we'd need three times that area. And if we had a 20% efficiency, say, high end but still commercial solar module, you'd need five times that. Whereas if you had a 10% efficiency module, which is more approaching the area of some relatively inexpensive solar cell, you would need 10 times that Area. So if you're doing a cost analysis, this is a very important part of the analysis, if you want to know how much it would cost to build a space station. is why efficiency matters. It might still be cheaper to use this instead of to used this over here. That might very well be more expensive. When you do the math and figure out how much it costs to deposit those materials with a very low throughput deposition process and it's still more expensive to do it over there. It's still cheaper to do the process over there, but it's more expensive in the long run. That's why efficiency is so important. It could be cheaper. very high cost. It might still be, but it might not. The material costs might end up whopping you. And so a simple equation that calculates all these parameters in, the material costs, the module efficiency, essentially the material [? and labor ?] costs, are being calculated in dollars per hour. It's a very simple equation. It is not a very complex one. It doesn't have to be. It just has to be in the right place and at the right time. meter squared, just saying, how many dollars go into producing a meter squared of this material? And the efficiency is over here. And this is just a very simple back-of-the-envelope calculation type of way of estimating the cost of a solar system. So if you say, OK, I'm willing to do that, then you're going to have to pay a lot of money to do it. And so that's what we're doing here. We're doing it with solar panels. pay more for a high-efficiency cell because I'm using less area, you can use this type of calculation to get to the answer quickly. This is not a levelized cost of electricity analysis. It's not using discounted capital flows and so forth, which we'll get to later on in class. This kind of calculation is a quick and easy way to figure out how much electricity you're using, and how much it's costing you in the long run. It can be used to get an answer quickly and easily. is a really back-of-the-envelope envelope engineering approach to estimating costs of a solar system. So I think this is a great place to stop. And if anybody has a pitch concerning their project ideas, class project idea, I'd like to invite them to the front now. The class project, mind, is what we'll be working on for the rest of the year. We'll be doing a series of videos on how to make a solar-powered car. you, is really the capstone of this class. So if you have an idea, a fun idea, for a class project, I'd invite you to give a pitch up here at the front of class, or you're welcome to send it on an email to the class listserv. 2.626, 2.627. You are all welcome to join us for the next two weeks of class. We will be working on a project for you to share with the rest of the class.