Today, we're going to talk about what happens when we take that unconstrained choice we talked about on Monday and impose budget constraints. We'll then come to a discussion of what budget constraints are. And we'll end with a look back at our discussion of consumer choice on Monday. And then, we'll come back to the question of what's next for the White House. And that's what we'll be talking about today on CNN at 10 p.m. ET. Back to the page you came from. talking about how consumers make constrained choices. And then we'll end with an example of food stamps. So let's start by talking about budget constraints. And we'll start bytalking about their construction, the construction of budget constraints, and how they're used. So, basically, last time, we talked about the fundamental axiom of consumer. And now we're going to talk about how they use budget constraints to make choices. We'll start with budget constraints and then talk about food stamps, and so on. choice that more is better. So what stops people from just bingeing on everything? It's their budget constraint. It's Their limited resources. Now, for most of this course, we're going to make a simplifying assumption that your budget-- that is what you spend-- equals your income. That is what your budget is. That's what you are spending on. And that's what your income is, too. So that's your budget. And you can spend it on what you want. earn, OK? That is there won't be any savings or borrowing. Now that is a simplifying assumption. And, indeed, we'll spend a couple lectures at the end of the semester talking about what happens when people can save or borrow. That said, this is not a terrible description of what happens in the world of finance. It's just that it's not as clear-cut as you might think. It can be a lot more complicated than you think, too. most Americans. The median American household has $400 in the bank. So this is not kind of a terrible description of the way most people live their lives in America, which is what they earn each week and what they spend each week. So that's what we'll do. It also is also a good way to get a sense of how much money you have in your bank account and how much you have to spend on it. It's also a great way to learn more about how to spend your money. might not be sort of a terrible description of your life. I presume, in college, you're not doing a lot of savings. You maybe do a little borrowing, but not a much savings or borrowing. So what we're going to do is we'regoing to assume that's true for us. We're going into the future, and we're not going to be as good at saving as we used to be. We are going to have to learn to save and borrow a little more. We're going to assume your parents have given you some amount of money to spend. We'll call it Y. And, once again, let's say all.you as well. Your income Y is the amount of. money your parents've given you to spend for say the semester or. the month. And we'll say all of you as well, and we'll call you Y. Your parents' money is the money you've been given to spend over the past month or so. you spend your money on is pizza and cookies, OK? That's all you want to spendyour money on. We write the budget constraint as saying that your resources, your income Y, can be spent on either pizza or cookies. And the constraint is that you could spend it-- that you can spend it on anything you want. That's the way to think about a budget, I think. It's not about how much money you have, it's about how you use it, and how you spend it. budget has to be divided between pizza and cookies. We have the price per cookie times the number of cookies. That's your budget constraint. You can essentially devote your income to some combination of pizzas and cookies, but you have to consider how much they actually cost in doing that. I find this very difficult to do, but it's a good idea to have a budget for it. I think it's good for people to have an idea of how much it would cost to spend on both. easier to see graphically. Figure 3-1 shows a budget constraint. So how does the budget constraint look? Well, the x-axis is your income divided by the price of cookies. That is, if you decide to devote all your income to cookies, then how many cookies do you need to buy? And how much do you want to spend on cookies? Let us know in the comments below or on Twitter @CNNOpinion or @cnn_opinions. The y-intercept is the income divided by the price of pizza. If your income is $100, and cookies are $10, that means you can only have 10 cookies. That's how many pizzas you can have. If you have an income of $100 and $10 cookies, you get 10 cookies, or 10 pizzas. If it's $100-to-10, you have to have 10 pizza pizzas, or just one pizza. You can't have more than one pizza at a time. The price ratio is the negative of the price ratio because it's a downward-sloping line, pc over pp. That is every extra cookie that you buy, holding your income constant, lowers the amount of pizza you have. The budget constraint represents-- the budget constraint, the slope of the budget constraints, is thePrice ratio. The price ratio represents the price you pay for the goods and services that you have, not the amount that you can afford to buy. The Price Ratio is the Negative of the Price Ratio. can have by p sub p, OK? So let's consider an example. Suppose that Y is $96, that the price of pizza-- it's an expensive pizza place-- is $12. $12 for pizza, this is like downtown San Francisco or New York. The price of a cookie is $6, and that's what we're going to do with the pizza. We're gonna do the pizza by subbing it for the cookie. We'll call it "p sub p" $96 income, $12 for a slice of pizza, $6 for a cookie, OK? I'm sorry. Y is-- I wanted to make Y 72, my bad. So Y is 72. Your income is $72. And you can spend it on pizza and cookies, and those are the prices. Now what? I don't know what to tell you, so I'm just going to give you a number. That number is Y, and Y is your income. The rate at which you can trade off pizza for cookies is minus 1/2, OK? That is every additional cookie would require giving up half. If you wanted just pizza, you could get six pizzas, but if you wanted 12 cookies, you can get 12 cookies. That is a trade-off of 6 pizzas for 6 cookies, or 6 cookies for 6 pizza. That's a trade off of 6 Pizza for 6 Cookies, or 2 Pizza for 2 Cookies. that's aTrade-off-6 Pizza for 12 Cookie, or 1 Pizza for 1 Cookie. a slice of pizza, OK? Every additional cookie requires giving half a slice of Pizza. That's why the slope would be negative 1/2. So, basically, we're going to call the slope of the budget constraint the Marginal Rate of Transformation, the MRT. The slope, we are going to calls the slope, theMarginal Rate Of Transformation. The MRT is the rate at which a budget constraint can be met. It's the rate of change in a budget that can be achieved. Last time, we did the MRS, the Marginal Rate of Substitution. Now we're going to have MRT, the marginal rate of transformation, which is equal to minus pc over pp. Or the slope of the budget constraint, OK? That is the marginal rates of transformation. Now this class is not a class of people who are going to be working on this project for a long time. We're not going to work on it for a very long time, either. The more you spend on pizza, the less you spent on cookies. So you're effectively transforming pizza into cookies and vice versa because you're going to spend all your money. You've got to spend it on something. So, the more you spending on one, the fewer you're spending on the other. It's effectively doing the same thing. We are not literally transforming pizza. into cookies. That would be kind of cool, but we're not doing that. That's somewhere else at MIT, OK? less you get of another. So, through the budget constraint, we are effectively transforming one good to the other. So that's the sense in which we call it the marginal rate of transportation-- of transformation. ... By having more of one, we're getting less of the other," he says. "So, basically, this comes down to the cost of doing business in the U.S. and in the rest of the world," he adds. "It's a very, very complex and complex system" back to the key concept we talked about in the very first lecture, opportunity cost. The opportunity cost of a slice of pizza is two cookies. And that's the sense in which you're transforming pizza into cookies or cookies into pizza, OK? Now this seems kind of abstract, but let's actually think of an organization which has taken this approach. It's a company that has taken the approach of turning pizza and cookies into each other. It has taken that approach and transformed them into one another. this principle to heart to develop the best method of weight loss in America, which is Weight Watchers. OK, dieting is super hard and basically doesn't work, OK? There's a large literature, which says that people go on diets all the time. Then they stop them, and they gain the weight back. But a much more successful approach has been established by Weight Watcher. It's not the only approach, but it's been proven much more success. And, essentially, what does Weight Watchery do? Do you have a budget of your own to follow? Do you know how to do it? If so, please send us a picture of your budget. We would like to hear from you. Send us a photo of yourself and your budget, and we will share it with the world. Please send your photos to: jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. For more information, go to www.do.com/jennifer-smith or call 0203 615 9091. what weight are you today? What's your age and gender? That stuff matters for weight loss. And what weight do you want achieve? And they say, if you want to achieve a weight loss of x over y days, then you've got to limit yourself to z points. So, essentially, essentially,. essentially, you have to lose weight over x days and y days. That's how weight loss works. And that's the way it's supposed to work, I think. your goal is to lose weight. So we're going to give you the budget constraint. We're not going to tell you what to eat. That's why it's better than dieting because, once again, Adam Smith was right. People like to have choices. They like to let choice drive things. But they also like to be told what to do about it. And that's why we're giving you a budget constraint to help you lose weight in the first place. But we're not telling you how to do it. we are going to tell you a total budget. So, for example, vegetables are like zero points. Snickers bars are like six points, et cetera. They have various point systems, OK? So,for example, suppose your budget is 30 points, which would be pretty typical. OK? Suppose you go to the supermarket and buy 30 points of fruit and vegetables. That's a budget of 30 points. That would be a typical budget. That is a budget for a person. McDonald's for lunch, and you get a number one. The number one at McDonald's is a Big Mac, which has 14 points. That's 30 points, and it's only lunch, OK? You've blown your whole budget for the day. The Big Mac is 14 points, fries are 10 points and a Coke is six points. It's the number one McDonald's meal for 30 points or more. It is the most points you can get in a single meal, according to McDonald's. on lunch. Now you could just get depressed and say screw it. I'll just be fat. But, clearly, looking around the room, you guys have not made that choice. Or you could look at the budget constraint and say, well, what else can I get. Well, it turns out you can't get anything else. You can only get what's on the menu at the time of the meal. And that's not a lot of food. It's not like you're going to be able to go out for dinner. can get a 10-piece nugget, 12 points, apple slices, and a Diet Coke, which is zero points, for a total of only 13 points. Now you have 13 points and plenty of room for dinner. Now, to be honest, anyone who tells you that anyone who tell you that is lying. You can get 12 points from a nuggets, one point from an apple slice, and zero points from the Diet Coke. That's a lot of points to spend on a meal. second lunch is as good as that first lunch is a liar, OK? I'd much rather a Big Mac and fries and a Coke than nuggets and apple slice and Diet Coke. Give me a break. But I'd also much rather have dinner, alright? So, basically, this lets you make a second lunch, which is better than a first lunch, right? I mean, it's better than the first lunch. But it's not as good, is it? I don't know. the trade-off by imposing a budget constraint, by setting relative prices across goods. The points are like utils. They are not meaningful. They're only meaningful relatively. It lets you set relative prices and then it lets you, essentially, optimize across those various-- across those different goods. So budget constraints, they're not meaningful; they're just a way to set prices for a range of goods. That's the way to get the best price for the best quality of the goods. essentially, by setting up this marginal rate of transformation, can help with a lot of kind of decisions in life. OK, questions about that? OK, now what happens if we shock the budget constraint? So we talked about constructing them. What about shocking the budget constraints? We're going to do that. We're not going to be able to do it yet, but we'll do it. We'll have to wait and see what happens. We've got a long way to go, but it's a start. a lot in this class of what we call comparative statics, which is, essentially, making changes in one thing or another and seeing what it does to the system. So let's talk about shocking the budget constraint. Let's start first with a change in prices. Suppose the price of pizza is increased by $1.50. That would be a big shock to the budget. That's what we're trying to do here. We're not trying to shock the budget, we're just trying to make it work. goes from $12 up to $18. Now the price of pizza has gone up. What that's done is that has pivoted inward your budget constraint to BC2. It has flattened the budget. The equation of that line is 12P plus 6C equals 72, OK? The number of slices of pizza plus the price. of cookies times the number of cookies equals 72. This is a really good slice of pizza,. OK? Well, what happens to the budget constraint? Let's look at figure 3-2. constraint because the slope, remember, is the ratio of the price of cookies to theprice of pizza. That ratio has just fallen. It used to be a 1/2. Now it's a 1-3. So what's happened is you can still have as many cookies as you had before. The y-intercept has not changed, but you can have fewer slices of pizza, but one price has not. That's why it's an pivot because one price hasn't changed. changed, only the other price. So it's a pivot inward. The other thing here, you'll notice we have all these funny dots and stuff, OK? That represents what has happened to what we call your opportunity set. Your opportunity set is the set of choices available to you given your income and market prices. So your opportunitySet initially was the black dots plus the red dots. Now your opportunity Set has shrunk. Your chance set is now the red dot plus the black dot. Given your income, you can now get less stuff, same amount of cookies, but less pizza. Your opportunity set has shrunk. Even though your parents are still sending you the same check, you are worse off because you are less able to afford it. Just look at the black dots to see how much your income has shrunk since you were a child. The black dots show the amount of money you can afford to spend on things you can't afford to buy. Just the black dot shows the amount you can spend on items you cannot afford to purchase. can now buy less pizza with it, OK? So that's what happens to the opportunity set when a price changes. And, likewise, you should show to yourself the same thing will happen when the price of cookies change. In that case, you'll get an increase in the steepness of the price. And that's the way it's going to be for the rest of the year, too, if you live in the U.S. and want to buy cookies or pizza. budget constraint, OK? But your opportunity set will still-- your opportunitySet will still shrink. Now what about-- yeah? AUDIENCE: Don't we not care about all the dots below the line, though, because we're assuming we're spending all the money? JONATHAN GRUBER: Well, that's a good point, and we're budget constrained. We're budget constraint. We are budget constrained, but we're also budgeted to be creative. We can be creative with our budget. "We haven't-- we assume they're spending all their money, but it's just a way of representing. You could think of the line being lower as the same thing," he says. "We care about-- we just care about the area because it represents the set, but you're.going to come back to that," he adds. "You're going to have to wait and see what they do with the rest of the set. We don't know what's going to happen." right. You could just focus on the line and say the line is everywhere lower. So they're worse off. That's another way to look at it. But we like to think about as a set. It comes in handy later for various reasons, OK? But that's a good question. Now I'm going to go to the bathroom. I'll be back in a few minutes. I've got a lot of work to do. I'm not going to lie to you. I don't think you're going to believe me. let's ask about a second thing. What if your income goes up? What if prices are back to 12 and 6, but your parents decide to send you more money? Suppose your parents-- or send you less money. It turns out you haven't been paying enough attention in 14.01. You're now 14.1. You've been paying too much attention to pay too little attention to paying attention. It's time to start paying attention to your parents again. The time to pay attention is now. parents are mad. They're monitoring you. That's why we have the camera here. This goes directly to all your parents, OK? I'm sort of joking. And so let's say parents cut your allowance to $60. Well, what does that do? That's in figure 3-3. OK, in figures 3-2 and 3-4, that's what happens to you when your allowance is cut from $100 to $50. OK? So that's in Figure 3-1. That is what happens when you get cut from a $100 allowance to a $60 allowance. old budget constraint was that you get pizzas and cookies at a price of $6 and $12. Now you can only get them until you spend $60. The market controls the slope, OK? But you and your family control the level, says CNN's John Sutter. "The slope is dictated solely-- you don't do anything to control the slope," Sutter says. "You don't want to change the way you spend your money," he adds, "because you're not going to change it." and the level has shrunk. So you're pivoting inwards, OK? And, once again, now, instead of being able to buy say 12 cookies and six pizzas, now you can only buy say 10 cookies and five pizzas. That's the most you can get. So,once again, your opportunity set has been reduced. And you're going to have to change how you spend your money. And that's going to change the way you spend it. And it's not going to be as much as you used to. has been restricted, but in a different kind of way through this pivot inward, OK? So that's how we sort of manipulate these budget constraints. And we're going to come back to that next lecture. That'll be important. Yeah? AUDIENCE: So, in looking at the differences, can like an increase in spending be achieved through a pivot inward? That's what we're trying to figure out. That's why we're here. We're here to talk about how we manipulate budget constraints, and how we do it in the U.S. in the price of pizza or like a decrease in your budget-- is it more showing that like the change in slopes doesn't really affect you if you're like say buying more cookies than pizza? But like, in terms of if your budget as a whole decreases, then it affects you as a person as well, he says. He says it's more a matter of how much you're willing to spend on things like pizza or other things like that, rather than how much money you're saving. you overall. JONATHAN GRUBER: That's a great question, and we're going to actually answer that question next lecture very explicitly. So hold on to that question and we'll talk about we'll compare explicitly why income changes differ from price changes and what are the underlying mechanisms. Yeah? AUDIENCE: You're not going to answer that? You're just going to say that you don't think it's a good idea to compare income changes to price changes. You don't want to know the answer to that? How do you determine your marginal rate of transformation? How do determine your-- like say it wasn't just pizza and cookies. Like say it was more products. How would you determine that value? JONATHAN GRUBER: Great, great question. So, as I said, we always are going to start with simplifying. It's a very, very difficult thing to do, but we're going to try to do it as quickly as we can," he says. "It's a lot of work, but it's worth it" assumptions to make life easy. There's no reason that this couldn't be written in three dimensions. And you'd have relative marginal rates of transformation, rates at which you're willing to trade off various things. So you could just extend the math in all dimensions. It wouldn't add any richness, and it wouldn't be as good as the other options. But it would make life easier for people who want to do this kind of thing. And it would be a lot more fun. it'd just make your head spin. But the basic-- so all the basic ideas can come across with two goods, but it'd be the same mechanics with more goods, OK? You essentially, when we get to the constrained optimization, you'll essentially have more first-order conditions in your constrained optimization. That's the basic idea. It's just a way to get around the problem of how to make the most out of a finite amount of data. It doesn't have to be very complicated. the way to think about it. OK, so let's-- actually, that's a great segue. Let's turn to the second part, which is how we use budget constraints and the utility function we learned about last time to actually describe how consumers make choices. So we're going to take utility. Remember, I said last time consumers are going to maximize their utility subject to a budget constraint. Well, now we've taught you about utility. We've told you about budget constraints. Let't put them together, OK? How to consume-- how do consumers put them Together? Well, graphically, the representation of preferences was our indifference curves. That represented people's indifference with further out indifference curves made people happy, right? That was last time. So, essentially, what we're going to ask graphically is what is the highest indifference curve you can achieve given your budget. We know you want to be that highest indifferencecurve possible by more is better. So let's consider the same utility from last time, OK? Utility is square root of P times C. And let'sConsider the same budget. we wrote down up here-- $72 income, $12 price of pizza, $6 price of cookies. And now let's ask where can you go with that. So let's turn to figure 3-4 and do it graphically. We'll do it mathematically in a minute, OK? So, in figure 3 - 4, you have our income. And in figure 5-6, we have our cost of living. And we can see where we can go from there. budget constraint, which runs from 6 pizzas to 12 cookies. That's the original budget constraint. And you have a series of indifference curves. And these indifference curves, I1, I2, I3, I4, they all come directly from this utility function. So, simply, I've solved this utilities function. I'll talk about the utility function in a few minutes, and then I'll go on to talk about some of the other things I've done in the past. math in a little bit, and you'll do more math in section on Friday, OK? But, essentially, you can solve-- we'll show you-- you'll drive on Friday how you take this utility function and literally can draw the indifference curves from it. But, for now, take my word that you can do it. You can solve it, and I'll show it to you on Friday. You just have to do it in a way that makes the utility function look like an indifference curve. these indifference curves represent this utility function. And what we see is that point D is the furthest out indifference curve you can achieve while still meeting your budget. And, therefore, we say that the optimum, graphically, is the tangency between your indifference curve and your budget constraint is the optimal constrained bundle. You see how we brought-- last time, we talked about further out indifference curves make you happier. Today, we're going to talk about the fact that you're limited byyour budget. point, you are choosing six cookies and three pizzas. That is the best off you can get given your budget. And, to see this, let's talk about some other points and why they're not better, OK? Let't talk about point A. Why isn't the choice you are making the best of both worlds? That's point B. Why is the choice not the one you made in the first place? that's point C. That's the choice that you made, and that's why it's not better. point A better? Why isn't it better to have two? Maybe you just-- maybe you like cookies a lot and don't like pizza a lot. How can we say that point D is better than point A? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Because point D. Why is point D better thanpoint A? Because point A is better. Because point C is worse than point D, because point B is better, because of point C, because D is worse, because C is bad, because A is good. is on a higher indifference curve. Same person, by that logic, why not choose point E? AUDIENCE: It's above the budget. JONATHAN GRUBER: Yeah, you can't afford it. So point D dominates point A because it's a higher indifferent curve. Well, fine. So why not pick point A? Because it's on a lower indifference curve, and it's closer to the center of the circle. That's what we're going to do. So the bottom line is you can see graphically why the tangency is the best you're going to do. OK, likewise, point C you wouldn't choose. Point C has the same slope as point D. In other words, the slope is minus 1/2 at point C. The slope will be just like it is at point D, but you Wouldn't be spending all your money. So you wouldn’t choose that point either. Yeah? What if you have just three? indifference curves so there is none that hit the tangent? Do you just go for one that's like the most tangent I guess? JONATHAN GRUBER: We're going to come to-- we'regoing to-- well, first of all, we're not going to have discrete indifference. We could have lines, and the lines could be lines, or they could be curves, or we could have curves. I don't know what the answer is, but it's going to be different. lines could end up lying along a budget constraint for example. Or you could have-- you could even have utility functions, which just touch a budget constraints at one extreme or another. And we'll talk about those cases. Yeah? AUDIENCE: What do you think? Tell us in the comments below or on Twitter @CNNOpinion. Back to the page you came from. Click here to go to the CNN Opinion page.    ‘We’ll talk to you soon.’ So [INAUDIBLE] utility function go through lines and the budget constraint, right? JONATHAN GRUBER: Yeah. AUDIENCE: Isn't this just Lagrange [INAudIBLE]?? JONathan GRUBer: Well, let's come to the math then. OK, let't come to a mathematical derivation. So that's the graphic. So let'sCome to the Math, OK? Now, always, always. Back to the page you came from. a bit of a tightrope act when I'm doing math up here on the board, so bear with me, OK? But the key thing is the math of constraint optimization is all about the marginal decision. Remember, it's hard to say how many cookies you want. It's easier to say should I have the next cookie, OK?!? It's about constraint optimization. And what we want to ask is we essentially want to compare how do you feel about trading off pizzas versus cookies versus what will the market let you do. is the optimum is going to occur when we set your marginal rate of substitution, which, remember, we defined as minus MUc over MUp. And this is equal-- I'm going to get rid of this-- equal to your marginal rates of transformation, which we define as minus pc over pp. This is the optimum that will occur when you set the rate of transformation to equal to minus MUC over M up. The optimum is equal to the ratio of MUc to PC over pp, which is the ratio between MUc and PC. the fundamental equation of consumer choice. If you understand this equation, you can solve virtually every consumer choice problem. That basically, at the optimum, the ratio of marginal utilities equals the ratio prices. That is the rate at which you want to trade off pizza for pizza. That's the optimum rate. It's called the optimum utility rate. And it's what you get when you trade off a pizza for a car. You get a car at an optimum rate, and you get a good deal. The MRS is the rate at which the market will allow you to trade off pizza for cookies. MRT is the ratio of the benefits to the costs. Think of the MRS as the benefits. It's what you want. The rate is what the market is willing to pay you for it. The ratio is the costs to the benefits, or MRS. It is what we want. We want MRS to be what the benefits are. We don't want MRT to be a cost. the costs. It's where you're constrained. You want to set the ratio of the benefits equal to the ratio. of the costs, OK? Now I find it actually easier to think of it this way. If you just rearrange terms, you can write it as MUc over pc equals MUp, and MUp over PC equals MUc. Over PC over MUc equals M up, and over PC over MUp equals Mup. That's the way to do it. over p sub p. I like this way of writing it because I call this the bang for the buck equation. What this is saying, your marginal happiness per dollar should be equal. This is sort of the happiness per dollars spent on cookies. This are the happiness each dollar should bring to your life. It's not about how much you spend, it's about the happiness you bring to the life of the person you are with, and the happiness that you get from that person is equal to that. You want the bang for the-- you want to put your next dollar where it's going to make you happiest, OK? And so, basically, think of that as your bang for your buck. And you want those to be equal. So, for example, suppose you were in a restaurant and you spent $1.spent on pizza. You want to spend that $1 on something that makes you happy. You don't want that money to go to something you're not happy with. a position where the MRS was greater than the MRT. The marginal utility of cookies over the marginal Utility of MRT was greater. You're in a position. where the marginal utility was greater, and I'm getting rid the negatives. There's negative on both sides. So I'm just going to get rid of the negatives, OK? The marginal utilities were greater, so I'm going to take the cookies. That's the way it is. I'm not going to go back to the old way of thinking. utility of pizza was greater than the price of cookies. That is the slope of the indifference curve. In absolute value, the slope is greater in absolute value. That would be true at points like point A, point A where you intersect, where you basically intersect from above the budget constraint by the indifference curves. The rate at which you are willing to give up, once again, I want you to understand the intuition-- the rate at Which you're willing to Give Up, OK? the rate at which you are willing to give up cookies for pizzas. The marginal benefit to you of another cookie relative to another pizza is higher than what the market will charge you to turn pizza into cookies. Therefore, you should trade in your pizza for cookies, OK? So let's say this mathematically. At a point like A, point A, OK, you have your marginal utility for pizza is the derivative of the utility function with respect to the number of slices of pizza. Remember, marginal rate of substitution is MUc over MUp. So your marginal rates of substitution are minus 2.5. What does that mean? That is a meaningful concept. Utils are not, but that is a different concept. That is not to say that Utils aren't important. It is just that they aren't as important as other things. It's the same as saying Utils don't matter as much as Utils do. It doesn't mean Utils shouldn't be used. It just means Utils should be used less. CNN's Jonathan Gruber asks people if they would trade two pizzas for one cookie. Gruber: You're willing to give up 2.5 slices of pizza for one cookies. The audience responds: "Yeah, say it loudly so we can hear" "That's what that number means. That's what it means," Gruber says. "That is a trade" "You can trade anything for a cookie," the audience responds. "Yes, you can," Gruer says. a meaningful number. You are willing to give up 2.5 slices of pizza to get one cookie. Half. That's not an ordinal, that's cardinal. We can use that. What is the market asking you to giving up? How much pizza do you have to give. up to get a cookie? Half. that's not a ordinal. That’s cardinal. You’ll give up half a slice of pizza. Half a cookie. You'll give up two slices of Pizza to get 1 cookie. a slice. You are happy to give up 2 and 1/2 slices of pizza to get a cookie, but the market is saying we'll let you have a cookie for half a slice of pizza. So what should you do? AUDIENCE: Trade. JONATHAN GRUBER: Eat less pizza. Eat more cookies. The next episode of The Daily Discussion will air on Monday, January 15 at 9 a.m. ET. Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter. You basically want to trade pizza for cookies until these things are equal. If you do the same math starting at point B, you'll find the MRS is much below 1/2. That is, at that point, you are happy to give up tons of cookies to get pizza because, jeez, you've got 10 cookies and one slice of pizza. So you'll happily do it, and you move back towards point D. And that's sort of in a bundle sort of the intuition and math and graphics of the show. how we do constrained optimization. OK, that is hard and very important. If you understand this, you're sort of done with consumer theory, OK? This is sort of the core of what consumer theory is all. Questions about that? Don't hesitate to ask. OK,. that ishard and veryimportant. Ifyou understand that, you are done withconsumer theory. OK? You're done withConsumer theory. You are done. You can now move on to the next phase of your career. "The whole course is fundamentally all about one equation, which is marginal benefits equals marginal costs, OK? Everything we do is going to be about weighing the marginal benefit of an activity against its marginal costs," he says. "It's all about this balancing act. If we take the next step, what's next step? What's next?" he asks. "The answer is, it's a lot of work. It's a long way off," he adds. "We're going to have to wait and see what happens." the benefit? And what's the cost? Well, here the marginal benefit is the MRS. The marginal cost is theMRT. We want to set them equal. And this sort of example I hope explained why, OK? So that is how we think about constrained choice. Now I want apply it. I hope I've explained why I think it's a good idea to set the MRT and MRS at the same level. I want to make it equal. I think that's what we should do. I want to apply it by looking at the example of food stamps, OK? Now food stamps are not actually called food stamps anymore. It's basically a program the government has that provides money for individuals to buy food if they need it. When I was a kid, they were called food stamp. Now they're called food aid. I don't know if that's the right name for it, but that's what it's called. I mean, it's a federal program. It doesn't mean it's illegal to use it. they're low income. Essentially, we have in the US what's called the poverty line. And I'll talk a lot more about this at the end of the class. The poverty line is essentially a measure of what's a minimum level of resources you need to live in America. It's not a set amount of money that you can live on, it's a set of resources that you have to have to live well in the U.S. and get a good quality of life. poverty line for an individual is about $14,000. For a family of four, it's about $28,000; how you feel about that number obviously is going depend on where you're from. If you're below the poverty line in America, roughly speaking, you get help with buying food. And that comes through a program we now call SNAP. It's good and bad about it. But, in any case, if you'rebelow the povertyline in America,. roughlyspeaking, youget help with buy food. used to be called food stamps. Supplemental Nutrition-- I don't know. I know the N is for nutrition. OK, so, basically, what the SNAP program does is it gives you a debit card. If you qualify on income grounds, you get a debit debit card, and you can use it to buy food. You can also use the debit card to pay for things like gas and electricity. You don't have to go to the store. You just use your debit card and you pay for what you want. and that debit card can be used to buy food and food only, OK? So you essentially get a debit card from the government that you can use to buying food if you're poor enough. And they give you sort of a fixed amount every month, and that amount can be spent on food only. And that amount is set at a certain amount each month and can only be used for food. So you can't use it to buy other things. You can only use it for food and only food. be used to purchase food. So here's the question. Why go through this rigmarole? Why not just give people cash? This fancy thing, if we want to give poor people money, why don't you just give them money? And we're going to-- I don't want the answer yet, OK? What do you want to do? What would you like to do to help the poor people of the U.S.? Tell us in the comments below or on Twitter @CNNOpinion. I want to do is show you graphically how we think about the trade-off, and then we'll come to the answer. So let's actually graph how we thought about food stamps. Let's go to figure 3-5A. And let's start with a cash transfer. So here's the question: What is the best way to use food stamps? And what is the right way to spend the money that we get? And I want to show you how to answer that question. setup.com: What do you do when you have no money and can't afford to buy food or shelter? How do you decide what to do with your $5,000-a-year income? The answer: Spend it on food and shelter, because that's the only thing you have to worry about at that level of income. If you're that poor, that probably is the only two goods you can worry about. OK, it's OK. It's a lot easier to have two goods. food and shelter. So you $5,000 to devote to food and shelter, OK? So you have some original budget line, which is labeled there original budget lines. And then you can have some of in between, some along the way, OK?" he says. "You can have a budget line that runs from 5,000 in food to 5,00 in shelter," he adds. "And then you Can Have Some of In between, Some Along the Way, Some along the Way" Now let's say we give someone $500 in cash. Obviously, this graph is not to scale, OK? It looks like you're doubling his income, but it's only $500. This just sort of makes it easier, a not-to-scale graph. Let's give someone-- we say to them, look, Look, We're going to give you $500, and you'll double your income. And you'll be able to do it. And it's going to work out for you. you're poor. We're going to give you $500 in cash. Well, now all we've done is shift out your budget constraint from 5,000 to 5,500. What does that do to your choices? Well, consider two different types of people. You could be poor, or you could be rich. You can be rich or you can be poor. You might be poor or you might be rich, but you can't be both. You have to choose one or the other. Person y, OK, they used to be on indifference curve I0. They used to spend almost all their income on food. They were probably homeless, OK? So they spent all their money on food and were basically homeless. Now what do they do? Well, well, they go to the movies. They go to a movie theater. They watch a movie. They eat popcorn. They drink beer. They do nothing. They are probably homeless. So they spend all their cash on food, and not a lot on shelter. Now they are basically homeless, and they are going to the Movies. they spend a little more on food and a lot more on shelter. Maybe now they get-- you know, $400 still doesn't buy you much shelter. They spend alittle more, OK? Maybe, a night a week, they can get shelter. So, basically, that's what they do. That's their problem. They don't have a home. They have no place to go. They can't get a job. They're living on the streets. They've got no shelter. constrained optimization. We're not saying it's right or wrong. This is not normative economics. It's positive. The positive thing is, given their utility function, they move from point y1 to y2. Now imagine someone like individual x. They're different. Their tastes are such that they don't need to eat. They don't want to be fed. They want to live on their own terms. That's what we're trying to do. We don't know if it's the right way. just want to have shelter. So they're up at point x1 initially. And you give them that $500, and they spend just a little bit more of it on food and even more on shelter. They just love their shelter, OK? And they're just super-- they're super weighty, too. They're super, super heavy, and that's what makes them so fun to play with. It's just so much fun, and it's so easy to have fun with. Watchers. They don't eat, OK? So, basically, they move from x1 to x2. Once again, not normative right or wrong, it's just these are feasible choices people could make given the opportunity set with which they're faced. And that's what happens when you give them the $500 in cash. It's just not what you want to do, but it's what you have to do when you're given the chance to do it. It doesn't have to be perfect, it just has to be feasible. about what I did here on this graph alone? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Like, even if like you gave them money specifically for food, couldn't they then just reallocate their other money? JONATHAN GRUBER: OK, that's a good point. We'll come back to that. That's time out if you're not a sports fan. We're going to take a break here for a minute, and then come back with a different question. We've got a question for you. Do people understand what the cash transfer is, how it works? OK, now let's go to SNAP. And let's say, with SNAP, instead of giving them $500, we'll give them the debit card. OK, so we will come back to that. And, in fact-- OK, but do people understandWhat the Cash Transfer is? Do people understand the Cash transfer is? If so, please tell us about it in the comments below or tweet us at @CNNOpinion. them a $500 check, we give them a debit card with $500 on it that can only be used on food. How does this affect their budget constraint? Now we see where budget constraints start to get interesting and fun and the kind of challenges you're going to face in the workplace. We give the team a budget challenge and see what they come up with to meet it. We also show them how to use their debit card to pay for their food. We show them the challenges they face when trying to make ends meet. this course in drawing budget constraints. The new budget constraint is this kinked line that runs from 5,000 on the y-axis to the point x2. The original budget constraint continues to be the original budget line. Can someone explain to me why that's the new budget constraints? Yeah? AUDIENCE: You want to know why it's a new constraint? You're not the only one who wants to know. You're the one who started this course in Drawing Budget Constraints. can't spend a negative amount. So you can't spend like negative amounts of your non-food-stamp money on food. JONATHAN GRUBER: Exactly, you have-- we are forcing you to spend at least $500. Compared to cash, where you can do whatever the hell you want, we are forced to spend $500, he says. "You have to spend it," Gruber says of food stamp money. "It's not like you can go out and buy whatever you want." $500 of your money on food. It doesn't have to be a specifically labeled 500. It can be any 500. But we're forcing you to spend at least $500. Well, what does that do to your choices? Well, for person y, it doesn't change much. But for person x, it does change a lot. It does change the way you look at things. It changes how you think about things. And it changes what you do with your money. makes no difference whether they get cash or whether they getting food stamps. Now the person, light blue shirt, turquoise shirt, asked that question. Why does it make no difference? Yeah? Whydoes it-- whatever, greenish, I don't know, yeah, you. Why do you think it makes no difference for person y to get food stamps or cash? You. You think it doesn't make any difference? You're right. You're wrong. It doesn't. if I give him food stamps or cash? AUDIENCE: He's already spending a lot of his money on food. JONATHAN GRUBER: Exactly, he can just reallocate his money, OK? That's exactly right. So, for person y, there's no difference. Look, they're already spending, what, $4,900 onFood. You give him a thing labeled $500 for food. It's not going to affect their life. They'll just take 500. as $500 more in cash. They're indifferent. So nothing affects them. But what about person x? Well, remember, the dashed portion of this budget constraint is from the old cash example. And the dotted indifference curve is what they would have chosen with cash. Remember, person x with $500 in cash with $1,000 in credit card. They are indifferent. They would have spent $500 on $500 of credit card cash. So they're indifferent, too. So what does that mean for them? They're not indifferent. "We are forcing them to not be on their preferred budget constraint. Rather, we're forcing them down to point x2, which is they'll spend the minimum they can on food, but the minimum is $500," he says. "Why do I know for sure they are being forced, that they're less happy at x2 than they would have been when they were at x1?" he asks. "Even when you gave them $500, they still only spent $300 on food," he adds. gave them the cash? How do I know that for sure? Yeah? AUDIENCE: They're at a lower indifference curve. JONATHAN GRUBER: Exactly. The fundamental-- one of the important things is people always get to the point that makes them happiest, OK? We call it the "mood" of the person who is at the point they are at the most comfortable with their life. That's what we're trying to do here. We want to help people get to that point. robustness of economic equilibria. People get to the point that makes them happiest. They always could have spent $500 on food. They didn't. Therefore, in forcing them, you're making them less happy, OK? So they are worse off. They'd rather spend some of that money and find a nicer place to live, but we're not. They are forced to spend. They would rather spend it on nicer places to live. But they are not happy. letting them. We're making them buy food, OK? Do people-- I don't want-- I just want to know if people understand the graphics here and the conclusions I drew. OK, now why? Why are we doing this? Why would you-- they're better off with cash. Why would we force them?" he asks. "I just want them to know that they can do what they want to do with their lives," he says. "They can do whatever they want with their life," he adds. What makes people happiest is not necessarily what makes them live the longest or have the best health. So, perhaps, like if you never spend money on food, and then you don't have food, then you're happier.to have food? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Say because what makes-- what puts people on the highest indifference is just what makes they happiest, but not necessarilyWhat makes them like live the long or like have thebest health?Yeah? People are happiest when they don't feel like they have to have food. "I'm just saying, look, if people knew best, maybe they'd like to just like have a nice house and die, OK? If.you die, that would be really bad," he says. "I'm not accusing you. Let me-- I'm not accusation you," he adds. "But, basically, what you're saying is you know better than the guy" "I don't know what to say," he responds. "If people know best, they should just have a good life," says CNN's Jonathan Gruber. people knew best, then there'd be no reason to do this. So, for example, let's change the label on the y-axis, just a small change. Let's cross out shelter and write cocaine. [LAUGHTER] OK? Well, in that case, we think they don't know best, so we change it. And that's why we're doing it. That's the reason we're changing the label. We're changing it because we think we know best. case, maybe we don't feel so bad about forcing the guy to buy food instead of cocaine, OK? In other words, this a program which might make sense if we are paternalistic. If we think that people won't necessarily make the right decisions. Now we're getting into normative economics, paternalistic, and that's not a good thing. It's a bad thing to be paternalistic and paternalistic at the same time. That's what we're trying to do in this case. for themselves, then it may be worth actually making them worse off because they're not worse off. Their perceived benefits are worse, but they don't know what they're doing, OK? Now you can see why-- I hope you can sort of immediately see why this concept makes economists a little uncomfortable. It's a little hard to explain to people, but it's a good way to get people to think about what they want to do with their money. It could be worth it. nervous because why do we know what they want better than they do, OK? So it makes people a little bit nervous, economists alittle bit nervous. And a lot of people are nervous to say, gee, maybe they're just happier doing cocaine. And how do weknow? That's the question. That's what we're trying to figure out, and that's why we're doing it. And we're going to keep doing it until we figure out how to do it. that that's the wrong way for them to spend their resources? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Well, like can't you look at it from the perspective of like this is taxpayer money, right? So then aren't you also just factoring in how the taxpayer wants to spend its money and then their indifference? yeah? Yeah. That's the way to look at the issue, I think. I think that's a good way to see it. Yeah? yeah. I'm with you. curve and all their information? JONATHAN GRUBER: That's a very good point. Now but there's sort of two points there. First of all, if the taxpayers' goal is to help poor people, then why shouldn't you make them as happy as possible, right? If tax-- why am I giving money? Why should I give money to the poor? Why shouldn't I help the poor people? I don't know. I just think it's a good question. to this poor guy? Because I'm sad his poor. If you're really just sad he's poor, then you should give him money. If what you're sad about is, gee, I don't like how he's not eating, you shouldn't give him any money. But, what you are saying, I'm not actually that sad he'm poor. I'mSad he'sNot eating. I've never heard of this guy before. He's not that bad. living-- I don't like his-- I'm sad he can't have better food to eat, sad at the place he lives. Then you're starting to impose your preferences, but let's be important. That's imposing your preferences. Yeah? AUDIENCE: I feel like the indifference curve only goes for happiness or like contentedness, and I'm not sure why that's the case. I'm sorry, I just don't think that's a good way to look at things. but, really, the point of SNAP isn't really with contentedness or happiness, but rather like what would be to a more sustainable life. JONATHAN GRUBER: Well, that's a related point of the taxpayer. If the taxpayer cares about, look, we want a healthy populace that's going to live a long time, and SNAP is a way to help that happen. It's a good way to make sure people live a healthy life, he says. time and be productive and pay taxes, then that would be a reason to do this. But, once again, I want to emphasize, OK, this is paternalism. If you really just care what makes people happiest, you should give them cash, OK? So that raises two questions,. OK? First of all, what is the point of giving people cash? And second, what does it have to do with being productive and paying taxes? I don't know. I just want to know. all, first question-- yeah? AUDIENCE: So how about like negative [INAUDIBLE].. Because, for example, if we pump a lot of money-- if we allow people to spend a lot on shelter, that's not really going to help people. It would just make the real estate developers rich. And say the same thing about tax cuts for the rich and for the poor. All right, I'm going to go ahead and ask the audience for a question. amount of shelter is kind of fixed, but like the amount of food that eaten [INAUDIBLE].. So, if we let people spend more money on food-- JONATHAN GRUBER: Yeah, yeah, so, basically, that's a great question. And, in general, we're going to-- I'm going to answer a lot of those, I'm gonna answer a a few of them, I'll tell you what I'll do, but I'm not going to go into too much detail. questions with the same cheat this semester, which is we're going to assume the markets are perfectly functioning. If there's no market-- once there's market failures, all bets are off. But, with no market failure and no paternalism, you'd want to assume that the markets were working fine, he says. "There's no-- you're imposing sort of a market failure," he adds. "You're imposing some sort of paternalism" on the market, he adds, "which is a mistake" to give them cash. Do food stamps actually increase food purchases? First of all, there's two reasons why they might not. Reason one is everybody could be like y. x is sort of a silly case, right? You're going to die if you eat that little. And food stamps aren't that much. They're maybe like $3,000 a year. Everybody is going spend $3,.000 on food. So the first issue is the first reason why food stamps may not matter is that, in fact, everybody is spending at least that amount. What's a way people could get around food stamps? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Buy food with food stamps and sell it. JONATHAN GRUBER: Yeah, they could set up a black market where they, essentially, say, look, I only want x.and nobody is like x. What's another reason why it might not matter? What's one reason why food stamps might not be a good idea? What do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments below. $2,000 of food. The government is making it worth $3,000. I'll buy my extra $1,000 and I'll sell it to people who do want it. And I'll end up still eating $ 2,000 worth of food, so we actually want to know do food stamps actually increase food consumption? We want to hear from you. Please email us at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk or tweet her @jennifersmith. in practice. Are they making a difference? Well, actually, we've run an experiment on this, OK? We're going to talk in this class a lot about empirical results in economics. This class is mostly going to be a theoretical class. That is we'll talk about models and ideas. But we're also going to look at how these ideas are being applied in practice. We're looking at the impact of these ideas in the real world, and how they're being implemented. Also, we're going to talk about empirical economics, which is results and testing the theories we develop. Empirical economics, here's a great example of empirical economics is we set up a theoretical model. You always want to start with the theory, but the theory should be tested as well as the results. Also, since, basically, I'm an empirical economist, we'll talk about how we test the theories that we develop, which are called empirical economics. And we'll also talk about some of the things we've learned in the course of our research. sometimes has predictions, which are uncertain. Here we have an uncertain prediction from theory about whether food stamps will affect food purchases or not. So let's test it. And the way we test it is we actually have run food stamps cash out experiments where we literally take guys on. It's an experiment to see if food stamps actually have an effect on how people buy their food. And it's a test to see whether or not it actually has an impact on how they buy their groceries. food stamps and give them cash instead and watch what happens to their consumption before and after. Food stamps is forcing people to spend about 15% more on food than they would like to unconstrained by the cash. What happens is that people spend about15% less on food when you give themcash instead of food stamps. Yeah? This gets you into the program. Yeah, this gets you in the programme. It's a real randomized trial. We literally flip a coin. Heads, you keep your food stamp. Tails, we replace those food stamps with an equal amount of cash. Then we watch what happened. the behavior of [INAUDIBLE]. I remember reading an experiment like, if you have the price of gas go down, the actual like amount of money spent on gas is constant. And this might translate to food stamps because like food stamps are like explicitly on food. JONATHAN GRUBER: Yeah, you know what I'm saying? I think we're going to see a big increase in the number of people on food stamps in the U.S. over the next few years. know, that's a great question. And that's you're asking about richer theory, richer theory. And I'm telling you that I'm going to give you the empirical evidence. So, whatever the theory is, the empirical Evidence tells you what happens. And there's different explanations for why. So the empiricalevidence is what it says, and that's what we're going to focus on in this article. We hope to hear back from you in a week or so about your thoughts on the article. that, basically, the price of our paternalism is 15%, OK? We are making people, effectively, 15% worse off. We're making them spend 15% more food than they want to. So is it worth it? Well, actually, the evidence is starting to pour in that it might not be worth it, he says. He adds: "The evidence is beginning to pour out that it may not be a good idea at the moment" He says: "We're making people spend 15 per cent more food, and that's not a good thing." because there's starting to be a lot of experiments where we're giving people just cash, especially in developing countries. In developing countries, the answer seems to be just giving people cash makes them better off. So, for example, in developing nations, people use the cash in productive ways. For example, they use it to buy food, electricity, water, medicine, shelter, shelter. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @cnnsocialmatters. example, they have a series of evaluation programs where they've given people cash, mostly in developing countries, in Africa in particular, some in the US. And they find that people spend relatively little of that on drugs and alcohol, but they actually tend to spend it productively. And, in fact, they've found that people actually spend it more productively than they would otherwise have done, if they'd spent it on drugs or alcohol or other things that are bad for their health. A nonprofit company randomly offered a group of women $150, which is huge relative to their income. That's 50% to 100% of annual income in Uganda, $150. They found, in developing countries, this often provides valuable resources for individuals to start businesses. So they ran experiment Uganda where a nonprofit companyrandomly offered aGroup of Women $150,. which ishuge relative totheir income. And what did they find? They found they were able to start a business with the money. they found was, after two months-- after 18 months, these women had used that money to start businesses. That actually effectively doubled their earnings. From that one injection of cash, it led them to actually double their annual earnings, OK? So that leads one to one, that's what this study was about. It was about how to get people to start their own businesses. And that actually raised their earnings, and that was the key to the success of this study," she said. Vox.com had an article just the other day pointing out how they actually followed these rules. Unfortunately, if you're a reader of policy websites like I am, you might think that maybe we should stop being paternalistic and just give cash. The best one of which is vox. com-- it's a great website-- they had an articles just theother day pointingout how they actual followed these. rules. It's a good idea to give cash, but it's also a bad idea to be paternalistic about it. women up nine years later. Nine years later, the effect had totally gone away. So the story isn't quite necessarily positive, but it's not negative. They're not worse off. But it looks like, at least what in the short run made them better off, well, that effect fades over. It's not positive. It doesn't mean they're worse off, it just means they're better off in the long run. That effect fades away over time, and they get better off. time. But the bottom line is, at this point, I think the evidence is sort of probably in favor of being less paternalistic and just giving people cash. But that runs into a lot of difficulties in terms of our concerns about how people will spend it. So let me let me say that I don't think that's a good idea at this time. I think it's probably better to give people cash, but that's probably not the best way to do it, either. stop there. We will come back on Monday, and we'll talk about how we actually go from this stuff to the demand curves we started the class with. Back to the page you came from. back to CNN.com home. Follow us on Twitter @cnnireport and @CNNOpinion. Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter. For more, go to www.cnn.com/lifestyle and www.dailymail.co.uk/lpin.