The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. For more information about MIT Open CourseWare, visit opencourseware.mit University.org or call (800) 909-8255. For the latest from MIT Open courseware, go to opencourseWare.MIT.org. The two-level problem is one that's exactly solved. It's one of our favorite problems. We'll talk about perturbation theory in the rest of the week's show. The show will be on CNN.com/Science on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday at 10 a.m. and 11 a. m. ET. For more, go to CNN.co/science and Twitter @cnnireport and @liz_epperson. For the full show, visit CNN.org/science. exactly solved problems, although it doesn't seem to have any physical relevance. It's just a nice numerical exercise. So we can take a two by two Hamiltonian and exactly diagonalize it. And that's done using a unitary-- or actually, in the case that we looked at, orthogonal-- transformation. And so we can get a Hamiltonian that is exactly diagonalized to a two-by-two Hamiltonian, and so on and on and so forth. it's a rotation in state space. And the rotation angle is an explicit function of the parameters in the Hamiltonian. Now all good things come to an end. We cannot do this for anything more than a two-level problem. But we can take the formalism for the two- level problem and apply it to the rest of the world. The result is that we can say that the rotation is a rotation of the state space in which the parameters are in state. We can then say that this is a rotation of the whole state space, not just the parameters. say, oh, well, we can describe a transformation that diagonalizes the end level problem. And it has the same property of being unitary. But the good thing about it is it's solved by a computer. You tell a computer what the operator is, and it will diagonalize it. And not just diagonalize, but diagonalize the whole thing. That's what we're trying to do here. We're not trying to solve the whole problem. We just want to diagonalize a part of it. only will it diagonalize it, but it will give you the eigenvalues and the eigenevectors. It gets those eigenvectors by applying the same two level unitary transformation many, many times. So if you have a six-level problem or a hundred-level problems, the computer just cranks and cranks on each two level transformation. It will get the eigevectors and eigevalues for each level of the problem. It can do this for up to 100 levels of problem. by two and does transformations. And it keeps doing that until the off diagonal matrix element is small. And so you tell it, I want this convergence criterion to be a part of the way we think about the universe. I want it to be part of our understanding of how the universe works, and how it can be made more efficient and more efficient. And that's what I'm trying to do with this new algorithm. I'm hoping to make it more efficient, and I want to use it to make the world a better place. in a hundred or a part in a million. And it just does this and does this. And eventually, it gives you the transformation and the eigenvalues. So that means that it doesn't matter how big the problem is. You just have to have a computer that's patient or fast. It doesn't have to be big or small. It just has to be fast and patient. And that's what we're trying to do here. We want to make the world a better place. And it will crank out the results. Now you need to know how to use the t matrices, or the t dagger matrix. These things enable you to solve basically any problem in time independent quantum mechanics and a lot of problems in time dependent quantum mechanics. So there there, that's how to do it. And it's a lot easier than you might think. It's a very powerful tool. It can be used to solve any kind of problem in quantum mechanics, including time dependent problems. is another way, and that's going to solve an n-level problem. It's called non-degenerate perturbation theory. Now our goal-- well, let's ask. What do spectroscopists do? Now, there's a silly, stupid answer to that. I want to find a way to solve the n- level problem in a way that makes sense to everyone. That's the goal of this lecture and the next lecture, and we'll get to that in a minute. something a little more profound. Yes? AUDIENCE: Find energy levels? ROBERT FIELD: Yeah, we record spectra. We get energy levels. And we get intensities. We could also be working in the time domain, and we could we could be looking at some kind of time domain. Yes, that's what we're doing. We're looking at time domain spectra and time domain intensities and all sorts of things. Yes. That's the way we do it. quantum beating system or some decaying system. We make these measurements. But this is not why we do it. Remember, yes-- AUDIENCE: All spectra have buried information about the physical parameters of the system. ROBERT FIELD: Exactly, exactly-- that's what's kept me going for my entire career. I use the.quantum beat system orSome decaying system or a decaying system as an example of what we're measuring. We're not trying to find out what's wrong with the system, we're trying to see if it's decaying. We're not allowed to determine the wave function by any experiment. But we are able to observe the energy levels and properties of the material. I might start using buried.word encoded rather than buried. word encoded as well. But I like that. It's a new way of using the word 'buried' to describe the state of the system. We'll have to wait and see if it works for the rest of the year. But it's a great way to start a new project. Hamiltonian. And we can regard the Hamiltonian as a fit model, a model where there are adjustable parameters which are the structural parameters. And today's lecture is mostly going to be on Hamiltonian. The Hamiltonian is a model to describe everything in this problem. It can be used to describe the force constants and the reduced masses and whatever we need to describe. And it can also be used as a way of describing the structure of an object in a particular way, such as the shape of a body. the interactions between normal modes of a polyatomic molecule. Now you might ask, why am I doing this rather than talking about just an ordinary, anharmonic oscillator. And the reason is, I'm going to do that in the next lecture. And it's in your problem sets. You're going to be able to use it in your own problem sets as well as in the ones I've given you so far. I'm looking forward to seeing what you'll come up with. that. So we go from what we can observe to a representation of it, which we call the effective Hamiltonian, where in this effective Hamiltonians we have determined the values of all of the important structural parameters. And from this we can get a more complete picture of what is going on in the system. So I'm going to show a little higher order of information, which is what we call a higher order Hamiltonian. That's what we're going to see in the next part of the show. that, we can calculate everything, everything that we could possibly observe, including things we didn't observe. So it's really powerful. It's a way of taking the totality of observations that you're going to make and saying, yes, I have looked inside this molecule. And I've determined everything that I'm allowed to do. That's a really powerful way of looking at the universe, and it's a very powerful tool, too, because it allows us to see things that we couldn't before. to determine. And I can calculate the wave function. The wave function is an experimentally determined wave function, but only indirect. This is amazingly powerful. And basically, everybody who deals with spectra is doing this whether they know it or not. And so I want to be able to give them a way to do it, to make it easier for them to do. I want them to have a way of doing it, so that they can do it in a way that makes sense to them. you the tools to be able to take any arbitrary spectrum and extract from it the crucial information. In the last lecture, we talked a little bit about matrix mechanics, and that involved linear algebra. And you have a wonderful handout on linear algebra, which will give you more than just a handout. It will also give you a wonderful set of tools to help you understand how to use linear algebra in the real world. You can use these tools in your own work, and they will help you to understand the world around you. enough to be able to do any quantum mechanical problem we're going to be facing in this class. And there is notation. And the notation is unfamiliar, and you have to learn how to use it. And so we have for example-- the analogy to the Schrodinger equation in matrix in matrix. And we have the analogy for the Schrödinger equation, which is in the form of a square root of the equation for the square of the number of square roots of the square root. language-- where we have the Hamiltonian, an eigen vector, and this eigenvalue. And this is the form of the Schrodinger equation and we can pretend that it is the real Schrodingers equation. And we can use the standard approaches, but it's useful. It's a useful way to look at the eigenvalues of a Hamiltonian. And it's a good way to see how the Eigenvalue is related to the Eigenevalue of the Hamiltonians. to work in matrix notation. So we can solve for the energy levels, and we can solving for basically all of the eigenvectors. And our friend is this unitary transformation where t dagger is equal to t inverse. And t times t inverse isequal to this thing 1111100, or the unit matrix. And so these unitary transformations have this special convenient property. And we use these t daggers and ts to diagonalize the Hamiltonian. Now this is just a little bit of review. did we derive the thing that we are going to solve? Well, we took this equation and we inserted 1 between the Hamiltonian and the vector. And then this is 1. So we don't need to put it over here. And we left multiply by t dagger, and we we said, 'We don't want to put this over here' And then we said: 'We want to use this to solve this problem' And so we got the answer we were looking for. put parentheses around things. So this is now what we were calling h tilde and this is c tilde. This is now an equation that says, OK, we can transform the Hamiltonian into diagonal form-- E1, En, zeros. And when we have this in diagonal form, we could say, "E1" or "E2" for "E3" and "E4" for" "E5" or  "E6" or "E7" well, this equation is just E1, 100 et cetera. So for any eigenvalue, we have an eigenvector. Now what we'd really like to know is, well, how do we get these eigenvectors from the unitary transformation that diagonalizes H? We don't calculate this unitary-- yes? AUDIENCE: Is that i or--? "Yes, that's what we want to know," he says. "We want to find out how to do it." ROBERT FIELD: This is a particular eigenvalue, and this is the eigenvector in that. Now it's easy for me to get screwed. I mean in your c tilde, third from the top. That's a j. That is a j, and that is a 1. This is the 1, and the 1 is the j. And that is the 2. And the 2 is the 3. and the 3 is the 4. And so on and so on. up, and it's easy for you to wonder, what the hell am I doing, until you've done it. And then it's completely transparent. It's really quite simple. But it's just this extra notation. And so it's possible to show-- and I don't want to do it. I did it last year. I didn't do it last week. I'm not doing it this time. I just want to show it to you. I want you to see it. time. You can show-- and this is important-- that this transformation t dagger c equals c. Do I want?-- above, above. This is telling you that the columns of t dagger are the eigenvectors. They are linear combination of the basis vectors that correspond to each eigen vector. And you can. show that this is the case. And it's the same with the other transformation. It's a transformation of the time.time.time to the time of the moment. look at this in more detail in the notes. Now this is great because mostly you want to know what the eigenvectors are for a particular eigenvalue. But sometimes, when you're doing dynamics, you prepare, not an eigenvector, but you prepare a t equals 0, a basis state. This is a very useful way to look at the dynamics of a system. It can be used to understand how a system behaves in terms of its basis state, for example. the most common, doable problem, and it's also something that one does in experiments. You can set up a problem so that, with a short pulse, you prepare the system at t equals 0 in something that's not an eigenstate. And usually it's a basis state-- it's one of the most common and doable problems in physics. It's also a good way to test your knowledge of the theory of quantum field theory, which is based on quantum mechanics. eigenvalues of an exactly solved problem. But your problems are not exactly solved ones, but your experiment selects that. And this, not being an eigenstate, needs to be expressed as a linear combination of eigenstates so that you can actually calculate this, which will describe how the system is behaving. This is called a "logarithm" and it is used to describe the state of the system in the experiment. It can also be used to express the state as a function of time. And I like asking exam problems like this because it's easy to get hopelessly involved in ordinary algebra rather than just using linear algebra. So if this is the transformation to the eigenbasis, then the columns of t are the transformation back to the 0 order bases. And the columns are the transformed eigenbases back to their original order. And so on and so on. And on and on. It's a good way to learn how to do linear algebra, I think. of t are the rows of t dagger. Now why should you care? Because you don't know how to calculate the elements of the t matrices yet. With perturbation theory, it doesn't matter that the computer could solve for the t and t dagger, but that's what perturbion theory is for. Theorem: The elements of t are not equal to t, but they are equal to the number of rows in the t dagger and the length of the row. dagger matrices. But there's no insight. You just get the numbers. I like to say that spectroscopy is not about creating archival tables of observed transitions and observed transition intensities. It's about understanding how things work. And so depending on whether you're doing a time domain experiment or frequency domain domain, you need to have a different set of numbers to work out what you're trying to do. And that's what we do in the spectroscopic field. experiment, you're going to want to use either the columns of t dagger or the rows of t Dagger. Now at some point in your life, you have to be exposed to non-degenerate perturbation theory because it is really powerful. But it's also incredibly ugly. So we have a whole new way of looking at the universe. We have a new way to look at the world. We've got a whole different way of seeing the world, and it's really beautiful. bunch of problems-- I'll go over here-- that are related to the particle in a box. And so one of the things that you might do is round off the corners because physical systems don't have discontinuities. Well, that's a problem, too. That's a very, very big problem. It's not just a particle in an infinite box or the harmonic oscillator. It can be a whole lot of things. It is a very big, very complex problem. going to be a very modest change to the energy levels and wave functions. Another thing you might do is have a barrier, and you could put the barrier anywhere. What does the barrier or an extra well do? Or you could do something like this. So the particle-in-a-box is going to be very modest, and it's not going to change a huge amount of energy. But it could make a big difference to the way we think about the universe, for example. a whole family of problems that you could solve using perturbation theory. And we have to work out the matrix elements of the Hamiltonian that correspond to these extra things. And then figure out what to do to get the eigenvalues of the perturbated Hamiltonian. And that's how you get a Hamiltonian with eigenvalue. And so on and so on. It's a very simple way to look at the world. And it's very simple to understand. And to solve problems. and eigenfunctions. Now, for the harmonic oscillator-- again, you could put a barrier in the middle or you could make it an asymmetric like almost all molecular potentials are, where this is dissociation and this is two closed cells colliding with each other and doing very hard repulsion. And so you could do this with a number of different ways to get the same effect, including with a different type of structure, or a different kind of structure at the same time. that is harmonic near the bottom, but it's not harmonic elsewhere. And so how do you represent this? And the Morse oscillator is a cheap way of generating something with this shape. And then doing the perturbation theory to understand how the nonharmonic aspect of the Morse can affect the Morse. That's how the Morse is used to represent the non-harmonic part of the oscillator. And that's how it's used in the Morse system to make the Morse sound. energy levels. Or how did the energy levels determine, say, the association energy of this molecule? How is that dissociation energy encoded in the energy level pattern? Now for polyatomic molecules, if you have n atoms, there are 3n minus 6 vibrational normal modes. Well, how do I know that? Well,How do Iknow that? How do I tell you that? You tell me what energy levels you think the molecules have, and I'll tell you what I think they have. n atoms, there's 3n degrees of freedom. There's 3 translations and 3 rotations. And so that leaves 3n minus 6. And all of that is vibrations. So we have many normal modes, and it's not too surprising that, if you stretch one normal mode, it'll affect the frequency of another. It's not a surprise that if we stretch a normal mode it will affect another normal mode. We have a lot of normal modes. We don't know why. And we'd like to know that. And so perturbation theory is really valuable for polyatomic molecules. And that's the bulk of the examples that I worked in the non-lecture notes for this lecture. But there's also dynamics. So you prepare some initial state of t equals 0 and you want to know what that state is. And we want to find out if it's a positive or a negative state. And if it is a positive state, then we know what the state of the molecule is. to know how it's evolving. But often that initial state is an eigenstate of one of the exactly solved problems. And so you want to know C J-- I'm sorry. You want to be able to re-express that in terms of the eigenstates of the real problem. That's what we're trying to do here. We're going to try to do it in a way that makes sense to all of us, so that we can all benefit from it. to know J, CJ eigenstates. So once you have this, then you know how to write the time dependent wave function. And so you just write this thing out. It's just mechanical and boring. But it's also true that molecules rotate. So you are dealing with eigen states and they have eigenenergies. So that's what we're dealing with here. And that's why we need to know J and CJ. We need to get to know them. And when they rotate, there's centrifugal force and their internuclear distances change. And we can then calculate how that will affect the rotational energy levels using perturbation theory. And then there's the origin of life. You need two particles to come together and start. Gases are not supportive of life, so we need to think about how this could have happened in the universe's early days. We can't know for sure, but we think it could have taken place in the early universe. to condense into a liquid. That's the beginning. Perturbation theory explains the long range interactions by which all gas phase particles attract each other weakly. So that's important too. And so you'll be able to do all of this stuff. So here we have non-degenerate perturbation Theory. And it is important too, because it explains how all gas phases interact. And that's how you get a liquid in the first place. It's the first step. a mind numbing, formal derivation. So we start out with this rotary equation. And we say, well, let us expand the Hamiltonian. And let's put a little thing here. This is an exactly solved problem. And this is what's new, and this iswhat's new and small. It's a mind-numbing derivation, but it's a very useful one. It can be used to solve any number of problems, including complex ones. And it can be applied to any kind of mathematical problem. It is a very powerful tool. And we could probably neglect it. And we do the same thing to the energy levels. So these are the energy. levels for the exactly solved problem. And these are. the energy level-- the first order corrected energy levels -- and these. are the second order correctedEnergy levels. And they are the same as the first. order corrected Energy levels. and we can use them to solve the problem. We could probably. neglect it, but we could also use it to solve other problems. do the same thing for the wave function. Now we write the Schrodinger equation with these three term expressions. Now I'm also going to say, we're never going to consider this one either. So life is simpler without them, but in the notes, I included them all. And so what is the result? The answer is that we have the same result as we had in the first place, but with a different name. The result is the same as the first time, except with a new name. we do is now we write the full equation and we sort it into sub equations corresponding to powers of lambda. So the lambda to the 0 equation is really easy. It's just H0 psi 0 is equal to E0 psi0. We could put n's on this. And this is the exactly solved problem. It says, yeah, you build your foundation from the Lambda to 0 equation, and it's just what you know already. And what you're going to do is use the psi n 0 and en 0 to do everything else. Lambda is just a mathematical trick. It has no significance whatsoever. It's a smallness parameter, but it's also something where you can say, these equations will be true for any value of lambdas. And so it's just a way of separating the.equa-- well, you might ask, well, what is Lambdas? It's just an abbreviation for 'lambdas' and it means 'smallness' or 'smallest number' equations into things that have a structure that you can manipulate. People have waxed eloquent about the meaning of lambda, and it really doesn't have any meaning. So the lambda to the 1 equation-- well, we collect terms on the left hand side that have 1 Lambda and on the right hand side those that have 2 Lambda. That's how we get the 1-2-3 equation. It's a very simple formula. It doesn't mean anything. It just gives you a structure to manipulate. right hand side. And so the Lambda to the 1 equation is going to be, say, H0 psi 1 is equal to E0 psi 1. There's more to it than that. We're just collecting the terms that have 1 Lambda on the left-hand side and 1 lambda on the right-hand. side and so the equation is H0psi 1 + Epsi 2 + H0Psi 2. And that's the equation for the equation. right-hand side. And we've got this equation. What are we going to do with it? Well, one thing we can do is multiply on the left. So we have n, n,. n. We're going to multiply on. the left and integrate by n. The result is that we have. n,n, n. And this is the result of multiplying on the. left and integrating by n on the right-hand. side of the equation. And the result is n,N. psi n 0. So we're going to get a bunch of terms. We have integral, integral. And we have E n 0 integral psi n 0 psi n 1. Well, this is kind of an ugly term. It's a psi 0 and a psi 1. But we know that H, when operating on psi 0, gives E 0. so we'regoing to get E 0, which is the same as E 1, or E 1. And E 1 is E 0 and E 0 is psi 0 or psi 1, so E 0 means E 1 and H 0 is H 0. E n 0 integral psi n 0 psi n 1-- same two over here. Cancel them. And so we get a simple equation that is just H1 n n is equal to E1 n. So we've gotten now the diagonal matrix element of the perturbation term isequal to the E1n term. And we've got now the equation for the integral of the pupil's pitch factor. We've got the equation. We can now say that the integral is the sum of the two integral factors. first-order correction to the energy. And we can continue. The algebra isn't beautiful, but we end up getting the following equations. We have E n 1 is H 1 nm. We also have psi n1 is m not equal to n psi m 0 H nm. So what did I do? Well, I made a mistake. And I'm not sure I want to do it again, so I'm going to make a different mistake. I'm making a mistake when I make a mistake with the energy, and I don't want to make the same mistake again. do here? I said, the wave function-- we have completeness. So if we want the first order corrections to the nth wave function, we can write this as a linear combination of the zero order wave functions. And when we do that, we end up with this formula. This is the formula for the first-order corrections to a wave function. And we can use this formula to get the first orders of corrections to any wave function that we want to make to the second order. the mixing coefficient, and these are the state-- now why do I exclude n? Because we already have it. And then we get the second-order correction to the energy, which is m not equal to n h n m 1 H m n 1 over En 0. That's it. The mixing coefficient is the state of the energy. The energy is the energy of the mixing coefficient. And the second order correction is to make the energy less than the energy from the energy in the first order. all we need. Now it does say non-degenerate perturbation theory. And so it's subject to the requirement that H1 n m over E n minus E m. So if the energy denominator is near 0, we know we're in trouble. But for the vast majority of energy levels, this term this term is not needed. But if it is, then it's a sign that we're going to have to change our energy levels to a lower level. is much less than 1. And so that means we can deal with all of the interactions among the non-degenerate levels in one fell swoop. Now this is an infinite sum, and this isan infinite sum. So we don't like infinities. But we can say, all right, here's the solution to that problem. And we can do it in the same way as we did in the previous example. So that's how we do it. We can do the same thing in the other direction. Hamiltonian. It's an infinite Hamiltonian. And we're interested in this little corner of it. All of the interactions among these states with all of the infinite others get subsumed into this infinite sum. It is a small number. And then we're just interested in that little subspace of the Hamiltonian, which is a very small part of the universe. And so we're not interested in the whole thing. We just want to look at this little part of it, and it's very small. energy levels that we're sampling in our experiment. So the molecule more or less tells you how to focus on the part that you care about and to get rid of the stuff that is of no trouble whatsoever. And it just contaminates the wave functions a little bit. And that's what we're trying to do in this experiment. We're going to try to get to the bottom of it and see if we can get it to behave in a way that's more like a normal wave. if you wanted to know what that contamination is, you could deal with it. So this is the tool that you can use to solve, basically, any problem involving molecules with a potential like a harmonic oscillator at the bottom. But it's usable for all problems, but there's a different way of dealing with them, which is a different tool. It's a bit like a computer program, but it's a lot more powerful. It can deal with a lot of different problems. basis set rather than the harmonic oscillator basis set. So this is your handy dandy key. And you don't need a computer, although when you see the horrible complexity that will result when you start dealing with these sums, you will say, well, I do want to use a computer. But this is the key to getting the most out of your calculator. And it's a very handy key to get the most from your computer, as well as a very useful tool. But now it's up to me to organize the program so that you can ask the computer to do what you need in a sensible way and you still get good answers. So in the notes, I'm dealing with a two-mode molecule. There are no two- mode molecules. There's one-mode molecules, and there's a one- mode molecule. That's what I'm trying to do with this program. I want it to be as simple as possible for people to use. and there might be three or four or six or whatever. But the complexity is the interaction between two modes. And so we're going to talk about that. So we have for a two-mode molecule-- the Hamiltonian will consist of Hamiltonian for mode 1, Hamiltonians for mode 2 and mode 3. And the complexity of that is going to be talked about in the next few weeks, I'm sure, as we get closer to the end of the project. I'm looking forward to it. Hamiltonian for modes 1 and 2, interacting with each other. These are just ordinary harmonic oscillator. And we've got to do some work on this. And that's where perturbation theory comes in. So H12-- and we know, if this weren't here, we know that the energy wasn't there. And so H12 is the key to our understanding of how the universe works. It's a very complex system. But it's very simple, and it's the same for all of us. levels are that some of the energy levels for the two independent oscillators and the wave functions are the products. So even though the energy. levels have two quantum numbers, V1 and V2, and the. wave functions have twoQuantum numbers, they are not the same. If it were only this, we'd have only one energy level, and we'd only have one wave function. We don't have two wave functions, we have two energy levels. We have two independent energy levels and two independent quantum numbers. have completely solved that problem. But because of this, there's something else. So these then turn out to be the zero order states that you use to evaluate all the integrals here. And we have these and A and A dagger operators, which are enabling us to-- we have the A and B dagger operators. We have the ability to use these and other tools to solve the problem of how to solve a problem like this. We're going to be using them for a long time to come.  operator for coordinate x is proportional to A plus A dagger. And this has a selection rule, delta V of plus and minus 1. So we like these things because we don't have to do any integrals. They're all done for you. And so we're then going to use these tools to do our own calculations. We're going to be using these tools for a long time to come. We'll be using them to do all our calculations for years to come, I'm sure. sorts of things to deal with the most important terms beyond harmonic. And so there's a cubic and there is a quartic. And although you haven't really explored this, what happens when you make dimensionless coordinates? You factor out something. And if you have cubic terms, they're 100 times smaller. If you have quartic terms, you have a cubic term that's 100 times bigger. And you factor out another cubic term to get another quartic term. And then you get a cubic cubic cubic. than quadratic terms. The quartic terms are 100 times smaller than the cubic terms. And so you don't need to go much further. The cubic terms for the two oscillators would be 1/2 K 122 Q1 Q2 squared plus 1/ 2 K 112 Q 1 squared Q2. And you can get the same result with the square root of K 122 and K 112, or K 122/K 112/K112/K1 and K1/K2/Q1. could have Q1 cubed, but we already deal with that in the single-mode problem. So we won't worry about that. So these are the couplings between modes 1 and 2 that are cubic. And then we have 1/4 k 112 Q 1 squared Q 2 squared. There's also a Q1. But we already dealing with that, so we'll just use Q2 squared. And we'll use Q1 squared instead of Q1 for the time being. Q2 cubed, and those terms usually are not important because they mostly are dealt with under here. These are the parameters, and these are the things that you need in order to understand what this molecule is going to do when it's excited. Now when I was a was a teenager, I used to do this all the time. Now I'm not doing it anymore. I'm doing it in my sleep. I don't want to do it in the morning. I want to sleep in the afternoon. graduate student, there was a great deal of excitement about doing what's called mode-specific chemistry. Ordinary compounds cost on the order of $1 a kilogram. But if you could do mode specific chemistry, you could make things that aren't makeable by ordinary, organic chemistry. And the organic chemists would love it, says the professor. "It's a very exciting time for organic chemistry," he says. "I think it's going to be a revolution in the field of organic chemistry" this because it's a load of garbage because these guys make the modes talk to each other. And so even if you could excite a pure overtone or combinational level, the energy moves around the molecule. And that's called intermolecular, vibrational redistribution. And those there are processes that you could use to create new molecules. But that's not what we're doing here. We're trying to create a new type of molecule. We don't want to make new molecules, we want to create molecules that are more like atoms. talk about the primary paths for the energy to flow and the rates. And that was a major area of research for the last 30 years. And most people are tired of it. But it started out being IVR, yeah, anything can happen. It's statistic or whatever. But no, only, only the energy can flow. It can't be stopped. It has to flow in a certain way or it won't work. And it can't just be stopped if it doesn't flow in certain ways. specific things can happen, and they're controlled by these specific coupling terms. And you could calculate them. Now there's an interesting other thing. I told you that the first-order correction to the energy is equal to a diagonal matrix element of the correction term to the Hamiltonian. All of the all of the things that can happen can be controlled by the coupling terms, and you can calculate them, if you know how to do it. It's a very simple thing to do, but it's very interesting. second-order terms involve squares of matrix elements. The second- order terms you don't know the signs. If there is a first-order correction, you get the sine. And this enables you to know that in second-order perturbation theory when you have to square the matrix element, all that information is concealed. There is a huge amount of algebra that's involved in using these equations. And I don't really want to go through that. Well, anyway-- algebra. You can read my notes. I think the chances of you reading those notes are small. But if I don't lecture on them, it would be slightly greater. It's a complete treatment of a two-mode problem with all of the possible and harmonic terms cubic and quartic. And everything is cubic and Quartic. Everything is cubic or quartic and everything is quartic or cubic or cubic. And it's all cubic or Quartic and all of its possible terms. worked out. Now the trick is, you could easily say, well, the algebra is just so horrible. Why would I bother? But what you do is you take these terms and you sort according to selection rule. So for example, here we have a selection rule delta V1 is plus or minus 1. And so there are then six possible selection rules associated with these sorts of terms. And what you want to do is do the algebra that combines all this horrible stuff according to the selection rule that leads. to simplification of the formulas. And then once you've got everything sorted according to the selection rule, then you can calculate what happens. I can't promise that I will never give you a two-mode problem on an exam, but I can promise I will give you one-mode problems. And so on and so on. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, back to thepage you came From. Back into the page. Non-degenerate perturbation theory works when the energy denominator is large compared to the coupling matrix element. Accidents occur when you have, say, a situation where omega 1 is approximately equal to 2 omega 2. Now this is a good idea if you want to really know how to do these sorts of things. You can find out more about the theory at: http://www.npr.org/news/features/2013/01/29/383838/non-degenersate-perturbation- theory.html. isn't just blowing smoke. This happens an amazing number of times because stretches are higher frequency than bends. And it's very common for the bending modes to be roughly half or one third the frequency of a stretching mode. And so you get a resonance. So this is special because it's special because of the resonance. It's very special because the resonance is so strong. It can't be explained by anything but the resonance of the bending mode. It is a very, very rare phenomenon. now it's violating the fundamental approximation of non-degenerate perturbation theory. But it's a two-level interaction. And these resonances have names. There is a Fermi and there is a Darling-Dennison. And so you can say, I know how to do a two - level problem. I can solve that. The FermI resonance was the first one to be found. It was discovered in the 1950s. It's now called the Fermis resonance. discovered and understood by Fermi. And it has to do with CO2. Omega 1 in CO2 is approximately twice omega 2. So what happens then? Suppose we have a level that involves V1, V2, V3. And nearby there is a level nearby. The symmetric stretch and the bend are in Ferm i resonance. And that's what happens in the CO2 system. It's the same as in the Earth's atmosphere. The same thing happens in our atmosphere. level V1 minus 1 V2 plus 2 V3. And because of the energy denominators, these two guys are nearly degenerate. So what happens is one gets shifted up, one getting shifted down a little bit. And they're out of the expectation of smooth behavior. And it might also be that they're not as good as we think they are, because they are not as well-behaved as we thought they would be. It's a very, very complex system. this state is what we call bright and this is called dark. This state might be connected by an allowed transition from a lower-- an initial state and this might not. So the levels repel because they're interacting and they're out of position. And this guy is supposed to be bright. And he's supposed to. be in a dark state. And that's what he's in. He's in a bright state. But he's not in a light state. He doesn't know it yet. bright. We're supposed to see a transition in the spectrum. And this one-- well, it should have been somewhere else. But we shouldn't see it because it's dark. It's forbidden. But because of the interaction between these two levels, the eigenstates have mixed character. And you get both level shifts. And that's what we're trying to achieve here. We want to get rid of the dark. We don't want to see it. We need to see the light. and extra lines. This is called a spectroscopic perturbation. It is the core of everything I've done for the last 45 years. And so you can learn about some of these coupling terms because, instead of hiding in the forest of these small corrections, you get a big. You get a lot of information about what's going on, and how it's going to behave in the real world. It's a very exciting time for me, and I'm looking forward to the future. Among spectroscopists or physical chemists, there are two communities. Communities that like small molecules and communities that like big molecules. For the small molecule community, you have this accidental resonance and you get this sort of thing. For big molecules,you have a resonance with a dense manifold of levels. All of these levels share, say, the character of the effect.effect. And it's easy to observe and it'seasy to determine each coupling term from these resonances. And the last thing I want to talk about today is a little bit of philosophy. dark state. And so they can all interact with this guy. In this case, you get the main transition in an extra line. And if you have high enough resolution, you see that there is a broadened line. If you have low resolution,. you get abroadened line, and if you've got a good resolution, there's a line that goes into the dark state. The dark state is the state that the character is in when he or she is in the dark. It's the state of the character when they're in a state of darkness. a whole bunch of eigenstates under it. And if it's a large enough molecule, you couldn't resolve them anyway. And so some people are always dealing with fast IVR, fast dephasing of the bright transition into a dark manifold. And other people areAlways looking at these sorts of things. And others are always looking at the other side of the coin, which is the other half of the equation. And they're always trying to figure out how to get around it. Now I like these because they really give you a lot of information. Now you can get the information you want from this because the width of this thing is related to the number of dark states and their average coupling matrix element. That's called Fermi's golden rule. We'll talk about this in a few minutes. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, Back to thepage you camefrom. Back into the page. about that later. So I think there's a pretty good place to stop because what I try to do is to show you, yes, it can be really complicated. But it's something that you can do, and you can project out the coupling constants that you want in order to get the result you're looking for. And I think that's where I'm going to stop for the time being, because I don't want to go into too much detail about how to do it. determine the stuff that is relevant to your experiment. But then there is this dichotomy between small molecules where the vibrational density of states is always smaller until you get to really high energy. And bigger molecules-- now they're not very big. Benzene is plenty big for this sort of thing. It's a big molecule, but it's not a big enough molecule to be used in an experiment like this. But it's a good molecule to use in a lab, if you're looking for something to do with energy. thing. And there is the question. For example, in some big molecules, when you excite an electronic transition from the ground state to some excited state-- so here's S0, S1. Sometimes you can't see any fluorescence from S1 because the dephasing is so fast that there's nothing. And so it so it is a question of whether or not it's a good thing to excite a big molecule to a new state. It's a very interesting question. says, well, tough luck. You can't do spectroscopy in emission. But you can still see the absorption spectrum because then your signal is the removal of photons from your beam as opposed to fluorescence. So there's a huge amount of photochemistry and interesting stuff connected with a large density of light. It's a very exciting time for the field of spectroscopic research, says Dr. David Houghton, a professor at the University of Cambridge. He says the future of the field is very exciting. states. And again, when I was a graduate student, there was a huge controversy about non-radiative transitions in medium sized molecules. And there was one community that says, the collisions which transfer population between levels are so fast that, in order to turn off this broadening, you had to go back to the beginning of the molecule and do it again. And that's what we did. We went back and did it again and again, and it was a very interesting process. to really low pressure because then there wouldn't be collisions. The answer, whenever somebody failed to see sharp spectra, was, well, you're not at low enough pressure. But this has nothing to do with collisions. And that got resolved by two gentlemen called Bixon and Jortner. Those are two of the most important people in the history of physics. They were the men who first discovered the theory of relativity, which is the theory that the universe is made of atoms and molecules. names that any educated physical chemist will know to say, oh, that's the Bixon-Jortner. And they're still alive. They're still doing beautiful stuff. But anyway, that is all I want to say today. I will do details on one mode and Morse oscillator in other sorts of things next time. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, Back to thepage you came From. Back into the page.