In this video I'm going to be going over lung oscilation specifically the sites of where you osculate. I'm also going to go over normal breath sounds versus abnormal breath sounds. As always you can access the quiz and the video at CNN.com/Nursing. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Back To the pageYou came from: CNN.co.uk/Nurses/Back To The Page You Came From:CNN.com / Nursing/Back to the Page you Came from: notes over here or in the description below now in the next video I'm going to be performing an assessment on a patient. I'll show you how to listen with your stethoscope to these sides so let's get started first let's talk about our objectives of this lecture. what I want to achieve in this lecture what I'm looking for in a patient and how I can help you achieve my goals in this patient assessment. I want you to be able to give me feedback on how you feel about your patient. want you to learn is lung Anatomy. It's really important you know what you're listening to the specific oscilation sites. I'm going to give you some landmarks to make your job easier so you'll know what intercostal space correlates with which lobe of the lung um we're going to go through some of the different types of lung surgery. We'll also talk about how to get the most out of your listening time and how to use your earpiece to get a better view of the patient. go over some audio clips of normal breath sounds and where you should hear them at CU that's a big thing of you should know where you Should hear bronchial versus bicular and we're going to go over abnormal breath sounds. I'm going to let you listen to them and we'll go over some more later in the week. I'll be back on Monday to talk about our next episode of "This Is Life with Kelly Wallace" at 8 p.m. ET. For more, visit CNN.com/ThisIsLife. Whenever you're osculating you're going to be listening to the anterior part of the chest and the posterior part. One thing you want to remember whenever you're listening to anterior mostly what you're doing.and you can compare the two so first let's go over lung Anatomy. Then we'll go over the different types of lung. And then we'll talk about the different shapes of the lung and how you can use them to help you osculate. And we'll finish up with the anatomy of the lungs. going to be hearing a lot of because it's predominantly in the anterior part are the upper low loes however on the posterior part what is predominately made up on this is the lower loes. So first let's take a look of the anatomy of the anterior parts of the body. Then let's look at the lower part of the abdomen. Then we'll go on to the upper part. And then we'll finish up with the lower body. And we'll end up at the top of the page. chest in this illustration you have your right lung and your left lung and how I set up this illustration is that I wanted you to be able to see what is over the lungs. Whenever you're listening with your stethoscope you need to know where your clavicle is. I wanted to make sure you could see what was over your lungs so you could hear what was going on in your body when you were listening with a stethoscopes. I also wanted to show you where your lungs were in relation to each other. and certain intercoastal spaces because they correlate to which lobe of the lung you're listening to. For instance if you are listening down in the six intercostal space mid axillary you're assessing the lower loes of the right and left lung. We'll go over in depth whenever I cover these in more detail in the coming weeks and months. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the first part of the interview with Dr. David Perry. osculation sides so first let's cover the right lung. Your right lung is made up of three loes very important so you have your right upper lobe, right middle lobe and right here here you have the horizontal Fisher and then you have an oblique Fisher. This just separates the middle loow from your upper and your lower and then down here you've got your right lower then over here you're left lung. You have your left upper lobe and then your left lower lobe and if you notice in the drawing mainly the lower lobe is shown. whenever you're listening to your lungs you're mainly going to be assessing because you can see more of it of your upper load. We have our trachea which is up here and it goes down and it branches off into your broncus your bronchi and then your broni go. We also have our bronchi which are up there and go down into the bronchi. We then have our broni which go down to the broncus and bronchi, and then into the broni. even further and Branch off into bronchials with your avolar Sachs and this is where gas exchange occurs. Then of course you have your breast bone and all your ribs right here now let's look at the posterior view of the lung here is the anterior view of a lung. Here is the posterior views of a bronchial lung and a lung with a ribcage. This is where the rib bone and the breast bone are located. The rib bone is the most important bone in the lung. patient's back if you were to look inside look at the lungs you'll have the clavicle on the front then it comes around and it forms into your scapula. You have your left lung and your right lung they're on they're flip then compared to the anterior View and the anterior view of the lungs. If you're in the middle of the lung and you're not sure if you're going to be able to breathe, you'll need to go to the hospital. here as you can see you have mostly lower lobe that you're assessing and it's separated by your fissures here. notice you can't really assess the middle lobe like you can with anterior View and anterior View. Here you have your right upper lobe and you haveyour right lower lobe. You have your left lower lobe and your right left upper lobe. And you have the right right upper and right left lower lobes. You can also see the right left and right right side of the head. then over over here you have your left upper lobe and your left lower lobe. You have your spine in the middle and um it's really important you find C7 to T10 whenever you're assessing which we'll go over in the oscilation sites. This will help you know what you're looking for. It's important to find the C7-T10 range. It will help with your assessment of your neck and your spine. It'll help you understand what your neck is doing and how it's moving. where to place your stethoscope in between the spine and the scapula on those intercostal spaces right in between ribs. Listen directly on the patient's chest with the diaphragm of your stetoscope that is the big part of the Stethoscope. You want to listen on the skin and not over cloes. You'll see a little bit later on how to use the stethoscopes on a patient's face. You will see how to listen to a person's face on a stethscope later on. is because a lot of times your diaphragm can rub up against the patient's clothes and that can make like a rustling sound sound like one of those adventitious lung sounds. It'll muffle and decrease the sound quality of what you're trying to hear also whenever you are listening. It can also make a noise that can be heard by the patient. It's called a "lung noise" and it can muffle the sound of a patient's breathing. It also can make a sound that is heard by other patients. on women you want to have the woman raise up her breast so you can get underneath those sights. You want to hear those lung sounds because the tissue will muffle the noise and you won't be able to hear that so remember that whenever you're listening on a female. If you're talking to a male, you can't hear the female's voice because the male's voice is muffled by his own body. If it's a female you can hear the sound of her breathing. patient also whenever you're listening to the chest you're going to listen to the both the front and the back side. Whenever you're listen you'regoing to note a full cycle of in inspiration and expiration and what you'reListening for is you're listens to the pitch is it patient.patient. patient. patient patient. Patient.patientpatient.patient patient. Patients.patient, patient, patient.patient. patient,patient,patient. Patient, patient and patient. It's the same thing with the chest. high is it a medium or low pitch what's the sound quality and its duration is is inspiration longer than expiration or vice versa or are they equal. What are the characteristics of normal breath sounds and and um on that sound that you're hearing is there any extra adventitious sounds and what are the sounds you hear when you take a deep breath? We'll be back in a few days to give you the low down on how the breath sounds are made. We'll also be giving you a look at some of the other sounds that you may hear when taking a breath. that shouldn't be there maybe on inspiration or expiration so you really want to not that. whenever you listen you are going to start from the top and work your way down and you're going to compare sides so be something like this you'regoing to start up here. That's what I'm trying to do. I'm just trying to get the best out of my life. I don't want to get stuck in a rut. I want to be able to get out of this rut and move on to the next thing. at the apex of the lung listen here and then you're going to go over and listen on the other side to compare it. Then you're just going to drop down a little bit listen here. and then go over here and compare sides drop down again. At the top of the lungs listen here then drop down to the bottom and listen to the opposite side. Then go over to the top and compare the two sides to compare them again. Then drop back to the beginning of the journey and do the same. and just keep repeating until you've reached the bottom another thing what you want to do to help get the best sound quality is have the patient sitting up so you can get to the front and the back of that chest posteriorly. This is an area that may be an area of concern for the patient. The patient may be in pain and may be struggling to breathe. This can be a sign that something is wrong with the patient's heart or breathing. If the patient is in pain, try to get them to sit up so that you can see their chest. give you trouble because as we went through the anatomy you have your spine here and you have the scapula here. If you have a patient sort of move their arms forward maybe in their lap to separate those shoulder blades you can get in those little intercal spaces. You have to move your arms forward to separate the shoulder blades so you don't get in the way of the spine. You can also move the patient's arms forward so you can separate the spine and scapulae. better so you can put your diaphragm and listen to those sounds also whenever you're having the patient breathe you want them to breathe in and out through their mouth slowly. You can hear those lungs inflate and deflate however um a lot of patients who may have breathing problems may not be able to hear the sound of their own lungs inflating or deflate. You want to make sure the patient is breathing slowly so that you can hear the sounds of their lungs deflate or inflate. difficulties you'll have to take your time with them because they can hyperventilate easily and and make sure your patient doesn't get dizzy. Take your time while you're having them breathe now let's go over the oscilation side okay first we're going to assess the anterior part of the body and then we'll move on to the posterior part of body. We'll go through the different stages of the procedure and assess the different parts of the patient's body. the chest first and what I like to do is I find the clavicle and um we're going to start at the apex of the lungs the top of the Lungs. We're also going to get our diaphragm which is the big part of your stethoscope and you are going to go to the chest first. The chest is the most important part of the body. It's the place where the heart beats and the lungs breathe. The lungs are the most complex organ in the human body. to place it right slightly above that clavicle where the Apex is. You're going to listen there for a full inspiration and expiration and then you's going to go over and compare on the other side. This is listening to the apex of the lungs then you'regoing to go to the top of your lungs. It's a great way to get a better sense of how your lungs are working and how your body is working. It can also be used as a way to learn more about a person's body. find your second intercal space this is one of those landmarks we were talking about because this is going to assess our upper loes of our right and left lung. This is found mid cularly so the middle of where the clavicle is in the second intercostal space so this is a good place to start. It's also a good spot to look for a good vein in the back of the neck. It is also a great place to find a good blood vessel in the right lung. you will listen here compare your side and then just go a little bit lower maybe into the third intercal space and just keep listening to those upper loes. We're still in the left lobe in the upper lobe. Now we're going to go over here and compare sides now we're in the right middle lobe and this again is mid perly and we're listening in here. We will inch down to the sixth intercostal space but we'll just inch a littlebit down maybe in the fifth. mid axillary so where their armpit is go Midway and we're down in the lower lobe of the lungs. We'll have them in inhale and exhale and then we'll go over and compare it on the other side. We're in the right lower lobe here and assessing this. This is a good way to get a sense of where they are in the body. We want to make sure they're not in the wrong lower lobe. We don't want them to feel like they're in a bad place. and then we'll just inch a little bit down maybe to the seventh space down the lung and just listen in those lower loes a little more and compare sides. And then we're done now let's look at our sides on posterior just like with anterior in the posterior. And we'll do the same thing on the posterior side of the lung. and we'll compare sides on both sides. and then we will go on to the next stage. and the next step is to look at the sides on the anterior side. and so on and so forth. we're going to start from top to bottom and compare sides and work our way down. We're going right above the scapula right where the Apex is and we're Going to listen here and then we're going over to the other side and compare and compare. It's going to be a little bit of a learning experience for us. We'll start from the top to the bottom and then go down from there. It will be a bit of an eye-opening experience for all of us. remember to get the best sound quality so you can hear so you're not listening over the shoulder blades because that will muffle your sound and you won't be able to hear. Have your patient put their arms in their lap or just separate those shoulder blades from each other. If you can't hear, put your patient's arms in your lap. If they can't talk, put their arm in your hand. If that doesn't work, move their arm to the side or put it in a different position. If the patient can't speak, move them to another position. so you can get in between that spine and shoulder blade area then what we're going to do we want to assess first your upper loes. So from C7 to T3 your cervical and thoracic spine that is where your upperLoes are and as you can see here's your upper Loes.so you Can get inBetween that spine & shoulder blade Area then whatWe're Going to Do: Assess First Your Upper loes Then What we're Going To Do: assess First Your Lower Loes Fishers right here and you have the upper loes there so what you want to do is just go in between where the shoulder blades and the spine are and just work your way down. So we're going to listen to our upper Li so we'll go here and then we'll come back to the top of the body and do the same thing. We'll go from the top to the bottom and then back again. We're just going to work our way down so we're not going to go all the way down at once. we'll compare over here and then we'll go down a little bit towards where T3 is listen here still being in the upper lob then we will go over and compare sides from T3 to T10. That will allow us to assess our lower loes so we'll start around T3. We'll go over to T3 and T10 and compare over there and then over to the other side. We're going to start at T3 then go down to T1 and T2 and then T3 again. and work our way down again just staying in between where the scapula and the spine is and we will just compare sides and inch our way way down. You want to move around almost mid aill where you were moving before on anterior so you can just get a better view of the spine. And then you want to work your way down to the bottom of the body. And we will do this again and again until we get to the end of the procedure. We will then move on to the next part of the test. There's three different types of stethoscopes. A tip for whenever you're trying to learn these normal breath sounds is to get a stethoscope listen to yourself or listen to others and get agood feel for what's happening in those lower loes first let's start out talking about normal breathSounds okay there's three types of Stethoscopic. There's three different  types a tip for when you're trying to learn these normal breathalyses is to get a stethoscope. rhythm down for how long inspiration expiration is and where these are located because that's the key with these three different sounds because they're heard in different areas throughout the lung field so let's go over them the first one is bronchial this is heard anteriorly only you're not going to hear this posteriorly anteriorly why because they are mainly hurt over the tracheal area with the stethoscope so up here in this area they are high pitched and loud and you will notice when you listen to them that the inspiration will be slightly shorter than the expiration. The third breath sound is called vesicular this is heard again an both anteriorly and posteriorly and it is heard throughout the peripheral lung Fields. It will have a low pitch that will be sort of soft and inspiration will be greater than expiration. The abnormal breath sounds that you could hear that may be thrown in with those normal breath sounds okay they are separated into continuous.sounds like and the third breath sounds are known as "vesicular" and "breathalyser" and discontinuous now first let's go over continuous what does continuous mean this is a extra sound that you're hearing that is lasting SE more than 2 seconds with a full respiration okay the first type is called a high pitch polyphonic whe let the name help you okay so so what does discontinuous mean? What does discontinuity mean? How does it differ from continuous and discontinuous? What do you mean by discontinuous and continuous? How do you tell the difference between the two? what is it it is mainly heard in expiration so when the patient's breathing out but it can be in Inspiration as well. It is a high pitch musical instrument sound with many different sounds to it that's why it's polyphonic. Another type of Wee you can have is called a low pitch monophonic wheeze and this is again heard mainly in expiration but you can hear it any time. A lot of times you'll hear it whenever the patient’s breathing out it is a low Pitch whistle. so instead of being high pitch like the high pitch wh it's going to be low. It can sound like a whistle or a whine and this is what a low is. It's made up of one sound quality that's all you're going to hear and it can be heard as a whistle. It doesn't have to be high pitch. It could be low or it could be a high pitch sound. It just has to be a sound quality. And that's what we're looking for. Pitch monophonic wi sounds [Music] like and the third type of continuous adventitious breath sound is called stri spider. This is heard on inspiration because what's happening is that the airway is being obstructed by inflammation or some foreign object something like that. Once you hear this you will never forget it's very unique sounding it is a high pitch whistling or gasp with a very harsh quality to it and um patients like pediatric patients if they get the cro or cute epiglottis or you have a patient who has an airway struction you will hear this. sound and this is what Strider sounds like now let's go over the second type of breath sounds abnormal breast sounds called discontinuous. This is an extra sound that you're hearing that is La lasting less than2 seconds okay first type um is coarse crackles crackles for nor Al has nor Al sounds like. We're going to go over some of the other sounds that you may be hearing. We'll be back in a few minutes with an example of what a Strider might sound like. been known as rails so if you hear that that's what it means crackles rails they're interchanged just like ronai and Weis so of course crackles they are mainly heard in Inspiration when the patient's breathing in and can extend into expiration. What it will sound like is a low low low sound like a crackle or a low crackle. It's a sound that can be heard when a patient is breathing in or out. It can also be heard during a patient's expiration when they are breathing out. pitch wet SL bubbling sound and this is what coar crackle sounds like. Second type of discontinuous abnormal sound is called Fine crackles this is heard on inspiration. This is a high pitch crackling sound compared to the coarse crackle this is like low pitch like a bubbling like a pitch wet SL bubbles sound and it is called fine crackles. It is a sound that is similar to a fine crackle but more high pitch. It sounds like a high-pitched crackling noise. noise this fine crackles is high pitch it sounds completely different than coarse crackles and it has like a crackling a fire sound to it. The key with this is that it does not clear when you have the patient cough so you listen you hear that you ask patient to cough and it's still there. This is what it sounds like and the last sound is called a friction rub this is heard both on inspiration and expiration and it is a low pitch harsh grading sound and what's causing this. is that your plora on your lungs those two layers are rubbing against them each other and they normally have this little thin layer of Cirus fluid around the lung but it doesn't right now due to all that inflammation going on. You can actually hear that when that happens so you can actually see the difference in your breathing. It's a sign that something is wrong with your lungs and you're going to need to get help. It can take up to a month for symptoms to subside. patient's breathing in and breathing out so that's why you're hearing it on inspiration and expiration now. It can sound similar to a parac cardial friction rub how do you tell the difference um if you are wanting to know is this the lungs or is it the heart just ask. If you want to know if you're breathing in or breathing out is it your lungs or your heart then ask your doctor. If it's your heart it's probably your heart. If your lungs are breathing out it's likely your heart is breathing in. listen have the patient hold their breath and if you can still hear that harsh grading sound it's the heart because they're holding their breath their lungs aren't moving so you've rolled out the lungs and this is what it sounds like okay that is lung occultation and normal breast cancer. If you can hear the heart and lungs not moving, you've had a breast cancer mastectomy. If the heart is still moving and the lungs are not moving then you've probably had a mammogram. sounds versus abnormal breast sounds don't forget to take the free quiz on the website and check out the other videos in this series to help you with lung oscilation. Thank you so much for watching and please consider subscribing to this YouTube channel. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @MailOnlineLung and @MailonlineLung on Facebook. Back To the pageyou came from, Back to the pages you came From. Click here to follow us on MailOnline Lung.