the turning point for me are the Asian Games the people from the Olympic Committee when they attended this event they were like okay now we get [Music] it hi there my name is Al shalot I'm the CEO of GT Sports uh it's an Esports organization pretty Global they call it. I'm from the UK and I'm originally from London. I've been playing competitively since I was a kid. I play for a team called GT Sports. I also play for Team GB in the rugby union. "We have 13 teams in 10 games on three continents and I'm also a member of the Esports commission the international Olympic Comm" "I've been participating to the conception and Advising the I on what's not public the Olympic sports games and it's the real Madrid ofEsports" "We are the real Real Madrid of Esport," he says. "It's a very exciting time for us. We're looking forward to the next few months." "We're going to be playing some of the best teams in the world in the coming weeks and months," he adds. "I'm excited to see what the future holds" Olympic Games will be an official Olympics Esports event. The event will take place next year. It will be the first time the Olympics has been an official event in the gaming arena. The first official Olympics event will be held in the sport of e-sport. It is set to take place at the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. There will be a team of athletes from around the world who will compete in the event. They will compete against each other in a series of games. so we are going to have dedicated Esports Olympic Games so instead of being kind of like a side gek from the summer games of the Winter Games Esports and gaming as a whole will be the third official Olympic Games. so you have Summer Olympics in Paris this year East sport Olympics next year Winter Olympics after that and again e Sports Olympics before La so it's very exciting um it's going to be a dedicated event to celebrate Gamers and eorts F and why was the decision made to go down that separate route. "I was not part of the decision I was only advising and supporting uh but I would say that it's pretty clear that the Olympics are going to be in Paris next year," he said. "I was I was not involved in the decision to put it in its own year like as you said with the Winter Olympics," he added. "It was pretty clear" that the Olympic Games will be held in Paris, he said, adding: "I would say it is pretty clear." and the wit Olympics are very successful already it's very clear that we need to build the connection with this Olympic movement and the youth. We need to create something special to find the balance between the historical games and the new games and for me it makes absolutely no difference. "For me, it makesabsolutely no difference," he says. "We need to find something special" says IOC chief Thomas Bach. "It makes absolutely little difference," says Bach. 'For me it made no difference at all' sense to pay respect and celebrate gaming by having a dedicated event. You've been advising in the background for a while now. How did you manage to convince them that this was what they wanted to do? I imagine it's a really big event because I imagine that's what they want to do. I think it's going to be a really, really big day for them. I hope it will be a great day for all of them. It's a great way to celebrate gaming and gaming culture. there might have been some people who were quite hard to persuade I did nothing the they came to us with the intent with the the decision with the motivation to do something special for gaming and orts uh it's part of the agenda strategic agenda 2020 plus 5. There were a number of people in the boardroom who were not happy with the decision. There was a lot of debate over whether to go ahead with the plan. But the board decided to go through with it and it's now on the agenda for 2020. to connect with the audience the youth audience where they are and to leverage gaming and Esports to do that so it was strategically cited. "We're just part of a discussion about how to implement it when I think about why now I feel like first of all because now I'm in charge of it," he says. "I feel like we're in control of it now and we're going to use it to our advantage" "It's a great opportunity for us to connect with a younger audience," he adds. "To connect with them and to engage with them in a positive way" now for 20 years Esports and gaming has been growing so it's sure it's clear it's not just a trend or just a something that comes and will go back. We have 20 years of like see seeing like millions of Gamers actually billions now we have millions of people. Now we have Millions of people in the gaming industry. It's a huge growth area for us and it's going to be a big part of our lives for the next 20 years. We're going to see a lot more of this in the future. watching the biggest finals and you know we have also seen like the youth and it's something that's very special for them this is their Sports you know so that's special um I think we have  some International Federation like FIFA with Esports FC basketball cycling with swift that that's also very special. I'm looking forward to seeing what the future has in store for us in the sport of football in the future. I hope we'll see a lot more of each other in the coming years. have been very successful at using the gaming and the entertainment of virtual games to connect with audence with borts so there's less of like a fear and more kind of an excitement for the the potential and finally I would say the turning point for me are the Asian. Have you ever played a virtual game? If so, please share your story with CNN iReport. Visit CNN.com/sport to share your memories of playing virtual games with friends and family in the U.S. and Canada. Games the Asian Games officially added League of Legend and other games on their list. "Suddenly you had like a lot of people watching," says Olympic Committee official. "I think the people from the Olympic Committee when they attended this event they like okay now we get it," he adds. The Asian Games will be held in Jakarta and Palembang, South Korea, from September 26 to October 1. The games will take place in front of a crowd of more than 100,000 people. "We need to take it seriously something that's a little bit different compared to the summer and the Winter Olympics," he says. "We see that this brings so much potential to connecting with this generation that we need to taking it seriously" He adds: "At least in the short term they're not going to be as popular as the Summer Olympics. But they're going to have a big impact on our lives in the long term. It's a very exciting time for us all" moving around very much they're going to be in one location can you explain why Saudi Arabia as the host I'm not sure that from from what I heard um this is a strategic partnership with a with with a host that has a lot of capabilities and we can talk about that in a second. They just said that it's going to come regularly to to be hosted in Saudi so my understanding is that that means that we'll go several times but not all the time just to to put this into context. Saudi Arabia have shown that they are committed for the long term. The local authorities in in Saudi are very passionate and very supportive for eorts. They just created a massive events with orts World Cup and they have shown they're committed for a long term second is like they do it for. Saudi Arabia are committed to the long-term and that's what they've shown by hosting the World Cup in the first place. They've also shown they are passionate for the short-term as well as the longer-term. a reason I think 70% of their constituents are passionate Gamers um and and if you're a gaming publisher or gaming team like us this is the fastest growing region of the world right now for gaming and eort so this is why finally I would just like PC always to always be the way it's always been in the gaming industry. I think that's the reason why I'm so keen to see PC always the way that it is in the games industry in the future. I just want it to be as good as it's ever been. brought the idea to bring a property and events to a country to create some bridges. I remember when when Beijing was elected to host for some Olympics it created kind of like a a moment of like creating Bridges with like China and I I see the same way with this project. I see it as an opportunity to create bridges with people in the UK and across the world. I think it's a great way to start a new relationship with the UK. I'm looking forward to it. gaming entertainment in general could be a breach now for Saudi Arabia. There's been a lot of criticism about Saudi Arabia as a host uh some LGBT players uh women saying that they don't feel like they'd be welcome are. Saudi Arabia has been criticized for its treatment of women in the past. The country is home to the world's largest prison system, which has been home to some of the worst human rights abuses in recent history. It is also home to one of the largest prison systems in the world, with more than 100,000 inmates. you expecting to have those kind of conversations with some of the national Olympic committees. At the very least is that something that came up when you were advising the ioc on this. We have not been involved in the discussion with the host cities. I know several City I know some City. I have been asked to give an opinion on whether or not I think it would be a good idea for London to host the 2016 Olympics. I would say that it would not be a bad idea, but I would also point out that we would have to wait and see what happens. apply and and wanted to be the host uh this 12 years partnership sounds like a amazing opportunity to have a fing partner to launchable property. "What I would say is that you know we we have been attending multiple events all over the world with or teams," he said. "We have been attended multiple events ... we have had a lot of fun," he added. "It's been a great experience for all of us. We're looking forward to the next 12 years," the CEO said. and we have been super well treated in in Riyad when we attended G 8 and this summer is Sports World Cup. There's a there's a lot of commitment on their side also to to show all the changes that they are implementing in their country and I know there is a lot more to come for them in the next few months. I'm looking forward to meeting them and seeing what they have to say about our country. I know they have a lot to offer us and I'm excited to get to know them. to use this platform to to be open to anyone I think that's the way they describe it um so I look forward to it uh. What I would say is like as a team as a as as as players as athletes we want them to to play in the game that we want to see them play in. That's what I would like them to be able to do. I think they can do it. I'm looking forward to seeing them play. I've never seen them play like that. the the best tournaments the best teams and therefore want everybody to participate so you mentioned the Esports World Cup there uh it feels like we've got lots of big new announcements lots of tournaments. Are we in danger of having too many things going on I don't think so. I think we're in a good place. We're going to have a great year. I'm looking forward to it. I've got a lot of exciting things coming up. I can't wait to see what the future holds. I think this this one would be very different from anything we have seen in the past the same way I think the Esports workup is very different. So if these new events are.and and we can talk about it but I think this would be a very different event. I think it would be different from what we've seen before. And I'm looking forward to seeing what the future has in store for us. I'm excited to see what the next few months have in store. I can't wait to find out. bringing value to the community to the to the players to the fans and they are clearly positioned. I think there's room for new events in addition I would say we are very focused on let's say Counter Strike or do 2 maybe League of Legend which are games where we want to focus on bringing value to players and the community. We are veryfocused on let’s say Counterstrike or do two maybeleague of Legend. We’re looking at a number of different games, including Counter Strike and Counter Strike: Global Offensive. it's true there's a lot of competition but there's also other games that don't have enough stage to play on. We would love to have more opportunities for players to go on and so I think if it's maybe true that in it's possible that in the future there will be more stage for the players to play. It's a very exciting time for the game and I'm looking forward to seeing what the future holds for us in the Premier League and in the Champions League. I'm also excited about the prospect of playing in the World Cup. some games we already a pack calendar there so many games that are not. The benefits of events like Esports World Cup and now the Olympic Esports games is that it's going to be multigame. All the smaller games or game that don't benefit from as much support will benefit from more support from the IOC. The Olympic Games will be held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The games will be part of the 2016 Olympic Games. The Games will take place between July 16 and July 21. from their publisher to have international events will benefit and all players will have more stage to show their performance. Do we have any idea of which ones we might see which ones will be at the first event? I don't know which ones. I I I will let you know at the end of this article. I will also let you in on which games will be on show at the event. I won't tell you which ones, but I will say that there will be a lot of them. will not announce it now because I'm not in charge I'm just advising but I would say that what I hear and and for the intent that they shown it's all about balance finding the balance between uh sport simulation EFC for football or basketball viral sports like Swift for. Will be available for download in the next few weeks. Will not be available in the U.S. for the foreseeable future. Will only be available on the UK market. Will have a trial version of the app available in early 2015. cycling and traditional Sports and for tradition Sports I think there's a clear opening for mobas. League of Legend or mobile Legend like games that are a bit more strategic and away from Sports simulation also Fantasy games like rocket League. I know last year we were in rocket League last year. I think this year we're going to be in more traditional sports simulation games like cycling and traditional sports and for traditional Sports. It's a great time to be a sports fan. I'm looking forward to it. Singapore and we had an exhibition for Rocket league so apparently this kind of game will be official titles and not just exhibition so all those games you've mentioned pretty uncontroversial. We've got mobas we've got rocket League uh you know we've also got sports games do you want to play? You know you can play Rocket League. You can play mobas. You could play rocket league. You've got to play moba. You have to play rocket League. There's a lot of different ways to play the game. think that there could ever be an Olympic branded event that has a shooting game in it though like do you think that's ever so it's going to be possible to have a shooter under Olympic branding if if you ask me I believe so if I ask me is what I think. I believe that it is possible for a shooting event to be part of the Olympics. But I don't think that it's ever going to happen. I think it's a long way off. I'm not sure if it will ever happen. it g to happen next year probably not I think there's kind of like a it's it's a common theme to talk about which sports or which disciplines are featured in the Olympic Games. If you look at the first edition of the Olympic games it actually they were poetry competition and as you can as you probably know poetry is no longer on the official program so I think uh it's totally possible that in the future uh finding the balance as always between popularity relevancy and a certain fit with the values that the Olympic Committee wants to. project this kind of game will be futureed but it we we have we have advanced so fast in the last few years to come to. There's no way Sports would be ever with Olympics to we're GNA have a dedicated competition hosted by the Olympic Committee with Esports games. It's a very exciting time for us at GNA and we're looking forward to what the future has in store for us. We hope to see a lot more of this in the coming years and years. aside of same level as simulation and virtual that I'm I have to be optimistic and and I'm very positive. One of the big criticisms of the Esports World Cup is that there were 22 events just one of them specifically for women. The other 21 were open but there's not a huge amount of female participation uh at the moment at that event. When it comes to this Olympics event it's not esports World Cup it's eort as a whole has an industry who failed to represent women so. far we have 50% of the players globally that happens to be women when they play video games and then when you go to the pro stage and the high level of competition and World Cup and things like that less than 0.00001% happens to are women. So we failed so we have to change that. We need to change the way we think about women in sport. We have to be more accepting of women in our society. We must accept that we are not the same as our male counterparts in many ways. them maybe because we we didn't do all job in terms of education and they have a lot of like like toxicity when they play online. Maybe because we don't give them enough chances at G2. We created teams we provide them the same support from a staff point of view. We provide them with the same help and support as other teams. We don't do a very good job of giving them the opportunities they deserve. We create teams we create teams and give them same support as others. view to elevate the Excellence but it's not the case for all teams. "There's not a lot of competition if if you don't qualify for the Mixed environment which is very difficult" "You don't have a place to perform and Inspire the next" "If you're not in a Mixed environment then you're out of the game" "It's very difficult to get into the Mixed team. It's a very tough environment to be in. You have to be very good to get in" generation of players so as an industry be failed and I'm very excited because I think one of the direction that these events will take is 50/50. The goal is to do 50/ 50 sometime by having mixed teams and you know when you have five you can't have 50-50 you. I think that's the direction these events are going in. I'm excited to see what the future has in store for us. It's a very exciting time for me and I can't wait to see how it goes. have to choose three or two but sometime also bian dedicated tournaments one for women one for male. There's a commitment to a for full par and that's super exciting because the Olympic Games it took them 120 years to get to that point. Paris Olympics this summer will be the first time in 100 years that the French capital has hosted an Olympic Games. The first time a French Olympic Games has been held in Paris in 120 years. The last time was held in London in 1896, and the first was in 1900. 50% of the athletes will be women 50% will be male. The goal is to to reach this target from day one and that will be a game changer not for the Olympics but for Esports that's 50/50. The first edition of the Esports Olympics will take place in London in September. The event will be the first of its kind and will be open to the general public. It will be held at the Olympic Stadium in London and will run from September 26 to September 28. a pretty big thing to aim for and I imagine some of the people listening watching this will be thinking how are you actually going to do it. What's going to change before next year to make sure that happens talented and gifted players are there. We don't give them the chance to be at the top of our game. That's what we're going to try and change. We're not going to give them a chance to get to the top. We want them to be the best they can be. enough chances to perform the highest level and we don't give them enough uh path to become Pros so I think this uh is one part of the equation. I think event like this one will inspire the next generation of players will show to the players that it's possible to be a pro. It will inspire them to want to be the best they can be. It's a great way to start your career. I'm excited to see what the future has in store for me and my family. to perform with the highest level and then it will be the job of the rest of the industry to build the the step stones to get there and so at the short term it would be either depending of each title probably either a dedicated tournament for woman or for men. "It will be either either adedicated tournament for women or a dedicated tournaments for men," she said. "I don't think there is a single answer to how to get to the top of the sport," she added. a full mix tournament where it's possible uh but I'm very positive and affirmative that this will make a huge step forward and help the whole industry to to get better. It kind of sounds like the doors now a little bit closed for Esports to appear alongside other sports. It's possible that it will be able to compete with other sports in the future. But it's very early to tell if that will be possible in the near future. It will be interesting to see what the future holds for the sport. uh in LA in 2028 at those Olympics uh and you know it's got its own separate event but there might be some people who might feel a bit disappointed about that potentially it's not my role to say yes or no because I'm not decision maker but I would. "I would say yes," he said. "It's not a decision that I would make. It's just that it's something that would be interesting to look at and to think about and to look forward to" just say that I'm not aware of any plans to to include video games or Esports in the Summer Olympics. uh organizing Olympics games like winter or summer is a huge logistical challenge. One of the idea from the ioc has always been to say okay can we can we, says IOC president Thomas Bach. Bach: There are currently no plans for video games to be part of the Summer Olympic Games. "There are no plans to be included in the summer Olympics," says Bach. "We have always been open to the idea of having video games in the Olympics," adds Bach. "It would be difficult for any City to host it if we keep growing again and again so by creating a a dedicated competition I think it gives more space for more game title to be featured it give more room for.do smaller or can we stop growing," says the City's chief executive. The competition will be held every month until the end of the season. For more information on the competition, visit the competition's official website. Click here for all the latest news from the competition. celebration of gaming and ort instead of being one of the additional Sports I Come Just As exhibition or just as a visit. For me it's a very satisfying solution to believe that now Esports will be at the same level as winter and summer olympics from the point of view of a spectator. I'm looking forward to seeing what the future holds for the sport of gaming in the future. I hope it will be a very exciting and exciting time for all of us. I'll see you in London in a few weeks. of view of someone who runs a team uh one of the most successful teams in the world. What kind of impact will this have on your players because uh you know they might be getting pulled away to compete in these big International tournaments. There might be different ways in which the players will be affected by the changes in the rules and the way they will be able to play. It will be interesting to see how the players react to the new rules and how they are able to adapt to them. connections they can form with players what's the impact going to be what's going to change I I see the long term okay I don't want to talk about oh who's going on to pay them should we be should we receive innity because we we give our players to the Premier League. I'm not going to get into that right now. I've got a lot more important things to do than talk about who's gonna pay them. I'll talk to you about that later. teams it's probably going to be a small tournament for each game so it's not going to impact massively the calendar and on the other side it has huge potential. I was in Singapore last year when or rocket League women's team was playing on stage and participated to the tournament. It's probably Going to be A small tournament. for each games so it’s not Going to impact hugely the calendar. On the other hand, it hashuge potential. It has huge Potential. opening ceremony under the the Olympics logos this is amazing the pride in their eyes is the fact that the parents had to find a passport for them to travel to represent. I think this is what I want for every single players of G2 and I believe this will be the case for the rest of the year. I believe it will be a big step in the right direction for G2. I hope this is the start of a great thing for the future of the sport. I am looking forward to it. also help us to connect with the BBC and talk to a mainstream audience about something that they don't know. Discover this amazing Community this amazing passion the the Quest for excellence and the individuals that will become the heroes to win the trophy for the national. Help us to talk to an audience that doesn't know about our community and help us connect with a BBC audience that don't knows about our Community. Visit www.bbc.co.uk/sport to find out more about the BBC Sports Personality Awards. G2.team are set to launch a new team called the G2. team. The team will compete in the World Cyber Games. G2 are looking to break through to an audience that are not passionate about gaming. The G2 team are hoping to raise the profile of the sport in a way that will help them compete with the likes of Team USA and Team USA. G 2.team will play in the world's first ever World CyberGames. The event will take place in Beijing, China, on November 28 and 29. and when there's that first event we've got people competing and there are the Olympic rings on screen alongside Esports what impact is that going to have what's going to change. I think for the parents it would be a a moment of immense PR Pride for the people from the people in the UK. It would be an incredible moment of pride for all of us. It's a huge moment for us and we're all looking forward to it. We're so excited to be a part of it. the city it will be someone that they don't know that become an Olympian and represent them and for the country will be you know this national pride that we have seen from all the competition in football recently. People come together and celebrate the heroes of their country. It will be a day of national pride and celebration for the city and the country. We will be looking forward to seeing what the future has in store for us in the coming weeks and months. We hope to see a lot of great things in the future. so I think it's going to make a huge difference of like touching emotionally people that have not been touched so far by easts. And a last one for me obviously we don't know the kind of details of what opening ceremony there's Going to be um but if it's. If it's not, I don't want to think about it. I just want to go home. I want to be with my family. I'm going to go to bed. I've got to sleep. similar to the summer and winter games uh there'll be something you know with a flag ceremony uh probably at the beginning of the games. What kind of emotions will there be for you when you see that finally happen well I'm French so I I will cheer for the the national team, he says. He says he will be cheering for the French national team as well as the U.S. team. He adds that he will also cheer for his country's women's soccer team. "I'm French. I'll cheer for my country," he says, "as well as my women's football team" of League of Legend uh potentially with one of my players on representing my country uh playing against the Spanish team we have been dreaming of this like France against Spain with the best player of the World in League ofLegend for years um so that's exciting for me. "We have been dreamt of this for years," he says of playing against Spain in the show. "It would be a dream come true" he adds. "I would love to play against one of the best players in the world in the game" as a as a fan not as a professional just as a fans. I think you know to see some of the players that we selected when they were underage that we help become the best version of them themselves as athletes being selected to represent the USA. We help them become better versions of themselves. I'm a fan of the U.S. team. I want to see them win the World Cup. I don't want them to lose the World cup. I would love to see us win it. I'd love to watch them play. their country wherever the country we have Chinese players we have malesian players. We have French players German players Turkish players American players at G2 make will make me super proud. We've got lots of events in Esports already what makes this one different I think the main thing and I think this one will be different as well. I'm looking forward to seeing what the future holds for G2 and the world of gaming. I hope to see you all at the G2 World Cup in South Korea. and that's something we have been discussing a lot is this idea of national teams like it's in the DNA of Olympic games. People don't represent the club they represent their country they have a national flag a National Equipment apparel uh and for us that that that makes sense, says the England manager. "We have a lot of work to do to get to the top of our game," he says. "It's a long way to go, but we're getting there" says England boss Roy Hodgson. this event very special there has been some small minor events with amateur players representing the country but nothing that ambition to be the best player of the world in the biggest games with national teams. "I'm very excited about that and that makes by definition this event veryspecial," he says. "It's very exciting to be part of a team that can compete with the best players in the world," he adds. "That's what this event is all about. It's about. I'm excited to be a part of that team." special the parity in terms of like uh balance between over multiple games is also something special aside from Bas Force World Cup. Normally we go to an event for one game if a rocket League or Counter Strike or do tattoo this time again it will be very multi-game. It will be a very special event. It's not just a one-off event, it's a multi-year event. We're looking forward to it. We've got a lot of great stories to tell. like his world cup and then finally uh the mixity in gender which I think is very important desperately needed by Esports industry. It will give us an opportunity for the best player of the world to Showcase their talent and Inspire the Next Generation to believe it's possible for them to be the best in the world. I think it will be a great addition to the game. I'm looking forward to seeing how it pans out. I've been a fan of the game for a long time. "I think um if if.me to have a ro to play in Esports at a professional level just to follow that one up obviously you talked to lots of Esports players in your team is there a real want to compete under the national flag people want to do it" he said. "I thinkUm if. me to have an ro to playing inEsports at a pro level. Just to follow up that one. I think um um if. Me to havea ro to plays inEsport at aprofessional level" He added. "There is a real desire in the country to have that" you follow a bit like the conversation about but uh rocket league and OverWatch back in the days at the at the World Cup for for their game. and and and League of Legend also often have this conversation about creating the Euro Cup or the World Cups. yeah everybody everybody everybody. It's a little bit like that, but it's a lot more serious. I mean, we're talking about creating a World Cup, not just a Euro Cup. I think that's what we're trying to do. wants to see what a dennish team will do against Corin I I would love to see it too you know so um I've seen a lot of players making the the guess or what the team could look like. So his aspiration to be part is is clearly part of what he wants to do. He wants to be a part of a team that can beat Corin. He would like to play for a team which can beat a team who can't beat him. He'd like to be in a team with players who can do that. of the discussion of the discussion on this article. Click here to read the rest of the article and join the discussion online at CNN.com/soulmatestories. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @jennifer_eppolls on Facebook. Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter @cnnliving. Back to the page you came from for more of the latest CNN Living coverage of the 2014 Winter Paralympic Games and Paralympics in Sochi.