For individuals entering the labor market for the first time, there's some good news and some bad news. The good news is that the higher earners, or those with postgraduate degrees, are earning more than ever before. The bad news is this: In the year 2000, in the United States, the median household income was $44,000. That figure has risen to $60,000 in the U.S. today. That's an increase of more than 20 percent since 2000. The average household income has risen from $42,000 to $55,000 since 2000, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. four-year college grads actually earned more with their entry jobs than they're earning today. Having a college degree means you have a much lower chance of unemployment than if you don't finish college at all. But overall, what we see is a lot of waste of talent, of human capital -- people who finish college degrees but don't have the right skills to get a job. In the year 1970, only 1 out of 100 taxi drivers had a college degrees. These days it's about 15 out of100. the best jobs. So there's good and bad news from the labor market. How do we think about what's been driving it? Well, we should go back to the core economic concepts. That is, the supply and demand for labor. To think about how those supplies are being met, we need to look at the economy as a whole. We need to see how the economy is changing as a result of changes in the global economy. We also need to think about the role of technology in changing the economy. and demands have changed, let's start with the factor of technology. Technology has changed, and this has altered supply and demand. So think about a lot of older jobs. They were based in manufacturing. You worked in a factory. Maybe you didn't need a college degree at all, but you did need a job. You needed to be able to make a living. You had to have a job, and you had to make money. You couldn't do it if you had no skills. didn't necessarily need that much fancy training. A lot of people could take these jobs and that helped build the American middle class. Today it's different. You're much more likely to work with computers and work with information technology. And this will affect both the supply and demand of different jobs in the U.S. It will affect the number of people who can get a job and the wages they can earn. It's going to affect the economy in a number of different ways, and it will have a big impact on the economy. kinds of labor. The computer enhances the productivity of the skilled laborer. Information technology makes it possible for skilled labor to sell their products around the entire world. And that makes skilled labor much more powerful than manual labor. That's what's happening in the U.S. and around the world, he says, and it's a very good thing for the country and the world. It's a win-win situation for all of us, he adds, but it's especially good for the U.,S. it possible for wages at the top to be higher. At the same time, with information technology, that can be pretty hard to learn. So the supply there is more limited. Now let's think about how to get the best out of the best of the rest of the talent out of this talent pool. That's what we're going to try to do in the next few years. We'll have to wait and see how the economy develops before we know what the outcome will be. But we'll have a better idea of what the future holds. Less-skilled labor might find it harder to work with computers. In the old days, if you would have gotten a job as a clerk filing papers, well now we do. The computer actually might be competing with you, too, and it might be harder for you to get a job with a computer that's less-skilled than you are. It might even be harder to get the job with the computer than it is with you. It could be even more difficult for you if the computer is more skilled than you. that with software. People just book online. So changing technology has made wages rise more at the top. But it has held wages down for a lot of other jobs. And new technology is making it harder to get a job as a travel agent, for example. For more information on how to apply for a job in the UK, go to: www.gov.uk/careers. For a job on the road, visit a local travel agency or call the National Travel Office on 08457 90 90 90. For jobs in the back office, call a local taxi service on 0800 555 111. college graduates are experiencing that when they go into the labor market. The second factor of supply and demand has to do with the growth in global markets. Over the last 35 years, we've seen at least two billion new workers inglobal markets, often in China and in India, according to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. It's a sign of things to come, the chamber says, as the global economy continues to grow and demand for workers increases. The U.N. estimates there will be more than 2.5 billion new jobs by the end of the year. because those countries are now wealthier, freer and more open. Think about how this affects skilled labor. Let's say you're a worker really good at working with computers. Maybe you work at Apple, and you help design the iPhone. Well, there's now a much bigger market -- the whole world. It's not just the U.S., it's the rest of the world, too, and it's going to get bigger and bigger as the world gets wealthier and freer. -- you can sell to, and this means the value of your labor, and thus your wages, will be higher. At the same time, say you're a lesser-skilled worker. Well, there are now more people in the global economy you have to compete with. And a lot of them work in the U.S., which means your wages will go up too, as well as their wages. It's a vicious cycle, but it's a good one for the economy. pretty hard and they're being paid lower wages. A third set of factors has to do with slower economic growth, slower productivity. So if you don't have a special skill, you might find your job prospects aren't doing so well, because on the supply side, there's more competition for you. If you have a different skill, there is more competition on the demand side, so you might not be as well-placed for a job as you would have been if you had a different skills. The number of start-ups in the U.S. has been declining each decade since the 1980s. That means there are fewer new jobs, which means there is less of a demand for new jobs. The number of new jobs has also been declining in recent years, which has led to a decline in the economy's dynamism. The American economy has been experiencing slower growth and slower dynamism in the past few years, according to a report by the American Institute for Economic Research. for new labor, and that makes it harder for a new college graduate to get the job he or she wants at the right wage. When productivity growth is low, dynamism is lower, there is less turnover in jobs. And that can be fine if you're an incumbent who already already has the job you want. But it's not so good if you want to hire someone who doesn't already have the job they want. It's a vicious cycle that can only get worse if it's allowed to continue. has a great job, but if you're just starting off, that's going to make things for you tougher. Another way in which labor markets have become more static is that more and more jobs now require what is now called occupational licensing, namely legal permission to do the job at a job. The U.S. has one of the highest unemployment rates in the world, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The unemployment rate is currently at 4.7 per cent, the lowest level since 2000. Right now, over a quarter of the jobs in the United States require this kind of legal permission, often coming from a state or local government. It may make sense for some jobs, but should it really be the case that you need a legal license to be a. all-in-all. employee? Weigh in with your thoughts below and let us know what you think in the comments below. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. The page you were from. barber, or to be an interior decorator? That increases the cost of entering those sectors, it means a lot of time and some money, to get the license. Again, it's good for the incumbents, who face less competition, but it's bad for people starting off in the labor market. You want to be a barber? You need to have a license. You need a license to do interior decorating? You must have a licenses to do barbering. put all of those factors together, and then what we had happen in this country was the Great Recession starting in 2008. This meant that output was declining, employment was declining. People were laid off. There was a financial crisis. What did a lot of employers do? Well, they froze. And that's what happened in the U.S. as a result of the financial crisis and Great Recession. It's been a very, very difficult time for people in the United States, and it's going to get worse. their hiring. So again, if you were out there trying to get a new job these years, or immediately thereafter, it was harder. And we know from the data that people who start working during bad economic times -- it's slower for them to climb the future ladder of success," he says. "It's a very, very difficult time for people to start a new career," he adds. "You have to be really, really good at what you do, and you have to have a lot of confidence" So even 5 years out,10 years out,. they're earning lower wages or receiving fewer promotions than otherwise would have been the case. So this has led to a persistent effect on American labor, which has limited opportunities. So to sum it all up, the labor market is more about skills than it is about wages and benefits, according to the report. The report says the U.S. labor market has been in decline for more than a decade and is expected to continue for at least another decade. Finishing college is a great idea, but these days it's no longer enough. What really matters is how much value you can produce for an employer. Labor markets are ruled by supply and demand, and supplies and demands are changing all the time. So the way the way out of college is changing faster than ever before. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, Back to thepage you came From. Back into the page. Take a look at the relative wages of, say, engineering majors versus psychology or communications majors. You might be surprised. In today's world, the momentum is moving toward people who are trained to work in a certain way. To do well in labor markets is to understand those supplies and those demands. To think about how to do well, think about the demand and the supply of workers in the U.S. Today, the demand for workers is higher than it has been in the past. in information technology, who work well with computers and who can exploit growing global markets. When supply and demand are ruling labor markets, the people who do well are those who have an economic understanding of where is demand high, and where is supply scarce. Check out our practice at our practice in information technology at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/business/how-to-make-money-in-information-technology-and-who-can-exploit-growing-global-markets. questions to test your money skills. Next up, we'll show you where to find data to help you decide which career to choose. We'll also show you how to get the most out of your bank account and how to use your bank details to make the most of your tax refund. And we'll look at how to find the best bank accounts for you to use in your next job. We hope to see you on the next episode of The Money Show on Monday, November 14 at 9pm ET.