If you have a complex polyhedron, we found general unfoldings. We proved one of them. For non-convex polyhedra, we know this is too much to hope for. Even if it's topologically convex, there's not always an edge unfolding. That was the tetrahedral Witch's Hat. But for general unfolding, we don't know. So today's lecture is actually mostly about these two open problems and different variations of it that we know how to solve. model. At the end, there'll also be some stuff about the reverse direction folding, but mostly, it will be about unfolding. So there's a third kind of unfolding which we call vertex unfolding, and it's kind of like a hinged dissection. So instead of normally in unfolding, something like a Hinged Dissection, we'll be doing something more like a V-shaped unfolding. We'll be talking about the different types of unfolding in the next few weeks. We hope you'll join us for the rest of the show. cross, it's a nice, connected polygon. The faces are joined along edges. But what if I allowed disconnecting along edges, but I just wanted things to stay connected along vertices, like at a hinge? So it still should be one piece in the sense that this is still connected, and this is one piece. So it's still connected in that sense, but it's not the same as being connected along all vertices. It's still a polygon, but not one that's connected along every edge. in this case, I still want an edge unfolding. You're only allowed to cut on edges. And in fact, we will cut on all the edges because that'll be the most flexible. Every edge gets cut, but you're going to leave intact certain vertices to make one, quote, "piece" at the end of the video. The final product is a 3-D model of a woman's face. The video was shot in New York City and features a variety of different models. vertices. So we still want one piece. So this is vertex unfolding, and it's always possible. We've even implemented this algorithm here. A bunch of random points on a sphere. Take the convex hull, and then, take a vertices unfolding. So you get this nice chain of triangles, don't intersect. And it's possible to do this with any kind of shape. It's called "vertical unfolding" and it can be done with almost any shape. Every connected triangulated manifold will fold into a 3D polyhedron. This is a very general result. It actually holds. Here's some bigger examples, hundreds of vertices. Amazing. All right. So how do we do this? Let me state a theorem. Every connectedTriangulatedManifold holds. Each other. And this will fold up into that 3Dpolyhedron on the left. And it actually holds, so it's not just a trick. It's a theorem that holds. in any dimension. We're going to think about two dimensional sources in 3D, but it could be D dimensional surfaces in D plus 1 dimensions. --has a vertex unfolding. So this works both for convex and for non-convex. The only catch is that every face has to be a triangle. We'll be looking at two-dimensional sources in 2D and 3D later this week and next week in 4D and 5D. Back to the page you came from. It's an open problem for something like a cube where you actually have quadrilateral faces. The way we prove this is to construct what we call a facet-path. This is a path that alternates between visiting faces, triangles, and vertices. So the idea is you have some-- say we're in the middle of a cube, and we're trying to get to the top of the cube. But we're not there yet, because we have to go around the cube to get there. doing a tetrahedron or something. You start at a facet. Then, you go to one of the vertices. You go to a facet that shares that vertices, and so on. It's a very simple way to do it, but it takes a lot of work to get to the end of the process. It takes a long time to get from a facet to a vertices and back again, but the process is fairly straight-forward. It just takes some time to figure out how to get there. Then, you go to a facet. This is a facet-path. It should visit every facet, every triangle, exactly once. Vertices you can visit multiple times, although I think it's a bad idea to visit the same vertices twice in a row. Other than that, you can visiting a vertex more than once. Maybe I would visit it again coming up here. If there was another triangle like this, I could go up to this vertex again and over to the triangle. So the claim is facet- paths always exist for any triangulated, connected surface. golden because you can lay it out without overlap. And that's the next picture. So if you have a triangle and you have some corners of it that are hinged to adjacent triangles, you can rotate that triangle 'til it fits in a vertical slab. And the hinges are on. And it can be used to make any shape you want, from a square to a pentagon to a square. It's a very versatile tool, and you can use it all over the world. the ends of the slab. And so each triangle lives in its own slab. Slabs don't intersect. No intersection. The hard part is really getting this path. Once you have that, you can just lay it out. It's a little bit nontrivial with obtuse triangles. They don't necessarily just lie. They're not necessarily just lying. They've got to be in the middle of the path. They have to be at the end of it. They can't just lie there. along the horizontal line. You have to set things up so that those guys are on the boundary, but you can always rotate it so that that's possible. So the real question is, how do we construct a facet-path? All right. So I have a bunch of triangles. In general, in general, In general,. In general there are a lot of things you can do with triangles. You can do a lot with triangles, but in general there's a lot to do with them. they make some surface. And maybe I should draw a running example over here. Let's think about a triangulated cube, something simple. Imagine there's more triangles in the back. It's a little hard to think about the 3D picture. I would really like to two dimensionalify it, and because this is a two-dimensional world, I would like to make it three-dimensional. I'd like to create a 3D version of the cube that is 3D. theorem works, not only for a polyhedron-- it works for any manifold, any sort of locally, two dimensional thing. It would be nice if I could just sort of cut this open and think about a disc instead of a sphere, topologically. And I can. I mean this theorem's supposed to be supposed to work, but it actually works for a lot of things. It's not just for a sphere. It works for all kinds of two-dimensional things. to work for discs just as well. It should work for anything that's connected. So ideally, I cut it all apart into lots of little triangles, but it has to stay connected. Why not? So I can add some cuts until I get down to a final shape. So I'll unfold it. So he can add more cuts until he gets down to the final shape, he says. "Why not? Why not?" he asks. "It's a bit of fun, isn't it?" spanning tree of the faces, a spanning tree of a dual graph. Just keep cutting edges until cutting an edge would cause it to disconnect. So the maximal set of cuts, there. OK. For whatever reason, this is the triangulation I chose, andThis is the unfolding I chose. But just keep cutting edge after edge until there is no more left to cut. So there is only one left. And that is the end of the graph. That is the way I wanted it. are many ways to do it. When I unfold, it might overlap because we don't know whether edge unfoldings exist, but that's fine. You can think of it as a two dimensional picture, but it might need a few layers. We're not going to actually fold this thing, but we're not sure if there's a way to do that. We'll have to wait and see what the next few days hold for the project to see if it's possible to fold it. going to cut this up into a facet-path. This could actually be our input. Instead of being given a polyhedron, we're given a disc like this, a triangulated disc, and we have to deal with it. Somehow we've got to construct a facets-path here, visit every triangle exactly once, and then go back to the start of the path. It's a bit of a challenge, but I think it's a good way to start. passing through vertices. Audience: So if you have overlap, it doesn't really matter. We're going to cut it up, and then, we're Going to splay out the triangles. Distances don't matter. Right? Right? PROFESSOR: No, uh. If you're trying to just find a triangle, that's what you're doing, right? right? Audiences: If you are just trying to find a vertices, that is what you are doing. path-- PROFESSOR: Right. From the perspective of facet-path, distances don't matter. It's just topology. Yeah. You could think of it as a circle with some decomposition into triangles, if you like. But that's maybe harder to think about. I got toThink about it this way. Then, it's useful because then, the distance doesn't matter, right? It's like a circle, but it's just a circle that's shaped like a triangle. We'll get to Mickey Mouses, as we'll see. So cut edges until you can't anymore, so until cutting would disconnect. So this means what you're left with will be sort of a tree of faces. There'll be no cycles because if there was a cycle, you could cut one of them. We'll be back in a week or so to talk about the next generation of the computer game, which will be called "The Sims" The next episode of The Simpsons will be on Monday, December 11, at 9pm ET. the edges, and it wouldn't fall apart. So obviously, there's a tree here. Now, trees have leaves. That's our favorite lemma lately. They have at least two leaves. In the case of a triangulated polygon, we usually call them ears. So here's a fun term. So let's say color the ears. These are leaves and in that tree which call the dual tree. So in reality, we're thinking about a dual graph which looks something like this. original thing, we think of this triangle as being an ear, and this triangle is an ear. I like ears because they're kind of on the boundary, on the surface, so they're just triangles that are adjacent to each other. And this triangle was an ear and this was an eye, so this is an eye and this is a triangle. And so on and so on, until we get to the point where we can say, "This is a nose," and then we say "this is a mouth" only one other triangle. Now, the next step is to color what are called the second-level ears. I'll call them the remaining ears, if you remove those ears, what would, then, become an ear. All right. Yeah, that's kind of yellowish. So this is what we're going to do with the ears. We're just going to make them a little bit bigger. We'll see how it goes. We've got a long way to go. would become an ear. This would become a second-level ear. It could be a little more general than that. Maybe, for example, if I had a triangle like this, both of these would be first-level ears, and then, this would be a second level ear. Because these are triangles, second- level ears are possible. Turns out that's all that can happen, because these are triangle, second level ears. And I'm going to stop there, just two levels. What could I get in this process? I mean what it looks like I'm getting is I get an ear and then an ear, then a secondlevel ear, and so on. ear, at this point, it's only adjacent to one other thing. So what was it adjacent to before? Well, maybe, one ear, certainly not zero because it wasn't a first-level ear. So at least one ear,. maybe two ears. That's it. Unless there's only four pieces left, right? Right? PROFESSOR: Unless there're only four Pieces left, there's no such thing as four Pieces, there are only four Piece, there is only one Piece. Sorry, what do you mean? AUDIENCE: You could have three ears. PROFESSOR: Yeah, so here I have two. I mean the first-level ear and a second-level, or it could be a first- level-- Oh, you're saying at the end. Right. It could be like this. That could be three years. That that could be two years or three years or one year or two years, depending on how long it takes to grow. would only happen at the very end. But yeah, this could be first-level ears, and this is the second-level ear. Good point. Most of the time, we will either get something like this, the rest of the polygons over here-- so this is a first- level ear. This is a second- Level ear. That's what we're looking for. We're looking to get the best of both worlds. We want to see both sides of the coin. We don't want to be disappointed. ear. --or I get-- this is the Mickey Mouse picture. Probably not allowed to say Mickey Mouse. It's under copyright, but there you go. So two first-level ears, second-level ear. Boom. This is, most of the time, what you'll get in the base case of this induction. I'm going to go with the first one. I'll be back in a few minutes with the second one. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. pluck off these ears and keep making the thing smaller. At the end, there are a few cases to think about. I have them drawn here somewhere, base cases. Nothing. Yeah, well. This won't work out if you have one triangle. If you have zero triangles, which is this empty. This isn't going to work. It's not going to make any sense if you only have one or two triangles. It doesn't make sense if there are no triangles. picture, or if you just have two maybe. Well, I guess-- Yeah, because then, these are both first-level ears. It doesn't look quite the same. Or maybe just a Mickey Mouse because those are all-- Well, it probably works. But these are the sort of cases you worry about. But yeah, it's a good idea. It's a great idea. But it's kind of hard to do when you're trying to do it with two ears. for these cases, I just need to check that I can find a facet-path. In fact, I can make it a cycle if I want to go crazy. So for example, this one, Ijust visit the triangle. This one-- I don't know-- I do it like that. Thisone-- I just visit the Triangle. ThisOne-- ThisOne-ThisOne-this-one-This one-This-One- This One-This One-this one-this. I don't know-- something like this. That'd be one way to do it. Hm. Got to be a little careful. [INAUDIBLE] Something like that. All right. But really, I care about these two cases. So what I'm going to do for each of those-- I guess, I guess. (SINGING) Doo, doo,Doo. Doo dooDoo Doo! Doo Do Do Do! (Singing) this is still step four-- is I actually want to make cycles for these guys. I care about that. Am I doing something wrong? Oh, no. Over there. Good. So in both of these cases, I can make cycles. In this one, in the base cases, not always. Like this. In the base case, in this one,. not always, like this. like this like this Like this like. this.like this. Like that. Like. that. guy, hard to make a cycle. But for the two general cases, if I find two ears or three ears, I can just draw that in. So I'll do that for this example, though, by now, it's gotten a little messy, so let me redraw it. So we have-- All we have here is an example of what a cycle would look like if there were more than one person in it. All we've got here is a picture of a guy with three ears. right. This case, I only get the two-ear case, but I think we'll get another case shortly. OK? So obviously, I haven't finished it, and these are disconnected. There's lots of things left to do. But then, the idea is to connect these guys. So I'm going to connectThese guys and connect these guy. This is the first time I've done this. I've never done this before. It's been a lot of fun. is repeat. So imagine those guys as being done. I'm left with these four triangles, actually, a little boring because I don't get the Mickey Mouse case. But then, this will be an ear. This will be a second-level ear. And so I'll end up doing this. And this will. be a third- level ear. and this will end up being a fourth level ear and so on. and so forth. And it will be the same as the first ear. be an ear, and this will be an ear,. second-level here. I mean this is actually the base case, if you will. So in general, I just pluck off two or three triangles, repeat until I get one of the base cases. Now, what I have is not connected, but it's not connected to the other side of the room. It's just a little bit of the back of my head. I don't know why I'm doing it, but I just do. it's a bunch of cycles. But there's one cycle here, one cycle there, one cycles there. You could actually connect some of them together, like these two. But these cycles are not one and the same, they're not all going to happen at the same time. It's a lot of different things going on, but it's not one thing, it's a whole lot of things going at once, and that's what we're trying to get to. It could be a really big thing, I think. even attached to these cycles, so it's kind of a problem. That's step five is we're going to fix all the problems. That'd be a great title. Connect cycles together. We's going to do that by local switches, so here's the general picture. Suppose you have two adjacent triangles and you want to connect them. You want to link them together. You need to connect the triangles and the cycles at the same time. You can do that with local switches. two completely separate paths. So it's a cycle, so some cycle over here. And if this guy shared a vertex, then I could actually connect them together. So suppose it doesn't share a vertex. That means it has to use these two, and then, it-- something like that. What I'm trying to say is that if you have two different paths, then you have to connect them to each other. That's what I'm doing here. I'm connecting the two paths together. want to do is remove this edge and remove this. edge and, instead, add this and that edge. So that's a local change, and now, it will be one big cycle. We've probably seen this trick once or twice before, I think in the Mountain Valley assignment stuff. So here I have, for example, these two triangles, which are adjacent, but the paths don't meet. So I'm just going to erase this edge, put in that one. Lo and behold, I have a bigger cycle now. like these two triangles don't touch. Erase that edge. Put in that one. I'm preserving, at all times, that I'm a facet path, and I'm merging components. So by the end, I'll have one big component. Now, I haven't necessarily described this. I've just said that's what I'm doing, and that's the way it's going to be. I don't know if it's the best way to do it, but I'm going to try it. as a big cycle, but as I've kind of been hinting, what I do now is take an Euler tour around this thing. We've seen Euler tours. All the vertices in this graph will have even degree. And so I can take anEuler tour, and really, I should take really, really, seriously a tour of this thing, because it's so big. It's like a big, big cycle. But it's also a big circle. what's called a non-crossing Euler tour. Point is you've got a bunch of cycles that touch. You just walk around the outside. That will visit all the cycles. It'll visit all these edges exactly once, and that will actually be a facet-path. And we're done. Now, I have a facets-path and I'm going to take you on a tour of the world. It's called the Euler Tour and it's a great way to learn about the universe. for a triangulated cube. So I can splay out those triangles, get a non-overlapping chain like this. Actually, it's probably the top one, something like that, might be. I may not have matched exactly what's in the textbook. Cool. One slight detail is I was sort of waving my hands, so it might not be exactly what it looks like in the book. But it's a good starting point, right? So I'm going to go with it. assuming there was actually a cycle here. I really only need a path. In fact, there won't always be a cycle because at the very end, you're not able to construct a cycle. So that will actually cause you to make-- if I do something like this, so at least it's a cycle, right? So at least there's a path, right?" "Yes," he says. "That's what I'm trying to do. That's why I'm doing it." it can connect to other things. That will cause you to make two vertices of odd degree. But that's OK because there's still an Euler path that starts at one of the vertices. It visits all the other edges, and then, comes to the other vertex of odd degrees. It can also connect to all of the other vertices in the same way. It's called a "Euler path" and can take up to two hours to complete. It starts at the top of the page and ends at the bottom. And I just need a path. You can actually characterize when you get a cycle. It's when the original thing is not too colorable, I think. Anyway, that's how it's unfolding. I think we solved most of it in like an afternoon. We had this idea. It was kind of easy. It just took us an afternoon to come up with the idea. And then we had to figure out how to make it work. And it's kind of like that. Once you have a cool problem, it falls quickly. There's lots of interesting open problems remaining about vertex unfolding. And natural version is to think about what we were originally trying to attack, convex polyhedra. This turned out to not require convexity. Is there always a vertex unfolding? We don't know about edge unfoldings. And the answer is no. Well, no that's not the answer. And it's not always the case that there's always an edge unfolding. right. Sorry. The answer is we don't know. What's annoying about this example is that there's no facet-path. So there are two things that could go wrong. One is that the facet- path doesn't exist, and that can happen in this more general scenario. And the other is that when you are trying to do something in a more general way, it can be very difficult to do it in the first place. It can be a lot of work to get it right. lay it out, it overlaps. Both of these things could go wrong in the general convex case. So in this example, this is a truncated cube. There's eight triangles and only six octagons. And if you look, once you're at a triangle, you have to go to an octagon because it's a convex shape. If you look at the shape of the cube, you can see that it's not convex. It's not the same shape as it looks from the outside. there's no adjacent triangles. So at best, you could alternate triangle-octagon-triangle- octagon if you want to pack all those triangles in, but you run out of octagons to get there. So there's no facet-path, but maybe, you don't need facet- path. You could make a tree, just a little trickier. Obviously, if you're not a tree fan, you probably don't want to make one, but it could be fun. you triangulate that surface, you're done. So the analog of general unfolding with vertex unfolding is trivial. But if you really only want to cut along edges, this example can be done. The other thing that could go wrong is once you have octagons, even if you could find a way to lay them out-- that's not a very good octagon-- you don't know how to prove it. You just triangulates, and then, you use the edge case. can't-- let's say if your two hinges were here and here, if that's where you attach two adjacent pieces, you can't fit that in a vertical strip. There's no way to turn it so it fits in a vertically strip. So also this layout problem doesn't work if you have a layout problem. If you have this problem, you have to change the way the hinges are attached to the frame. You have to move the hinges around to get them to fit in the right place. something more than triangles. So some pretty fascinating questions. It's even open for non-convex. At the very least, you need to forbid faces having holes. But as long as the faces don't have holes-- let's say the faces are convex-- would be a nice version, like the Witch's Hat, the spiked tetrahedron. That's a nice idea. That would be nice. But it doesn't work for all polyhedra, of course. probably has a vertex unfolding. If you triangulate that, [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: If youTriangulate this, it'll definitely have a-- if you Triangulate anything, it will have a vertices unfolding. All right. That's all I want to say about vertex unfolding, and that's sort of addressing edge unfolding of convex. It's not about the shape of the shape, it's about the way it unfolds. And that's what we're trying to do here. polyhedra, or actually, both of these. Now, I'd like to go to sort of the real problem. This is one of my favorite problems, I think. A bunch of us posed it in '98, which was right when I was-- or '99, right when he was starting out. See, it's it's a real problem, and I think it's one of the best problems in the world. It's a very, very difficult one to solve. tantalizing, in some ways more natural, because it's nice to allow cuts anywhere. And it could potentially work for everything. I conjecture every non-convex polyhedron without boundary can be generally unfolded, and there's some really good evidence for this as of a couple years ago. That's what I want to do. That was what I was trying to do in the first place. It's a really good idea, and I think it could be used for a lot of things. An orthogonal polyhedron is one where all the faces are perpendicular to one of the three coordinate axes. Google SketchUp makes it really easy, and you can add shadows and texture. There are three kinds of faces. There's the ones perpendicular to x, like these guys. And there's the one perpendicular to y. That's all the yellow faces. And then there are the ones parallel to z. So we call them x- faces, y-faces, z-faces. if you can voxelize it. So this is really a lot of stuff. I would love to generalize this approach arbitrary polyhedra, but that's the big open question. So what do we do? Well, we're going to single out, from this color coding, the y-faces. Just color them yellow. Then, then, just color them green or blue or red or orange. And that's how you get the shape of a polyhedron. there's all the other faces. Well, they form bands. They're cycles. They go around in a loop. A lot of them here, I've just drawn as rectangular loops, but in general, all those wooden faces, the x and z-faces, will form a bunch of loops. And then, there's the y-faces. There's the x-face and the z-face. And there's also the Y-face, which is just a straight line. which we're going to have to deal with, but sort of ignore them for a while. I should have drawn it with them erased. It would look cool. But if you think about just those bands, this is sort of how they're connected together, this tree. There's a big one. There're a lot of bands that are connected together in this tree, and it's kind of like a tree of bands. It's like a big tree of all these different bands. out here, and then, it has two children. There's this one and this one. And then, this child has one child hanging off of it. And this one has two kids hanging off it. So that's these two guys. In general, this guy might have some children hanging off. And that's the way it looks in general, too. It looks like a lot of people have kids. It's just the way the world is. It doesn't always look the way you want it to. the back side as well. There's just a bunch of children. There will be some front children and some back children. You pick some root arbitrarily, and then, you have children going off of there. Now, if you're orthogonal, and you're Orthogonal. I'm not going to try to represent that in this picture. There is no way to do that. There are no ways to do it. It is just a lot of children, and there are no rules for it. polyhedron has genus 0-- it's topologically a sphere-- this will be a tree. If it's like a doughnut, it will have a cycle. So this theorem only applies for our genius zero. So we're going to exploit that that dual drawing, how the bands are connected together, is like a dual drawing. It's a tree, it's a sphere, it has a cycle, and it is a polyhedron. That's what we're trying to do. tree. So why don't I write down, a band is a cycle of x and z-faces, and they are connected together in a tree. Now, the rough idea is we're going to take a depth-first traversal of this tree. We're Going to start at the root, work our way down. We are going to go from the root to the top of the tree, and back again. We will go from root to root and back to the root again. and come back, work our way down, and something like that. It's not going to be quite so simple. The challenge, I guess you could say, is avoiding overlap. OK? If you wanted to unfold a band, obviously, a band can just unfold straight. But it's like a nice, long strip. It can't be unfolded straight. It has to be like a long strip, but it's not straight. And it can't just be like that, either. So each band, individually, is fine. It's how do you piece those bands together and then, have room for the yellow faces to attach on the sides, no overlap? But it can be done with the awesome, crazy idea that we'll get to shortly. We're going to start out kind of low-key, but it's going to be fun. We've got a lot of fun ideas. We'll show you how to do it in the next few days. We hope you'll join us. of innocent, but the general approach is always proceed rightward in the unfolding. So the unfolding will look something like this. We start here, and we might go up and down, but we never go left. And then, that's going to be all. OK, whatever. Always going to the right. We started here. We might go down and up and up, but never left. That's the way to go. And that's what we're going to do. the band faces. All the band stuff will be connected like that, and then, there's going to be yellow faces that can just hang off the sides. So these are the y-faces. As long as I get the band to do this, y- faces can hang up and down. It's not a bad idea, I'm sure they'll get it. I'm not sure if it's a good idea, though. I don't know if it'll be a good thing or not. going to intersect anybody. Pretty clear? So it's clear if we could do this, we can get non-selfintersection. The amazing thing is that this is possible. What this is essentially a limitation on is how far you could turn your bearing. So you start going right, you can turn right, You can turn left. You can go left. It's all about turning your bearing, that's what this is all about. We're going to go left, we're not going to stop. but I could not turn right again. I have to turn left next. I can actually do two left turns in a row, as long as I was initially going down. If I can turn left twice, then, I could alternate left-right. That's always good. Or I could turn right twice, or I could turned right twice. That would be good, too. I could do that, too, if I was going down the other way. But I couldn't turn left again. but only if I'm initially going up. That's the rules. As long as I adhere to those rules, I'm fine. Now, we're going to heavily exploit that we can do general unfolding, that we're able to subdivide those strips into lots of little pieces. We're going into a lot of different ways to do that, and it's going to be very interesting. It's a very exciting time for us, and I'm looking forward to it. I'm excited to see what's next. of little pieces, an exponential number of pieces, so this is kind of hard core. So here is one example. This is a leaf. So trees have leaves, and at the end, we're going to have to visit a Leaf. So this is one box. There's this funny view, so there's a funny view of a box. So there's this Funny View of a Box, and this is the funny View Of A Box. So, there is a funny View of A Box, which is one of the boxes. And there is this funnyView of a Leaf, and there is an exponential view of the leaf. you can see like a mirror on the bottom and a Mirror on the right and on the side. So this is if you had one box, here's what you would do. And we're actually assuming-- notice this side does not get covered. The idea is that site doesn't exist. It doesn't have to be perfect, but it can be a good starting point. It can be the beginning of a new way of looking at the world. It could be the start of a whole new way to look at our world. That's attached to the rest of the polyhedron, so that's where our parent lives. And our parent tells us you have to start at s, and it says you better finish at t. And I want the property that if initially, I think, initially, you're going right. No, it looks like it's going right, so I want it to look right, too. That's what I'm trying to do. I want to make it look right. like initially, you're going up. It matters. You can do stuff, and then, at the end, you should still be facing up. So you have to visit all these faces, but not turn in total. And normally, that would be hard to do. If you just tried to visit one face at a time, you can't do that. But if you visit faces multiple times and kind of weave around in a clever way,. you can do it. So maybe I'll point with this thing. So I start at s. I go up. I turn right. Now, I better better. turn left. I go down over here, up there. I turn left. Then, I turn right. So if you follow along here, I just turn right here. And that is a left turn because it's on the bottom, a little hard to think about. And then, I went down, turn left and then, right. This is confusing that I'm upside down. And I come to t, and lo and behold, I'm facing up again. In fact, I basically just zigzagged. work if it was rotated 90 degrees. It also works if t is on the other side of s. So this can kind of go in a couple of different orientations. It's really powerful. I'd initially be going right and, then, down and right and down and up and down. And then I'd be going left and right, and then down and down, and so on. And I'd go up and up, and up. And up. and up again. And that's how it works. You could do sort of the mirror image traversal. Now, obviously, I didn't cover the entire surface. I'm leaving room for later, but if this was all I was going to do, I would actually sort of fill out all those strips, just kind of extend them. It just makes you feel better about the way you're looking at the world. It's a great way to start a new project, and it's a fun way to get people to try new things. this kind of fatter. So this got a little bigger. I've got the first half and then, the second half. This is really glued up there. But you can imagine once you have these sort of paths that visit everything, you just fatten out, and it's no big deal. And it's like, 'Oh my God, I'm going to get bigger and bigger and larger and bigger' And it just keeps going on and on. It's like this. also, in this case here, we're imagining-- oh, this is actually two of them. Two of these strips joined together. And so there's a few side faces. They just attach up and down. They're not going to intersect anything because this is not actually below this. This is way down. It's fun. Fun. Fun, fun, fun. It was fun to play with. And it's fun to make. And we're going to do it again. over here. So that's the leaves, and I still haven't gotten to the exciting part. So imagine you have a band. Just going to represent that by this big rectangle, and it has a bunch of children. Remember, it can have front children. This is down in the y-coordinate. And I'll show you how to do it in the next episode of "This Is Life with Lisa Ling" at 8 p.m. ET on Sunday, September 14. it could have back children up in the y-coordinate. And suppose I'm actually attached to some parent, let's say, as a down neighbor, and I start at some s. Let's say I'm told you have to start here. You have to finish here, and you should preserve orientation because I'm attached to you. And I'm like, "Oh, my God, what am I going to do?" So I start off at the bottom of the page and work my way up. Don't have to think about whether it turned, don't want to have to depend on that. Initially, you must be facing up. And I could handle two right turns, as long as the next thing I did was a left. So I come into this thing saying, look, you're facing-- this is facing down. Now, you better turn left next, and by the end, I still want to be facing down again. And here, I'm wrapping around to here because this is actually a band that cycles around. Then, I go in here. It's just a little hard to see because I'm drawing it on a flat surface. But if it was on a ring, it would be much clearer. Just going left and right and left andright, alternating. It would be just like a game of Monopoly, I think. I don't know if I would win or not, but I would like to try. I would love to see some of my friends play the game. direction, so that I preserve my orientation. At some point, I get to here. I loop around. I make a little wiggle at some point. Then, I can visit all the top neighbors. You just have to slightly switch your orientation, but again, preserve that you're doing left-left-right-right, left- left-Right-Right, right-Left-Right. And then, you can go to the other side of the room and do the same thing. left-left-right-right. Then, you will preserve your orientation. You tell each of the children which way you're initially going, and they can deal with it. It's basically telling you whether s and t is like this or the other way around. OK? So now, we end up way up there where where we're going. So now we're at the top of the mountain. So, we're up there. We're going to get to the top. the lavender edge is at t10. Now what? We want to come back here, and I'm not allowed to sort of intersect myself. That would be the paper going into two parts of this unfolding, so that's not good. But I have all this space, so natural thing is to go back and do it again. That's what I'm going to do, I'm just going to keep going back and going back to the same place. I'm like, 'I've got to do this!' just wander from there back down to here, using up the space. So it's going to look like this. Everything that you did, you just undo. Now, where this is painful is not only do I have to undo it in this diagram, but I have a have to recursively undo everything. It's a lot of work, but it's worth it in the long run. I've learned a lot, and I'm going to use some of it in my next project. At every level of the tree, you're going to double what was below you, so this recursive thing from this structure ends up getting doubled. At the parent structure, it will also get doubled.I did in here, everything I didn't in this, and everything I did in this. So this is a tree of recursive things that you can do in this structure. It's a tree that can do anything, and it can do it in any way it wants. So it can be used to do anything in the world. that's why you get exponential, in general. On the other hand, if your tree happens to be nice and balanced, doubling is not so bad because here you'll have constant. This will double everything below. This a double everything down here, but it will be exponential. So if this is n, the number of things you're doing here is 2 theta n. That's why it's exponential. If your tree is ugly like something like this, you'll start with something nice and small down here. Maybe constant number of terms. Then, you will double again. there's only log n levels. So is that linear? It should be about linear. It's certainly 2 to the theta log n, and it matters what this constant is. I think it's n or maybe n squared, but not too bad. So if you're lucky and the just the structure of the structure is just the right, you can get away with it. If you're not lucky, it could be a lot worse. It could be 2 or n squared. of your bands is balanced, it's good. Exponential number cuts is a lot, but it works. Can you deal with these situations and sort of balance them and make them only make a polynomial number of cuts. Certainly be nice. It's an open problem. Open problem. It can be a lot of work, but in general it's going to be exponential. In general, though, it will be an exponential problem. If you can deal with it, you're doing a good job. You can unfold every orthogonal polyhedron this way. I would love to see an implementation of this algorithm. You could only do it in a computer because you'd be splicing into all these little things, and it would fall apart. Jason? AUDIENCE: You've been making these, I guess, gadgets [INAUDIBLE] Jason: Yes, I have been. I've been working on this for a long time. I think it's a very interesting idea. voxel would attach just by a side. You could imagine it attaching at a corner attaching to multiple sides. What we think about is one band, which looks something like this, attaching to another band. That will always happen on a face. That's what we're worried about. We're not quite sure. We don't know how it would work. We'll have to wait and see, but we think it would be a good idea to have it in place by the end of the year. I'm not quite sure what you're imagining. Maybe something like that where they share a partial face here? AUDIENCE: Yeah, but it could also be inset into the [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: If it's inset, I'm cutting with every-- I maybe didn't mention that-- through every vertices. I'm going to slice with every vertex, I'll cut with every edge. I don't know if that's what you want, but I'll go with it. a y-plane. That will cut into lots of little strips, and then, there's no sort of overlap with the strips. I'm subdividing into little substrips. So that sort of deals with that issue if this was moved that way. Then, there will be three strips, one over here, one one over there, and so on. And so on and so forth. And that's the way it's going to work. It's not going to be perfect, but it'll work. where they're overlapping, and one on the right. Good question. I forgot to mention the subdivision at the beginning. This leads to another notion which we call grid unfolding. So the grid of an orthogonal polyhedron is what you get when you subdivide, and that's what we call the grid unfolding of an Orthogonal Polyhedron. That's the idea behind grid unfolding, and it's the reason why we call it a grid unfolding system. It's a way of understanding the structure of the world. by extending every face into a plane and cutting with that plane. So that's sort of what I was doing here when they're overlapping. Even in this picture, there's like a face here, this vertical face, and so I'd end up slicing through this thing with a band in that band, and that's what I'm doing here, too. It's kind of like slicing through a piece of paper with a knife and cutting through it with a blade. That's what's happening here. With every vertex, slice x, y, and z. That's another way to do it. And that subdivides in sort of a nice grid where every face will now be a.direction. And I don't know, this vertex you'll end up slicing through this guy. So hopefully, you can imagine that. It's kind of a fun way to think about how to do something like this. I'm not sure how it's going to work, but it's fun to try. rectangle, and rectangles always meet whole edge to whole edge. So it's a nice simplification. What I'm proposing is add those edges to your polyhedron. It's kind of like assuming that you started with unit cubes and build something but kept all the edges of all the cubes. I want to make it more like a circle, not like a square. It would be a nice way to get rid of some of the complexity of polyhedrons, I think. an edge unfolding of that. Do those exist? These are what we call grid unfoldings. This only makes sense for orthogonal polyhedra. Edge unfoldings obviously don't work. We had lots of examples where those fail, like the cube with little bites taken out of the edges. But the question is, do they always exist? It's essentially the Orthogonal analog of this question, edge unfolding a convex polyhedRA. If you want to go to orthogona, which is like in between convex and general non-convex, maybe you could hope for grid unfolding. grid unfolding, you get lots of subdivision. It might be easy. Well, it's not easy. The next best thing you could hope for is to refine. So you take each of the grid rectangles and divide it into k by k, so subgrid. So ideally, k is one, and you're not subdividing at all. But maybe, you take every rectangle, divide it in half. Maybe that's enough to then be edge unfoldable. That would be sort of a refined level two grid-like unfolding. partial. Obviously, in the general situation-- I mean this algorithm we just covered-- you can achieve a refinement of only 2 to the theta n exponential. When can you do better? Ideally, you get 1 by 1, but maybe, you can do something. What? OK. One thing you could do could be to add a second step to the algorithm to make it a bit more complex. That would be a good thing to do in the long run. That's what we're going to try to do. This is more crazy examples of what it's like to visit. Manhattan Towers. No that's not a picture of Manhattan Tower. This is not-- this probably is complete, but here, there, there. There, there is something called Manhattan Towers, with merely 5 by 4 refinement. Let me show you a picture. No, that’s not aPicture of Manhatten Tower. No. That's Manhattan Tower, with 5 by 5 refinement. That’ll be Manhattan Tower 2. This will be Manhattan Towers 3. isn't too much doubling because there's only a single child, more or less, everywhere. But the unfolding looks something like that. Here is Manhattan Tower. So it has a connected base on the x-y plane. And I want to consider z-slices as I go up in z-coordinate, and I want it to look like a z-shaped building. It looks like a building with a roof. It has a roof with a top. It's a tower. those z-slices to get smaller and smaller, always contained in what I had before. So I never have overhang. That's a Manhattan Tower. And in that case, 5 by 4 refinement is enough to unfold these things. So that's pretty good, still not perfect, but pretty good. And this is the same thing. This is a New York City skyscraper. It's not perfect. But it's still pretty good and I'm proud of it. by the same authors, like a year before the general result. Let's see. I think maybe I have a movie. Yeah. So this algorithm has been implemented, at least in some simple examples. And it kind of nicely unrolls. You can see a 5 by 4 refinement in that little bit of code. It's kind of nice to see a little bit more of the process going on, I think. I don't know if it's going to be a movie, but it's a good start. staircase. It's, again, to make everything keep going to the right, but here, they find a clever way to visit all the faces without having to revisit, basically, at all, just visiting each face a constant number of times. And then, we can zoom out, and you get the unfolding. The film is out now on Blu-ray and DVD. For more information, visit www.staircases.co.uk or go to the official website. So it looks very similar in spirit. Of course, the details is how do you do all that visiting. I'm not going to cover that here, but you get substantially less refinement for that special case. Yeah. Another case looks like this. Boom! AUDIENCE: Woah. PROFESSOR: Isn't that cool? I'll. I'll be back in a few minutes with the next episode. I hope you'll join me. I've been waiting for you. play it again. This is just slightly more special. So again-- I have three of them. They're so much fun. It's like exploding a city. Boom! So here, the floor is a rectangle. That's the only additional requirement, and again, as you slice upwards, things only get smaller. Here's a here's a and a there's a. And here's another one. And a third one. and a fourth. and so on. And another. and another. bigger one. Boom! So exciting. I could do this all day. So I'm not going to describe how this works, but you could almost reconstruct it from these diagrams. This is what we call an orthogonal terrain. This result by Joe O'Rourke. Here, you don't need any refinement, grid unfolding, or refinement of the original map. It's all down to how you want to look at it. And it's a lot of fun to watch. one by one. That's pretty sweet. All right. Next one is what we call orthostacks. These are like a stack of a bunch of orthogonal polygons. This is where the idea of bands came from, from an old paper in 1998, from the University of California, Los Angeles. That was in 1998. This was in 2005. That is in 2005, and this is in 2006, and 2007, and 2008, and 2009, and 2010, and 2011, and 2012. beginning. So it's just I have a band, and then, I stack another band on top. So each z cross-section is connected. So that's a little different. With towers, I could have multiple towers here. I really only want one tower built slab by slab. These things we don't know. These are the things that make us who we are. We can't know what the future holds. We just have to wait and see. We have to be patient. how to grid unfold. That's an open problem, but if you refine just in z by a factor of 2, that's enough to unfold. So 1 by 2 refinement is enough for orthostacks. Now, you could go a little crazier and allow vertices to unfold with some grid refinement, and in that case, you don't need any refinement. So grid vertex unfolding orthostack was the title of paper. These guys, John Iacono and Stefan Langerman. go right. So it makes things easier. And in fact, the other guys, Damian, Flatland, and O'Rourke-- It's got to be awesome doing geometry and your last name is Flatland. Unless she does a lot of three dimensional stuff. Irony. You can do vertices grid unfolding of any orthogonal polyhedron. So that's what we're doing here. We're doing the same thing with the triangles and the polygons. It's just a different way to do it. is what I have written here. I haven't actually read that. I should read that paper. What else do I have? Orthotubes, this is again in the old paper. Orthotube is just sort of thickness one orthogonal tube. It could even be closed, I think, in a loop, but it could also be open. I don't know what the difference is. I've never heard of it. I think it's a very simple thing. It's just a tube. here I've shown it open. And here, grid unfolding is enough. You just do all the grid refinement. You could even just do it locally. Technically, there's a slice here that might slice over here, but you don't have to worry about that. you just subdivide into a bunch of separate slices. You can do it in any way you want. It's a very simple way to do it, and it's very simple to do in a big city. boxes, and this can be unfolded in a sort of zigzag fashion. So 1 by 1. You can generalize this to trees also, though, it's not totally known. As long as you have a tree of cubes with fairly long connectors in between the branch points, those are called well-separated. Those are called "well-separate" trees, and they can be generalized to other types of trees as well, as long as the connectors are not too long. orthotrees-- that works grid unfolding. If you don't have that condition, so just have cubes connect in some treelike fashion, it's open whether you can do a grid unfolding, he says. "My conjecture's, in general, you need to omega n refinement. We've worked on that in the past. My belief is that that's the way to go," he says, adding that the next step will be to make the code even more complex. "I think we'll be able to do it in the future," he adds. this kind of exponential blow up is necessary, but that you can do it only a balance tree. So this would give like linear refinement. But we can't even prove that you need 2 buy 1 refinement in any example. We don't have anything where grid grid is used. I think that's necessary. But I can't prove that it's necessary, because we don't even have a grid. We can't show that it is necessary in any particular example. It's not even clear that it needs to be. unfolding is definitely impossible. It's very hard to prove that there aren't unfoldings, accept by exhaustive enumeration, and that's hard to do because it's slow. We've come up with lots of candidate examples, but eventually, we unfold them all. I have a bunch of examples. I'm in a sad state, I guess. I don't know what to do with myself. I've got a lot of things I could do, but I'm not sure how to do them. other open problems. This was genus 0. Interesting question is can you do genus higher than 0? Orthogonal polyhedra. I would guess so, but I'm not sure. I think the biggest question is, can you make this non-orthogonal? But then, the bands get messy. Haven't been able to do that. But I think it would be a good idea to make it non-Orthogonal. I've been trying to do it for years. All right. I think those were the main problems. Any questions? I'm going to take a break from unfolding now and switch the other direction of folding. So with folding, we're imagining we're given some polygon, and we'd like to make a polyhedron out of it. It's exactly the reverse of unfolding. I'll be back in a few minutes with the next part of the show. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. of what we've been thinking about. When is this possible? Now, the rules of the game here are different from origami. With origami, we showed from any shape, you can make anything if you scale it down. But here, I really want exact coverage. Every point here, or let's say every point here. The goal is to make every point in the game look exactly the same as the previous one. We'll show you how to do it in the next episode of CNN iReport. every little patch here, should be covered by exactly one layer over here, not allowing multiple layers. So this means not everything is possible. I also care about scale factor, but-- This one, of course, you can crease like this, and more importantly, you glue these edges together. You glue them together. It's not easy, but you can do it. And it's a lot of fun. And you don't have to do it all the time, but it's better than nothing. These edges together. The opposite of cutting is gluing. We'll be more formal about defining gluing, I think, next lecture. This is just a sort of prelude. But you end up gluing-- I want to make something, let's say-- in fact, we're always going to talk about folding convex polyhedra. It's just a way of putting something together that's different from what you would do if you were doing it in a different way. There's very little work on the non-convex case, though, there was actually a recent result. I'll mention that next lecture. If you want to make something convex, and therefore, sphere-like, you have to get rid of all the boundary, so you've got a glue every edge. You don't have to, though. You just have to glue the edge of the convex part of the sphere to make it sphere- like. That's what we do. glue whole edges to whole edges. If you want something sphere-like, in fact, those gluings must be non-crossing. I have to be able to draw a sphere. I can't just glue part of an edge to another part of a edge, but somehow, boundary has to get glued up. And if you want a sphere, you have to glue something to the top of the sphere. You can't glue the top to the bottom. You have to glued the top and the bottom to each other. picture like this. Question is when do these gluings make a polyhedron? That is the question we will be answering next class. But first question is suppose I gave you one of these pictures. I give you a polygon, and I giveYou a gluing. What this tells you is that you are gluing two polygons together to make one. You can also glue two polygONS together to create one. If you are not sure what you are doing, you can ask your teacher for help. sort of how to locally walk around. The gluing tells you locally what the surface looks like, even though you don't know what it looks. So if I'm here, I could walk over here. I couldwalk over here, teleport over there, walk overHere. Whatever. OK? The glued tells you local what thesurface looks like. Even if you don’t know what that surface looks, you can still walk around it. So you can walk over there and then walk over to the other side. like yet in 3D. In particular, you can compute shortest paths here. I could compute the shortest path from this point to this point you might think is a straight line. But no, it's not, I don't think. Or maybe it is. Let's see. A little tricky. AUDIENCE: Should be. It's a little tricky, isn't it? It's not a straight path, is it? I think it's a line. I think that's what you're trying to say. diagonal with the bottom square. So this point is the same as this point, or no, this point. Because these get zipped together. So in fact, so in fact. This point is also the same with the other point. Very good. So that's the way to do it. That's how you do it with a circle. That is the way you do a circle with a square. And so on and so on. And that's how we do it in a square, too. that diagonal is the shortest path between those two points. So you have to think about it for a while, but it turns out, in polynomial time, you can do that. That's cool. What I want to show now is that suppose you could make a convex polyhedron in this way. In polynometric time, in this case, you could do that in a very short time. That would be in the form of a polynomials. way. I claim you can only make one, never more than one from the same gluing. So I've defined locally what this thing is. It's like a piece of paper. I can mangle it around. If I want to make something convex, there's only one thing it could possibly make. That's the way to do it. If you want to do a convex piece of art, you have to make it convex. You can't do two convex pieces of art at the same time. This is Cauchy's rigidity theorem. I think we mentioned it in a previous lecture when we were talking about rigidity and three dimensions and like why domes. Sorry about the screeching. Find out what that one thing is quite a challenge, but at least we can prove that it's unique. We can also prove that the shape of the universe is unique. Find it out here: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/science/science-and-technology/cauchy-rigidity-theory.html. stand up. We're actually going to prove this theorem, and we're going to use it to study these kinds of gluings and say there's, at most, one way to do this. There's a lot of ways to state this conjecture, but one way. But now, we're Going to Use It! We're Going To Prove This! We'll Use It To Study These kinds of Gluings. We'll use It to Study These Kinds ofgluings! There's At Most One Way to Do This. The dual here is, of course, an octahedron. But if you have two convex polyhedra and they are combinatorally equivalent, they have the same way that things are connected together, the same graph, and they have congruent faces, so the geometries match also. So here, initially, I drew a tree of how the faces were connected together. And then, I draw some other connections like this. So the dual here in this example is anoctahedrons. Professor: If you take a face and a polyhedron, they are actually the same thing. He says it's up to rotation and translation to determine which is the congruent face. He also says that if you take two faces and add them together, they're the same polyhedra. He explains how this works in his book, "Congruent Faces," published by Simon & Schuster, $24.99. To order a copy of the book, go to www.simonandschuster.com. on one that has a corresponding face on the other. Those two faces should be congruent, not just any pair, and they're not all the same. Different faces can be different, but they're identical in pairs. So I'm just saying basically, if you have this picture, there's only one realization. If you have a picture of a person with a face that looks like another face, that face looks like the other face. That's the way it works in the brain. So this picture defines what are the geometry of the faces, how are they connected together. And so if you had two convex polyhedra with that same underlying diagram, they have to be the same polyhedron. That's what we're claiming. Is this one any better than the other? We'll have to wait and see. We'll be back in a week or so with the results of our experiment. We're going to see if we can prove it or not. better? Yeah, it's better. This is an old theorem. You may have heard of Cauchy, famous French mathematician. He proved a lot of things. This theorem he didn't actually prove. He wrote a paper about it or, I don't know, he wrote a book about it. He didn't prove it, but he did write a paper on it. That's what this is about. It's a theorem. It doesn't mean anything to you. You don't need to know those. Cauchy and Steinitz wrote a paper in 1813. Proof was wrong, and it was fixed in 1934, over 100 years later, by Steinitz. So sometimes it's called Cauchy-Steinitz rigidity theorem. There's a lemma in here that's often attributed to both of them. So it's sort of a combination of the two. It's called the Steinitz-Cauchey rigidity theory and it's sometimes called the Caucheys rigidity theory. a proof by contradiction. We want to prove uniqueness. So we're supposing, well, maybe, there's two polyhedra, p and p prime, and they're combinatory equivalent and have matching faces congruent. What I want to do is look at corresponding vertices, let's say a vertices v and p and a vertex v and a vertice p. We're going to try to prove that there are two vertices with matching faces, and that they are combinatory identical. v prime and p prime. So there is corresponding in the combinatorial equivalence. And then, I want to slice the polyhedra, p and p Prime, with an epsilon sphere, epsilon radius sphere centered at v and v prime. Quick mention, this is not true if you allow non-convex realizations. You may not be able to do this if you don't have a large enough number of realizations to begin with. But you can do it if you have a big enough number to start with. have seen that example before. These have exactly the same combinatorial structure, same geometry on each face, but one's non-convex, and they're different. But as long as they're convex, they're going to be the same. In a convex situation, here's what the slice looks like. So here's little vertices, little degree, little angle, little height, little width, little depth, little radius, little length, little diameter. like 5, and I slice the polyhedron with this tiny sphere centered at v, not the interior, just the boundary of the sphere. What I get are these arcs. They'll be great circular arcs. Here we can see all five of them. They're great circular arc. There on the sphere, there on the surface. There in the center of the circle, there in the middle, there are the arcs. That's the center, that's the boundary, and that's where the center is. I get a polygon. I get a convex polygon on the sphere. Convex spherical polygons, convex because the polyhedra are convex. I actually get two of them. Right? One for p, one for p prime. What do I know about those polygons? I know they're edge lengths because the edge lengths of the polygons are the same as the edges of the spheres. I know that they're convex, because they're on the same sphere. length of an edge here is equal to-- if this is a unit sphere, if I rescale the epsilon to be 1, that edge length is actually this angle. That angle is an angle of the face at the vertices. So I know all the angles. I know the angles of the sphere. I have all the information I need to know about the sphere, and I can use that information to build a model of the universe. I've got all the info I need. geometries of the faces. I know they're congruent. So I know what these edge lengths are in the sphere. What I don't know are these angles of the polygon. That's essentially the dihedral because that's basically the angle of the polygons. I can't tell you the angles, but I can tell you what the lengths are, because I know the lengths, but not the angles. It's a very, very complex system. I'm not sure I've ever seen anything like it. angle of that edge. And the worry is, well, maybe all the edge lengths match. We could do this at every vertex, but maybe the dihedral angles are different. Maybe the convex polyhedron could flex. That's why this is about rigidity. Maybe it's flexible, and then, maybe there are two edge lengths. And then, perhaps, there are no edges at all, but just one edge at a time. And that's what we're trying to do here. different states. If p and p prime are supposed to be different, then there must be two angles that differ. All the faces are the same, and therefore, all those edge lengths are the the same. But the angles might differ. So I want to look at those angles, and I think I can find out how to do it by looking at the angles of the two faces that are in the same state. That's what I'm going to try to do with the angle of the p prime. want to label vertex of a spherical polygon. So I have n of these spherical polygons for p n of them and p prime. Let's look at them in p. I'm going to label it plus if the angle there in p is bigger than the angle in pprime. If the angle is bigger in p prime than in p n, the polygon is labeled. If it's not, I'll label it with a label for the angle that's bigger than that in pPrime. Remember I have a correspondence between everything in p and everything and p prime. Minus if the angle is less, and 0, if the angles are equal. Therefore, the polyhedra will be identical. If all the faces are identical, then all the angles will be equal. So what I want to show is actually all the angle are equal, and therefore all thepolyhedra are identical. And so on and so on, until we get to the end of the book. are the same and all the angles at which you join them are the same. There's no flexibility there, but it could be there are pluses and minuses. But if there's going to be a problem with this, it's that there's not enough room for all of them to be connected in the same way. It's not a perfect solution, but there's no reason not to try and make it as flexible as possible. It could be that it's not the best way to make a polyhedron. theorem, there have to be pluses and minuses. That's the proof by contradiction. Let's look at a vertex that has some pluses or minuses, so we have-- it's a spherical polygon. I'm going to draw it more like a polygon, maybe somepluses, maybesome pluses. It's a sphere. So we have a sphere that is a sphere, a sphere with a sphere in the middle. It has a sphere and a sphere at the top. some zeroes, some minuses, whatever. First question is could it be all pluses andZeroes? Is that possible? No. It doesn't look good. It would mean this is like a linkage. We're used to linkages. It just happens to be on a sphere. Forget this on. It wouldn't be the first time it's happened. It's happened before. It'll happen again. It will be the last time it happens to us. a sphere. Think of it is as almost flat. What that would mean is there's some other way to draw this thing. Basically, there's a way to flex this linkage so that all of these angles increase and this one stays the same. How could I get a polygon where all the angles increase at the same time? I don't know. I've never been able to do it. I'm trying to figure out how to get it to look like a sphere, but it's not that easy. all the angles increase and still be convex? Ain't possible. Why is it not possible? I think we've used this fact a couple lectures ago. It's not possible by something called the Cauchy Arm Lemma. This is the part that Cauy got wrong, so it's also called theCauchy-Steinitz Arm. It is not possible to have a convex shape without having a concave shape. It just isn't possible to do it. Lemma. And here's the thing. If you have a convex chain but open chain here. There's a missing bar. So suppose that even when you add the bar, it's a conve X polygon. But then, I take a conveX polygon, remove an edge. This is what we call convexChain. And And Here's what we called convex Chain. And This is What We Call Convex chain. And Here’s What We Called ConveX Chain. if you open all the angles in a convex chain, then this distance increases. It's pretty intuitive. I open all these angles. So I put plus. Some of them could stay the same, but then, this distance will increase, as long as you stay convex. I. open all of them. So, some of the angles could stay same, some could increase. But, if you open them all, then the distance increases, and so on. It is a pretty intuitive process. should mention that. But in this situation, we know that both the initial position in p and its target position in prime are both convex. Let's just take that lemma as given. This is the one I don't like. Then, I know, in particular, I can't have all the answers. I can only have some of the answers I want to have. So I'm going to have to go with the one that's easiest to work with. And that's the one where p is a convex prime. pluses because then, if I just pretend one of these edges wasn't here, I know that that distance must increase. But it can't increase. It's supposed to stay the same. The edge lengths are fixed. So if they're all pluses and zeroes, or all minuses and zero, the same is. The same is if they are all minces and zero or all zeros and zero. That's the way it works. It doesn't matter if it's a plus or a minus. true just viewing p prime as p and p as p prime. So if there's anything in there other than zeroes, there has to be at least one plus, at leastone minus. They can't be all pluses. They must be all minuses. In particular, there have to be. at least two plus points in each of the two prime numbers. If there are no plus points, there must be a minus point in each prime number. And if there are two minus points, the prime number must be zero. least two alternations. Alternation is either going from plus to minus or from minus to plus. So it could be something like plus, plus,plus, minus, minus. Maybe that's your polygon, and that is your labeling. Is that possible? So once you have at least two alternation, you're good to go. You can go to the next step in the series. The next step is the next section, which is the final section of the series, and then the next one. one plus and one minus, you have to have these two switches at least. Could this happen? AUDIENCE: No. PROFESSOR: Right. Because you pick some chord. What do I do here? Just subdivide. All right. Whatever. Pick some chord like this one. I'm not sure it matters. Maybe here? Maybe here, maybe here? I don't know. I've never been able to do this before, but I'm going to try. Whatever. Can't have both. So this is also not possible. So in fact, you have to have at least four alternations. It's always even. And so it has to be. So that's what we're trying to do here. And that's why we're doing it this way. We're not trying to get rid of each other. We just want to make sure that we're always in the same place at the same time. That's the only way we can do it. be at least a bunch of pluses, then a lot of minuses. And so we're counting these transitions from plus to minus. This is a lemma that we used when we were locking trees, I think. We had a convex tree, and so we had to count these transitions between plus and minus. It's a very simple lemma, but it can be applied to any kind of tree. It can be used to work out how many points in a tree are worth more than one. At least two of the angles have to decrease or increase, one way or the other. That's because there have to be at least two groups of pluses, not only two pluses and two minuses. You have to have at least one group that is both positive and negative. You need to have two groups that are both positives and negatives. You can't have just one group of positives and two of negatives. It has to be a balance of the two groups, one positive and one negative, one plus and one minus. might think, well, what happens if there's only three vertices. Well, yeah, you can't have those four alternation because if you have a triangle, even on the sphere, triangles are rigid. So you would know if I had a degree 3 vertices, locally, that I was on a sphere. So that's how you'd know if you had a 3rd vertices or a 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th. that thing is rigid. It can't flex at all. We're only interested in cases where it might flex locally at a vertex like the pentagon, like a quadrilateral. All right. So what? This was true at every vertices that was not entirely zero. So if we look at-- let me let me say this. Let me say that this was true in every case where there was a non-zero verticle. This is true in all cases where there were non-absolute zero vertices. write this down. I really just care about the non-zero edges, the ones that are plus or minus. So I'll call the subgraph of plus and minus edges. The number of alternations is at least 4 times the number of vertices. I'm going to denote the number Of vertices by. I'll denote the Number of Alternations by. The Number of Vertices by is the total number of edges in a subgraph. It is the number of alternations that is the number of vertices in a subgraph that is the same as the number of edges. a capital V. We're going to use a trick. It has many names, I suppose. I usually call it double counting in combinatorics, where you have one quantity, namely, the number of alterations. We'll get two different ways. OK? That's page one. That's on page one of the book, "The Power of One," which is published by Simon & Schuster at £16.99. For more, go to www.simonandschulder.com. answers, but we know they must end up being the same. And then, we'll get a contradiction. So what's the second way of counting. Well, we counted local to a vertex. The other natural way to count angles is by looking at the faces. There are also faces. It's sort of like counting angles in a game of Monopoly, but without the Monopoly characters. The game is called "Monopoly" and it's on Channel 4 at 8pm ET. of the dual perspective. Every phase has a bunch of angles that have some degree or whatever. They're really kind of the same thing. Oh, here was Cauchy's Arm Lemma. Beautiful. If you look at the alternations as you walk around a vertices versus as you walked around a face, they're the same. It's the same as walking around a vertex. It just has different angles. It doesn't look like it, but it's really like that. you'll end up counting them the same number. Right? Here was an alternation from plus to minus. What's interesting here-- before we were thinking of labeling the vertices of the spherical polygon, but in fact, whatever this edge does, it does the same thing local to that vertex as the previous one. You can see the whole thing in the video below. Click here to watch the full video on CNN.com. Back to the page you came from.   thing local to that vertex. So really the labels are on the edges of the graph. They could be zero, plus, or minus. And if I have an alternation from plus to minus, view from the vertex, it's also an alternations as I walk around the face. So instead of having a label on the face, I have a label at the edge of the vertices. And instead of a label, I can have alabel on the edge, which is a label local to the edge. counting by walking around all the vertices. Let's do it from the perspective of the faces. And we're in this weird subgraph of plus and minus edges, so assume there are no zeroes. All right. If I just did, and I got at least four at every vertices-- let's do that again. And if I just walked around all of them-- which are just did -- let's get to the bottom of it. And I got to the top. have a face of 2 k or 2 k plus 1 edges, then it will have, at most, 2 k alternations. I'm going to try and prove an upper bound, sandwich it between, and show that, actually, the upper bound is smaller than the lower bound, and that's a contradiction. So this is kind of obvious. Right? If you have 2 k vertices, no more than 2k alternations, slight, the place where we're making a little improvement is for the odd case. has to be even because for every plus to minus, there has to be a matching minus to plus because it's cyclic. So even here, you can only get 2 k alternations. That helps us a lot, as you can't get up to 2 k plus 1 alternations in the first place. That's why we have to have an even number of alternations, which helps us out a lot. It's a good way to get around the problem, as well as a lot of other things. little bit because now, we can talk about number of alternation is at most two times the number of triangles, f sub 3 is going to be the number. of faces of degree 3, plus 4 times the. number of quadrilaterals plus 4. times theNumber of pentagons plus 6 plus 6 is the total number of faces in degree 3. The number of alternate faces is 2.5 times that of the faces of degrees 3 and 4 times those of degrees 4 and 5. times the number of hexagons plus-- why'd I write seven? I wrote seven. I'm being sloppy. At that point, I don't care. 7 f 7, 8 f 8, 9 f 9-- I'm not going to try to be clever from 6 on, but I'm going to be Clever at 5. I'll be clever at 5, and then I'll get clever at 6 and 7 and 8 and 9 and 10 and 11 and 12 and 13 and 14 and 15.  polyhedra are planar graphs. They're convex. The average degree is 5? Slightly under 6, 4, 3, 2, 1? Let's see. Should be like 3 n minus 1? Why 5 and 3? As you may remember from way back when, you have a planar graph-- because polyhedRA are planAR graphs. It's a convex graph, so the average degree should be 5. And it's convex, so it's a Planar Graph. 6 edges, so that should be 3. Yeah, three. So most of the faces are going to have low degree. That's the points. So 3 and 5 really matter, but out here, it doesn't matter so much. This is kind of a magical proof. It shouldn't be intuitive where it is. It should be obvious where it's going to happen. It's not going to be easy, but it's not a bad thing to do. It doesn't mean you have to do it every time. came from, but it's really beautiful. You'll see as it all comes together. Fun. What do I do next? Right. I want to relate-- I have a vertices count here. I've got a face count here, and I know Euler's formula. Hopefully, we know it. It's a cool formula. V came from. but it was really beautiful, you'll see how it all came together. fun. What did you think? Let us know in the comments. minus E plus F is 2. This is the number of vertices, number of edges, number faces is two. [? For ?] connected, planar graphs. There are other versions when you have multiple components or whenyou have tori, genus, whatever, but for convex polyhedra, this is true. So this is the most common way to look at a planar graph. It's not the only way, but it's the best way to see it. conveniently relates vertices to faces, but it involves edges. The number of edges is half the sum of the degrees of the vertices. If I look at every face and I count the number of edge, I will end up counting every face. Remember, that's handshaking lemma from way back when. It's also half theSum of thedegree of the faces. All right. Well, edges. I want to count theNumber of edges in terms of the number. of faces. I could do it in Terms of vertices or faces. edge twice, once from each side, so this is half the number of faces. Well, number faces I want to write in this form. So this ishalf 2-- No, sorry. Not the number faces. What am I doing? Half the sum of the degrees of the faces. This is half-- what is the degree of degree 3 faces? 3. What is thedegree of degree 4 faces? 4. And so on. Exactly. So now, things are starting to look similar, and I wants to get some cancellation going on. I'm going to rewrite this formula as V equals 2 plus E minus F. Hopefully, that's the same. I put E over here. I putting F over there. We'll get this. OK. So now, I have E plus F. E is this. F-- I have F. Am I missing something here? I'll write the formula again. I'll put E and F back together. E plus E is the same as V plus E. V equals two. E minus E is 2. E equals E. next one, and I'll figure out where it came from. Oh, duh, I just skipped a step. F is the sum of f3 plus f4 plus f5 plus f6. OK? All I did here was decrease by-- well, because there's a half out here, I decrease each coefficient by 2, and that's what I did in this example. Because there's an F in the equation, I'm going to say that the F in this case is F. nothing surprising. So I took E, I subtracted F, just took away one of each. That's V. Now, I also know that 4V is at most, the number of alternations. Hm. So, I could get a formula for 4V here. Right? 4V. is going 4V, right? 4 V is going. 4V! 4 V! 4V!! 4V!!! 4V!!!! 4V!!!!! 4V!? 4V??? 4V?! 4V?? 4V? to be 8 plus this is going to be like 2. So I get 2 f3 plus-- oh boy, 1 times-- 4 times f4 plus-- just double these numbers-- 6 times f5 plus-- what's the next one? 4-- 8 times f6, and so on. OK. Now, these guys look like they're having fun. Yes. They're having a good time. Yes, they are. They are having a great time. And they're doing it because it's fun. very similar to these guys. Now, here it gets bigger. It's going to go 10, instead of 6 and 7. We also have a plus 8. We don't know whether there any faces of degree 6 or more, so we can't rely on that. But we have plus 8, and we're going to have a 10, too. We're not going to be able to rely on it, though. We have a 8, too, but we're not sure if there are any faces with that degree. So somehow, 4V, which is, at most, the number of alternations-- that's the reverse of what we said before. This number's at least 8 larger than this number. It could be even larger than 4V. It can't be both. It's at most this number, and yet, it's also equal to this number -- it's not possible to be both at the same time. It doesn't make sense. It just doesn't work that way. Cauchy's rigidity theorem works as long as there's at least one face. This works because we're only looking at the subgraph plus and minus edges. Let me quickly tell you in our more larger version of this article that there is at least 1 plus or minus in every subgraph. And that is Cauchy’s rigidity procedure and theory of Rigidity Procedure. We’ll show you how it works in more detail in the next section. situation, here, we don't actually necessarily know where the creases are. We just know how things are glued together. Even in that situation, you could sort of figure out where thecreases must be because as I said, you can compute shortest paths once you have the gluing. So you don't have to know exactly where they are, you just have to figure out how to get them to the right place. And that's what we did here in this case. compute the shortest paths between all pairs of vertices, something like this picture, except you don't know what it looks like in 3D. You know every edge must be a shortest path. So the edges are some subset of these guys. And so on and so on, until you get to the end of the list, which is the shortest path between two vertices. You can still compute the shortestpath. You just don't have to know how to do it yet, of course. you've got lots of little convex polygons here. We know it must make a convex polyhedron. If it made two, Cauchy's rigidity theorem would tell you that they're the same. So even once you fix the gluing, you know that there's a unique convex realization, and there will be a conveX polyhedra. It's the same as having two polygons that are the same size and shape. It doesn't matter how many polygons there are, there will always be a unique realization. unique set of edges from the shortest paths that actually realize it. The next class will be all about how to actually find those gluings and know that they actually will fold into some convex shape. But that's it for today. We'll be back in a week or so with a new set of questions and a new lesson on how to find the right shape for the right size of an edge. We hope to see you in the next class. Back to the page you came from.