When you do not have unlimited amount of everything, unlimited. amount of resource to produce unlimited amount. of all the goods that you desire, you will have to make a choice, what to produce? In what quantity you should produce a particular good. So, that leads to our next term, when we will talk about what we should produce in what quantity we should make a good. We will discuss this in the next term of the course of this term. We hope that you will join us for this next term. and that is allocation. So, what do we mean by allocation? Allocation is nothing but assignment, allotment, share, but in economics we are more technical about this particular term allocation. Allocation here means solving these three fundamental or basic questions of economics, and the first question is what to do with the money. And that is what allocation is all about. It's a way of solving the problems of the economy. And it's a very technical way of looking at it. produce? The second is how to produce? And third is for whom to produce. Let us look at to answer these three questions one by one starting with what to produce and how to do it. We imagine a very simple economy. We are talking about an economy that is based on the production of goods and services. So, let us talk about this question, first what to Produce? And then what to do? And finally, how to Do it? And what to Do It? And who should produce it? will time and again in this course, to make our life simpler, we will assume a very simple version of it. So, let us talk about island economy, this island economy is populated by only two individuals. One is Robinson Crusoe, and second is Xena, the warrior princess. Names are Robinson Crusoes and Xena the Warrior Princess. We will assume that this is the case for the rest of our lives. And we will try to make it as simple as possible. There are only two activities on this island. The first activity is catching fish, and second activity is gather coconut. So now, of course, here no literal production is taking place, but again we will use.immaterial just to make story interesting. So, do not pay attention to names, and there are only. two activities, and they are catching fish and gathering coconut. The only activity is catch fish, the other is gathering coconut, and this is what we do. it in a very loose sense. The production here involves catching fish or two production activities, catching fish and gathering coconut. So now, the first question is how they should do? Should they devote all their time to catch fish or should they devoteall their time for gathering coconuts? So, they have several options. So, if they spend all. their time catching fish, they would not be able to gather any coconut, or otherwise also if they. spend all the time gathering coconut, they cannot catch any fish. there; devote part of the time to catch fish or devote all the time that they have to catchFish depending on their need. So, how this allocation involves making this decision what you produce. The next is how to produce. Now let us bring, just to understand let us say that we are going to produce fish. We are not going to be able to produce all the fish that we want. We will have to produce what we need to produce to meet our needs. We have to make the decision what to produce and how to do it. bring the third activity, that they can take up is that, they can fabricate net that would help them catch fish. So, how do they produce involve; are they going to use their bare hand to catch fish, or they are going to make net to catchFish? So of course, of course they can make net, and they can catch fish with their bare hands, and with their nets, and so on. So that's how they can produce involve, and that's what they can do. this decision is about technology and what kind of process they would use to produce these two items. And third is about once they have produced, how they are going to allocate? How they're going to share? How are they going to give these collected coconuts and fish among each other? The decision is also about how they will share the proceeds of the production of these items with the local community. The decision will be made in the next few days or weeks, the government says. themselves, Robinson and Xena. And depending on who makes these decisions we have different form of economy. So, let us look at something, what we call command economy. In command economy essential authority typically, government some sort of government. And so, these are the three fundamental questions. What do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments below or tweet us @CNNOpinion. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from. Back To The page you come from. Government or a central authority is the decision-making body. Here individuals do not have to make many choices. The second we can think of is market economy. Here, as opposed to command economy, decisions are made by individuals. For example, let us say a farmer in west bengal produces some rice, nobody tells him how he should produce, what he should, where he should send his produce. So, what is happening there the individual is deciding on his own. The third is the market economy, where individuals decide on their own. own about these allocation questions. Third is mixed economy, here it is somewhat a mixture of command and market-based economy. So, some decisions are made by central authority while some other decisions are left to individuals. Now think of it how would you categorize Indian economic system? Do we have a command economy or a market economy? We will have to wait and see, says Ravi Agrawal, director of the Centre for Policy Research, a think tank based in New Delhi. command economy? Or we have market-based economy? or do we have mixed economy? Also, it is good idea to think about what we had before 1991, and what we have after 1991. Just to let you know earlier we had mixed economy, but heavily tilted towards command economy central planning. After 1991 after economic liberalization we are slowly moving towards market based economy. But we are not yet there so, still I would say that we have a mixed economy but realistically speaking these are 2 extreme command economy, and market economy. say we can characterize them near to command economy or market based economy, but truly speaking none of the economies are purely command economy. One concept that I would like to emphasize here is laissez faire, this is a French word it means leaving it. It is not a command or a market economy, it is an economy that is open to all people and all ideas. It's a very open and free economy, and that is what we are trying to create in the U.S. alone. So, what do we mean by leaving it alone? That here in laissez faire kind of economy of course, it is an extreme version of market economy where private parties are absolutely free from government interaction, intervention such as tariffs, tax, regulations. "So, individuals transact without any interference of the government," he says. "That's what we're trying to achieve here in the U.S. and around the world," he adds. "It's a very, very different world than we're used to seeing," he writes. the government. So, this is a concept, an extreme concept that we typically do not find, but you would see in newspapers talk about moving towards laissez faire or moving away from laissezes faire. The government. is not a government, it is a body that has the power to decide what happens to people's lives. The. government is not the government. It is a group of people who have the power. to make decisions about people’s lives. It has the ability to make changes to the law.