Alberto Riva is an instructor at CHB. He will talk to you about the most important resources for finding and using biomedical information. This is going to be something probably slightly different from what you've heard before, he says. He'll talk about information connected with the study of the human genome, among other things. For more information, visit CHB's website or go to http://www.chb.org/biomedical/resources-for-finding-and-using-biomedical-information. heard so far, which concentrate more on actual locations. Most of them will be websites, where you can find information, and to talk about how this information is stored and represented, how it's accessible, and what it can be used for. So you're going to see a long list of what we've heard so far. We're looking forward to hearing from you, so please send us your photos and videos of where you've been and what you've seen. We'll post them on our social media channels. of references to sites, websites, with URLs. Don't worry if you can't remember all of them because, of course, I'm going to distribute the slides and will be easier to just look them up. So I'mgoing to start with something that you probably heard about many times before. The Internet as we know it was created in the 1990s by Bill Clinton and George W. Bush. In the early days of the Internet, it was known as the Internet. It was created as a result of a series of events, including the creation of the Web. so-called central dogma of molecular biology, as you know, almost all our cells contain DNA in their nucleus. DNA is the molecule that encodes information-- for at least from the purposes of this presentation, this is what we're interested in. And this information is transcribed into our name molecules, that we can use to make new molecules. We can also use this information to create new molecules that can be used to make a new type of drug. We're going to use this technique to create a new drug that can treat cancer. then exit the nucleus under the form of mRNA. MRNA is then translated into proteins. Proteins are ultimately what is responsible for essentially all the external manifestations, all the observable properties of our biology. So I'm talking about things like metabolism, general physiology, diversity between individuals, diseases, drug response. And I'm not just talking about human biology. I'm also talking about other animals' biology as well as other species' biology, such as other mammals, birds and fish. These are all, n some way or another, due to the different proteins that act within our cells and outside our cells. So we have names, of course, for the extremes of the spectrum. We call genotype-- this information is encoded in the DNA. And on the other hand, we also have a name for the information that is not encoded in DNA. We called this information "genotype," and it's part of our genetic code. We also have names for the opposite of genotype, such as "genetic code" call phenotype whatever is at the other extreme of the spectrum, anything we can observe, we can measure, from the outside. So what I'm going to try to show you is that, as you move from one end of the. spectrum to the other, you're going to encounter very different phenotypes. That's what we're trying to show with this video. It's a very different way of looking at what's going on in the human body, and it's very different from what we've seen in the past. forms of information, of data. And each one has its own specific nature and function, and needs to be treated with different tools. So essentially these are the questions that I'm going to answer. How is all this information represented? What are the different ways that we can store and describe this information? Where does it come from, where is it stored, how do we find retrieve and use it? So we've talked about the two ends of the spectrum. So there are some very deep differences between the kind of information. The genotype is digital, because each base pair in our DNA can be exactly represented using one of four symbols, A, P, G, C. On the other hand, the phenotype is, say, analog. Because most phenotypes are qualitative in nature. They cannot be measured exactly. But essentially, using a small number of symbols, you can provide an exact representation of our genome, of all the 3 billion base pairs that compose our DNA. You can also think about insertions, deletions, and so on. or precise, they cannot even be defined precisely in most cases. You always have to take into account the effect of environmental factors that, again, are very hard to describe in a quantitative way. At the root of all this is that one of the biggest problems in the study is that it is very difficult to define the environmental factors involved in the development of a city in the first place. It is a very complex and complex field. It's a very long way from being able to say what the environmental factor is that is responsible for a city's development. of protein is the fact that the proteins are not uniquely determined by their sequence. For DNA, you just look at the sequence and you know essentially all that there is to know about DNA. For proteins, you cannot look at. the subsequence of a protein and understand just by. the sequence of that protein. For example, you can’t look at a protein’s sequence and know just by the sequence that it is made up of. You can only know what the sequence is of the protein by looking at its structure. looking at it what the protein is going to do. Not even how it's going to be-- not even what it's three-dimensional structure is. That's difficult enough. Then understanding what theprotein does, just by looking at the sequence, is still very far from being feasible. It's a very, very long way from being able to say what a protein will do, let alone how it will do it. That is a very big step. It is a long, long way off. The first thought is of inherited traits date back to Mendel in 1866. Nobody had any idea that there was any connection between these two things, between the DNA and inherited traits. It took over 80 years for this concept to be proven. So the definite proof that genes are made. It's much easier to observe a phenotype than to observe DNA in ourselves. The idea of genes is that they are made in a way that they can be passed down from one generation to the next. of DNA dates back to 1952. After that, progress was faster because the elucidation of the structure of DNA, and the DNA replication mechanism, came one year later. Then the geniculate code was deciphered between 1961 and 1966. Something that we now take for granted, like the discovery of introns, was discovered in the 1950s. The discovery of the introns was made in the 1970s and the first DNA sequencing was done in the 1980s and 1990s. only happened in 1977. The Human Genome Project, that was officially declared a success last year, brought us to the point where we now know the exact base pair sequence of our genome. "We now know with a sufficient degree of certainty-- we're going to talk about it," says Dr. David Perry. "It's a very exciting time," he says. "I'm looking forward to the day when we can talk about all of these things with a certainty," he adds. This more later-- we know the exact base pair composition of the human genome. And also several other genomes, but of course, the human one is the one we're most interested in. Going back again from genotype to phenotype, there is another thing to note. I've just said that we know that we have a human genome, but we also have a number of other genomes. And we're looking at how they interact with each other. We'll talk more about this more later. now have the complete sequence for our genome, but of course, this is an approximation. It's an abstraction, actually, because even if we're all human beings, there are no two human beings that are exactly the same. And this is a consequence of the fact that there are differences between humans and other animals. And so, even if you think you're a human, you're not a human. You're not the same person as another human being. You are a different person. the DNA of two any human beings. These differences are due to polymorphisms, like single nucleotide polymorphisms. Instead of having the base that everybody else has, you have a different base. Microsatellites, repeats, insertions, deletions, translocations, these are all things that can happen to your DNA sequence. The DNA of any human being can be altered by a variety of factors. These include genetic mutations, as well as chromosomal changes, such as deletions and insertions. that can modify in ways that, of course, are not enough to turn you into another animal. Your DNA sequence is slightly different from the sequence of any other human being. So if you have one of these polymorphisms, every 1,000 bases, you're still a human being, but you have a different DNA sequence than other people. That's what makes you different from other people, and that's what we're trying to figure out how to make people different from each other. you think we have 3 billion base pairs, it adds up to a very large number of differences. We now have the sequence of the human genome. But then if you go and look at one individual, you're not going to find the same thing. It's a very, very complex set of questions that have to be answered. It is a very exciting time for scientists. It will lead to a lot of new discoveries. It has the potential to change the way we look at the world. going to find that his DNA matches exactly the sequence that you find in the human genome databases. You're going to find approximately one difference every 1,000 bases. And understanding what these differences do and mean, and what is their consequence, is one of the most interesting problems in current science. "It's a very exciting time to be a geneticist," says Dr. Richard Branson, the director of the Center for Genome Research at the University of California, San Diego. bioinformatics and molecular biology, because now we finally have the tools of looking at our genome with this level of detail. We can look at individual base pairs and we can see, well, there should be an A here, and instead, we have a C. Does that cause a problem? We don't know, but we can try to figure out how to get it to work. It's a very exciting time for us, and I'm looking forward to seeing what the future holds. So again, we're going to go back to this soon. And the same thing happens for phenotypes, although in a slightly different ways. Phenotypes are generalizations, too. So when we talk about things like species. We're all human beings, but we're all different from a geniculate point. That's what we're trying to get at with phenotypes. And we'll be back to talk about that soon, I'm sure. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. of view. So it means that putting all of us together into one big group, in one species, is a generalization, of course. And even going down to ethnicity, or even a concept like disease, these are generalizations, because these are concepts that cannot be defined in a precise, formal way, he says. "It's a very, very complex world out there," he says, "and it's very difficult to put it into terms that can be easily defined" way. So we will see as we go forward that we're going to encounter very different forms of data. And we are going to need different methods to manipulate this data, according to what the purpose of our work is. So just to make this clear, if we are working at a very high level, we need to be able to manipulate data in a very different way than we have been able to in the past. That's what we're trying to do here. We're working at the highest level of data manipulation. the level of DNA, then the typical operations we might be interested in doing are, for example, sequence matching. So to understand if certain stretch of a sequence matches anything else that you've seen before. So this is useful, for instance, when you discover a new gene, you want to find out if it matches anything you've already seen. It's a very powerful tool, and it can be used for a lot of different things, such as finding out if a gene is related to another gene or not. know, first of all, if it's really a new gene, or if it has already been seen somewhere else. If it's a new Gene, you would like to understand-- have an idea of what it does. And if you find a similarity between your new gene and something that's already been found, you've found a gene. If you're not sure if you have a gene, you can ask your doctor for a blood test to see if it is a new or old gene. known, that can give a lot of information. We're talking about discovering genes-- finding genes in a DNA sequence is not trivial. There are programs that do this. They just look at the sequence and they find locations in the DNA sequence that might contain genes. And I'm not going to go into that right now, but it's a good place to start. It's not trivial, it's not easy, and it can take a long time to find out what's in there. Homology searches refer to looking for similarities between DNA sequences in different organisms. So if you discover the function of a certain DNA sequence, you can look for it in other organisms. There are various reasons why this is a pretty complex thing to do from a computational point of view. To go into details on this, we need to look at the DNA sequences of different organisms in the same way as we look for similarities in human DNA. We also need to study the DNA sequence of different species of fish. gene in the mouse, for example, you would like to if it does the same thing in humans. So again, if you find a high degree of similarity between the two genes, you can hypothesize that they are also going to have the same function. We've talked about polymorphisms, so if you have a polymorphism in one gene, you also have one in the other, so you have to look at the same gene in both of them. That's what we're doing here. another pretty common cooperation is performing DNA sequences, is SNP detection. So if you sequence the same stretch of DNA from a certain number of different individuals, then you can compare them. And you're going to find that most of the locations are the same for all individuals. But some are not, and that's where SNP detection comes into play. It can be used to identify people who may be at risk of cancer or other genetic disorders, for example. But it can also be used as a tool to find out if a person is at risk for cancer. SNPs are locations where different individuals don't have the exact same nucleotide. And this is how SNPs are discovered, how single nucleotide polymorphisms are discovered. And we'll talk later about why genotyping is important, what kind of information you can get from that, and how you can use it to improve your chances of finding out more about a person's genetic make-up. of them will be different. We'll also talk about why it's important to be able to test for SNPs and other genetic disorders. this relates to diseases, to basically trying to figure out what is the relationship between the genotype, and in this case, between polymorphisms in your genotype and phenotype, like disease. At a level of RNA, it might be interesting to look at alternative splicing transcription rearrangements. These are all things that can be studied at a lower level, like in the human genome, to try and figure out how they relate to disease. It's a very interesting area of research. that happen to the original DNA sequence when it's transcribed into RNA. It undergoes a series of transformations that can, of course, affect, in a very deep way, the final product. And this process, the process of transcribing the DNA sequences into RNA, is the basis of the DNA-to-RNA transfer process. The process is known as RNA polymerisation. It is a process that occurs when DNA is transcribed from DNA to RNA in a way that produces a new type of protein. expression analysis. Differentiable analysis, clustering, and so on, these are all the usual things that can be done using microarrays, using gene expression microarray. We talk about this in the other lectures. And you've heard a lot in the others lectures about microarraying. So I'm not going to go into too much details on this, but differentiable analysis and clustering are all part of the same process. It's just a different way of looking at it. Predicting the three dimensional structure of a protein is another very important and very complex task. Starting homology and conservation of proteins across different organisms can give you a very good idea of the importance of some proteins. So if something that's been around for millions of years can be predicted, that's a big step. It's a lot of work, but it's a very important step in the study of proteins. It can help us understand how proteins work and how they interact with other proteins and genes. years, it probably means that it's involved in a very basic mechanism, while there are some proteins that are new, that are only specific to human beings. And finally, something that is very challenging, and it's receiving a lot of attention lately, is the role of proteins in the immune system. And that, again, can give you some information. It's a very exciting time for scientists, and I'm looking forward to finding out what the future has in store for us. is the automatic construction and analysis of metabolic pathways and regulatory pathways. If you are able to understand how proteins interact with each other, and interact with the rest of the cell, how they then regulate other genes, and in turn other proteins, then you can use this information to improve your knowledge of the human body. For more information, or to learn more about how to use this technology, visit the Human Genome Project website. For further information, visit the HumanGenomeProject.org. try to build, in a computational way, the kind of pathway maps that biologists have been drawing by hand for decades. And of course, we're still very far away from being able to do this in the general case. It works in some limited case, and we're going to see it work in the future, he says. But it's still a long way off from being a fully-functioning computer system, he adds. "We're still going to have to wait and see," he says, "but it's a step in the right direction." later some examples of some of these things. But these are all very challenging problems that, of course, are still very much open. And finally, we get to the phenotype then, we could put a very long list of things here, but could talk about population genetics, about association studies. It could be a long list, but we could talk for a long time about what we're trying to do. It's a very interesting area of research. We're looking forward to seeing what the future holds. Association studies are studies that try to correlate the presence of a certain genotype with an observed phenotype. Like in the most common case, association studies based on SNPs, they just look at two different alleles of a SNP. They try to figure out if there is statistical correlation between the genotype and the observed phenotypic state. For more information on association studies, go to association studies.org or call the National Institutes of Health at 1-800-273-8255 or go to http://www.nhs.gov/. between one or two alleles and the disease, and that might mean that the SNP is indeed responsible for the disease in some way. And clinical trials, of course, to validate all this. OK, so two more slides about philosophy and then we'll start with the more practical stuff. I've been asked to give you a look at some of the ways in which the SNP could be used in the future to help people with cancer. I'll be back in a few minutes with a few more slides. already mentioned the word gene a lot of times, and I'm going to mention it again very often. So it might be interesting to ask ourselves, what is a gene? And this is something that it's a question to which the answer is probably obvious, but it turns out that it isn't. It's a gene that can be passed down from generation to generation. And it can also be passed on through a person's descendants. And that's a very interesting thing to find out. there are actually many possible answers, according to the context you're in. So for example, if you ask a classical geneticist what is a gene, you will get the answer that a gene is the smallest unit of inheritance. The different view of the world that you're using can give you a different answer to the same question. For example, a gene can be seen as a small piece of DNA that is passed down from generation to generation. It can also be seen to be the smallest piece of information about a person's history. This is the definition that goes back to Mendel, essentially. If you ask someone who is doing medical research, you will get the answer that the gene is a disease-causing trait. So hear about the [INAUDIBLE] gene, or the gene for cystic fibrosis, and so on. So in this case, it is the gene that is causing the disease. It is not the other way around. The gene is the cause of the disease, not the cause. the word gene has a very clear clinical connotation. If you ask a molecular biologist, you get the answer that the gene is a recipe-- is essentially a program to build one or more proteins. It's an active element in one of those big networks of interacting genes that regulate each other, and that overall realize the metabolic process. And we can go on, we can ask biochemists, and you will get the answers that the Gene is an element in a metabolic network. And if you're a motor geneticist, you'll get the same answer. locus on a chromosome, in a certain region of a chromosome that has a functional characterization. Locus that was studied, and was found to have a specific function in our biology. And finally, if you ask a bioinformatician, you will get the answer that a gene is just a stretch. It's not a gene, it's a region of the chromosome that is important to the biology of a particular species of animal. It could be a gene or it could be something else. of DNA where we know there is a gene. So we know it has a transcription start site, encoding sequence start site and exons and intrinsic in certain positions. In the following, we are to see examples of all of these different ways to look at the gene. And to start, of course, we're going to start from the beginning. So from DNA sequence data. And now we're starting toLook at where all these different pieces of information can be found, and how they can be used. GenBank is the largest repository of sequence data. It accepts direct submissions from researchers. So anybody in the world who sequences a new piece of DNA can send it to GenBank. They're stored and represented in a secure location in the U.S. and around the world. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the United States, call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. GenBank contains more than 22 million sequences and 100,000 distinct organisms. With a total of almost 30 billion nucleotides, GenBank is the world's largest database of DNA sequences. It's put in the big cauldron, and it's put to the test of the human genome. The results are expected to be very interesting, and very surprising, for scientists and for the future of DNA sequencing in general. The next step is to figure out how to use the data to make new discoveries and discoveries. GenBank. And GenBank is at the basis of the NCBI cluster. So the National Center for Biotechnology Information, is a branch of the NIH, that has the task of assembling the largest possible number of databases of biomedical information. They manage GenBank, and Gen bank, in turn, is at a basis for NCBI's databases. The NCBI is a part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), which is a division of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. for a lot of other resources that we're going to see now, that are all part of this cluster of NCBI resources. They're all interconnected, so you can easily jump from one to the other, and that is a very powerful way of exploring this kind of data. So this is a great way to explore the data, and it's a great place to start, too, because it's all in one place, and you can jump between different parts of the system. is a graph that shows you the growth of GenBank in recent years. You can see the very steep growth of the number of base pairs. And you can probably tell that the number-- we're sequencing longer and longer sequences, because the blue graph grows more rapidly than the red one. But anyway, what do you do when you have all these accumulated sequences? So in GenBank, you just have sequences by themselves that can be very short, very long, but they're just independent sequences that were put together. If you have enough sequences from the same organism, you can try assembling them, putting them together, and trying to reconstruct the entire genome. And this is what was done to assemble the human genome, for example, and all the other genomes. There are many ways to try to reconstruct a genome. There is a lot of information that can be found on the internet about how to do this, but it's very difficult to do it in a systematic way. It's a very complex process, and it takes a long time. genomes that are being sequenced. You start with-- you look at the sequences you have, and if you can find overlaps, then you know that these two sequences are related in some way, and you proceed from there. In the end you're going to build a map that tells you where all these fragments should be positioned on the chromosome. And you have different levels of coverage, so that you can basically arrange them in this way. And then let's say you sequence another one, and again you find an overlap with one that you already have. you have regions that you've seen only once, regions you've see twice, regions You've seen three times. If you have a sufficient degree of coverage, then you can say, well, OK, I believe this is the right sequence. And you proceed from there, you take that for granted, you proceed. You proceed. And if you have enough coverage, you can take that taken for granted and proceed. If not, you have to go back to the beginning and try again. from there by connecting more and more overlapping pieces. Up to a level of coverage-- I think it's five or six times covered, so each stretch of DNA in the human genome has been sequenced at least five or five times. And again, this is how the human genomes was sequenced essentially. It's a very complex process, but the goal is to get to a point where you can sequence all of the DNA in a person's genome. That's what we're trying to do here. six times for validation. And in addition to the human genome, of course, we have a lot of other genomes that are completed, or near completion. So and the details of how this process has been implemented and CVI are here. These numbers are probably higher by now we have more than 1,000 genomes completed or near completed. And we have many more that are in the pipeline or under construction. We are working on a number of them that will be published in the next few years. over 1,000 viruses. And then many other organisms from different domains of life. Of course, eukaryotes are the hardest organisms to sequence. But the human genome is considered finished by now. It is hard to go above this level of accuracy. It's probably not even necessary because the differences between two are so small. It would be a waste of time to try and sequence them all at the same time. It wouldn't be as accurate as it would be to sequence one or two organisms at a time. human beings are probably the same order of magnitude. But now we have several other organisms, including a chimp, that was recently released. And it's going to be very interesting because it's essentially identical to the human genome. So there is 1%-- the differences are about 1% between the genomes of humans and chimps. But there is a 1% difference between the human and chimpanzee genomes. That's a very, very small amount of genetic variation. It's very small. of the human and the chimp. And it will be very interesting to see exactly where these differences are, and why they are responsible for the fact that we are humans and they are monkeys. Again this is a link to the entry point for the description of all of the animals that make up the chimpanzee family. It will also be interesting to find out where the differences are between the humans and the chimps, and how they relate to each other. It is possible to see the differences between humans and chimps in different ways. the genomes that are stored in NCBI. And a new genomes, the small ones-- the viruses and bacteria, there arenew genomes, essentially, every week. So these numbers constantly change. Now, we now have the complete subsequence of the human genome. Where do you find it? So the best resource is NCBI, which has all the information you need to find out what's going on in your body. It's in the National Institutes of Health, in Bethesda, Maryland. Golden Path is a genome browser for several different organisms. Initially it was only for human-- now it has mouse, rat, chimp, Drosophila, yeast, and a few others. The nice thing about Golden Path is that it allows you to look at the human genome in a variety of ways. It's a great tool for looking at the genome of animals and plants, as well as humans. For more information on Golden Path, visit: www.goldenpath.org. it gives a graphical view, so you can see it in the next slide, it's very clear. It's very easy to find all the information you need about a certain region of the chromosome. All the information it provides is available in easy to download and easy to use formats. It is very clear and easy-to-use, and it's easy to read and understand. It has a very intuitive user interface and is very intuitive to use. It gives a very clear view of what is going on. It provides arbitrary DNA sequences. So you can ask for any region of any human chromosome, you'll get back the exact DNA sequence for that region. So if you want to build your own database, it contains the same information that is something that is pretty easy. For example, it can be used to parse formats. To see the full video, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories. For more information on the project, visit www.soulmatsurface.com. Golden Path was the first site to provide something like this. It gives you the absolute position of all the known elements of our genome. It was still something that was almost impossible to obtain two or three years ago, but now it's easy to do. The site is based in San Francisco, California, and is run by a team of researchers. It is owned by a group of academics and scientists called the Institute for Genome Research, which is based at the University of California, San Francisco. So genes, markers, mutations, other features, they tell you exactly they are at this location, in terms of the absolute base pair. And this is how it looks like-- this is an example, we're looking at the region that contains the TLR1 gene. This is the URL for Golden Path. And it's a tool to help you find out where to look for a gene or a mutation in the world. It's called Golden Path and it's available on Google Play. And you can see all these different tracks that provide different information on different objects. So for example, up here we have the genes, we have different sets of known genes. We have predicted genes, according to different prediction algorithms. And you can also see the mRNAs that were aligned to this gene, for example. You can see the different tracks for different objects, such as a car or a person. And it's all based on different algorithms and data sets that are being used. We have a tract like this and that shows the conservation between human and mouse in this region. So you can see it's very interesting to see that obviously the coding part of the gene is the one that is most highly conserved betweenhuman and mouse. That is the gene that is the most conserved in the human genome. It's very exciting to see the conservation of this gene in humans and mice. It is a very exciting time for the field of human genetics and evolution. functional part. So it undergoes selective pressure. There are tracks that tell you the location of SNPs, and so on. You can select the tracks you want to see, and you get your choice. There were many others that of course don't fit in here, but you can customize the display. It's a great way to get a sense of what's going on around you, and what you can do to improve your experience. It can also be used as a training tool for people who want to learn more. own view of a certain genetic region. You have the coordinates up here, chromosome 4, the band, and so on. And this is just to show that you can query it for any-- this is the same DNA region we were looking at before. But in this case, we asked for a different DNA region. We asked for the region that was on chromosome 4. It was the same region that we had been looking at earlier in the study. We were able to get the same results as before. The NCBI map viewer is a graphical browser to look at genomes and annotations of genomes. It's organized around several maps-- they have sequence maps, cytogenetic maps, language maps, radiation hybrid, human mouse homology maps. Each one of these is a view that gives you a different set of objects in the view. So in the sequence map, you can find information about the genes, transcripts, gene clusters, and so on. Inside the genetic map, for example, inside the DNA sequence, you could find a gene cluster. you find information about disease genes, what bands break points. It's extremely detailed, because of course, it can rely on the whole set of NCBI databases. "I, personally, find it a bit complex to use, a bit harder," he says. "It's a bit more complex than I thought it would be," he adds, "but it's a lot of fun to play with." "I find it more fun than I expected," he admits, "because it's so detailed and detailed" to use than Golden Path. Shows you much more detailed information here in this graphical bars, on the features of the genetic region. But then the coded information is a bit harder. They use all these abbreviations. But it's is a matter of taste. It's organized in a different way. shows you muchMore detailed information on theFeatures of the Genetic region. Shows. you muchmore detailed information. on the Features of the genetics region. shows. you many more detailed details on the genetics of a particular region. SNPs are the most common form of variation in our genome. They're much more frequent than microsatellites or insertions, deletions, and other things. SNPs are at a fixed location in the genome. And if you know where the SNP is, you can find it. You can use them as causal candidates for diseases, because a certain percentage of the SNPs introduce changes that then have some consequence on the genotype, on the disease.here. They essentially serve the same purpose with different levels of detail in different areas. phenotype. What I mean is that, for example, if you have a SNP in the coding. subsequence of a protein, you're going to get a protein that has an abnormal sequence. And that can be a change that doesn't cause any consequence, or it might be a very dramatic change. It can also cause a change in the gene expression of a gene, such as in a gene for a certain type of protein, which can lead to an abnormal gene. It could also cause the gene to be misfolded, leading to a genetic defect. For example, there are some SNPs that introduce a stop in the protein sequence. Instead of just being modified, it's truncated. It's shorter than it should be. As you can imagine, this is a chain that can be very very long. It can be a very dangerous thing to have in your body, especially if you're a young child or a young adult. It could be very dangerous for you to have these SNPs in your system. You could end up with a very, very long, very dangerous chain. There are many diseases that are due to the fact that you have SNPs that truncate proteins. They can be used as evolutionary markers, because SNPs arise randomly during the replication, and then they are transmitted from one generation to the next. And it's very interesting to study how SNPs are transmitted, and how they are used as markers for disease. It's a very interesting area of research. It is a very exciting area of science, and it is very exciting to be a part of. SNPs get-- how the frequency of the SNP changes in a population. Most SNPs are deleterious. But in some cases, the SNP can also provide an advantage, if it generates something that was not present. So if you have a SNP that provides an advantage for you, you can use it to your advantage. If you don't have an SNP, you might not be able to use it at all. You can use the SNP to get an advantage in some situations. before, and that works better than the original. So if you have a SNP that introduces a change is beneficial, then you will-- given enough time-- you will see that the frequency of the SNPs increases in the population. More and more individuals are going to have the variant form of the SNP, and it will work better than it did before, says Dr. David Frum, a geneticist at the University of California, Los Angeles, and author of the book SNPs: A Geneticist's Guide. of the SNP. On the other hand, if a SNP is neutral, then there is no selective pressure, and it will either go away by chance, or will stay at a certain basic level of frequency. So you can study the frequency of the SNP to understand if it's undergoing a change in direction. If you are concerned that the SNP is becoming more frequent, you should contact the Scottish National Party (SNP) on 0300 123 909 or call the SNP helpline on 08457 90 90 90 or visit their website. selective pressure, so to know if it's deleterious or not, or you can use it to reconstruct basically the history of our genome. There are ways of calculating the age of the SNP, so when that mutation arose. Now the largest database of SNPs has been set up in the UK. It will be used to help scientists understand the genetic basis of disease and disease prevention. It is the first of its kind in the world and will be open to the rest of the world. that we have again, is at NCBI, it's called the dbSNP-- currently contains over 4 million human SNPs. And almost 50% of the SNPs are validated, which is something very important, means that the SNP has been validated. The SNP has now been validated by the National Institutes of Health, which means that it can now be used to identify people with certain genetic disorders, such as autism, for example. It's a very exciting time for people who want to know if they have a genetic disorder. been observed independently multiple times. So you know it's a true SNP. It could be, many times, since sequencing is not an exact process, if you just look at a set of sequencing traces, you could think that there is a SNP when it's actually just a sequencing error. Now, if the SNP was validated, means it was observed several times by independent investigators, and that gives you the almost total certainty. There are other databases of SNPs. Another very important one is the SNP Consortium Database at Cold Spring Harbor. thing about TSC is that first of all, all the TSC SNPs are validated. So they basically take SNPs on dbSNPs, then they check them again, to make sure that they're really SNPs. And while doing that, they also look at the frequency of theSNPs. So what do I need to do to get to the right SNPs? TSC can help you out with some of the questions you may be asking. TSC has a number of tools to help you get to know your SNPs better. mean? A SNP is a polymorphism that substitutes the nucleotide you should have at one location with a different one. So if you look at a population of individuals, you're going to see that the major allele of the SNP, the common one, has a certain frequency. So it appears, so it appears that the SNP is common in the population. It's a very common SNP in the U.S. and it's very common in other countries, too. It can be found on the National Institutes of Health website. for example, in 80% of individuals. And the alternative allele appears in 20% of the population. Now, knowing this frequency is very important, because it allows you, then, to do association studies. For example, to look for a correlation between a disease and this polymorphism. But in order to be able to do that, you need to know the frequency of the SNP, which is very, very important. It's very important that you know how common it is, because then you can look for correlation between it and disease. able to do this, you have to know what is the baseline frequency. What is the original frequency in normal, so to speak, human beings. Yes? AUDIENCE: I guess the question then becomes, what are the base population is across base population-- ALBERTO RIVA: That's what I was going to say. That's the question. Yes, that's what we were going to talk about. Yes. The question is, what is that base population? If a SNP arises in a population, then it tends to be limited to that population. You're not going to find it in a different population, unless there is some genetic interchange between the two. So when you look at the frequency of a SNP, it's very important to specify what population you're looking at.say next. The next episode of The Daily Discussion will be at 10am ET on Thursday, November 14. The following day, the next episode will be on the topic of population genetics, at 11am ET. Haplotype Map project-- this is kind of a new project that is aimed at developing a haplotype map of the human genome. HGbase, another database of SNPs, it's manually curated, so you find-- it's very limited, but you find information that has very high quality. It's all manually verified, and it focuses on SNPs. But this will become clearer in the lecture about haplotypes.because we're going to have an example in two slides. So let's just get back to this in a second. the potential consequences of SNPs. Alfred at Yale is another very small database, but it has a very high quality, and it focuses on frequency data. And what they do is very, very interesting. So you're going to find a lot of information about known associations between SNPs and diseases. It's a very interesting area of research. I think it's going to be a very exciting area of study for many years to come," says Dr. David Perry, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. They go look at many, many different populations, and especially a population, at small isolated populations from where we are. Places like small islands, and Pacific or remote villages in Siberia, and so on. So they actually try to look for isolated populations to maximize the differences in SNP frequency. They actually look at isolated populations. They look at small groups of people. They try to find people who have the same SNP frequency as the rest of the population. It's a very, very complex process. that they're going to find, in order to have a picture of human diversity as complete as possible. And finally, SNPper that I'm citing because we developed a chip, this is a resource that tries to integrate information from all the places that I sited so far. So it takes a long time to get to the bottom of all of this, but it's worth it in the end, I think, for the sake of the future of the world. I hope you'll join me. information mainly from dbSNP, from Golden Path, from TSC, from Alfred, from HGbase. It tries to put everything together in a unified view that allows you to look at the gene, find all the SNPs around that gene. And then look at everything that is known about individual SNPs. And it provides a way of exporting this data in different formats to make it easier to process later. And I just want to show you one slide from SNPper, but. this is a window that describes-- that tells you information about the particular SNP-- this is a [? SNP ?] identifier. And so you can see there is a top part where you have general information where the SNP is, just the position on chromosome 6, where the alleles are, and so on. The bottom part is where you can find out more information about a particular SNP, such as where it is located on the chromosome 6 or where it's located in the gene pool. the gene it belongs to, notch 4. And here, it tells you that this gene is in the coding sequence of the gene, and it actually causes an amino acid change at position 319. It affects protein domains-- this is the list of protein domains that are affected by the gene. It actually causes a change in the amino acid position of a protein domain. This is the protein domain that is affected by this gene. The protein domains affected by it are the protein domains involved in protein folding. SNP. This is the list of some [? matters ?] of the investigators who have observed this SNP. It's a long list, so it means that this is definitely a true SNP. And finally under here, I wanted to show you, this data comes from TSC, and it's a data set that's been collected by the National Security Agency. It shows that the NSA has been conducting surveillance on the U.S. government. The NSA has also been monitoring U.N. agencies, including the State Department. frequency information data. So they sampled 41 individuals from a population of African-Americans. They found that these are the frequencies for two alleles, 72% A, 20% G. And then they looked at a different population-- these are Caucasian, I think-- and they found very different alleles frequencies. So different populations, so different allels frequencies. And they found that they had very different frequencies for the two different types of alleles. And that's what they were looking for. that what was the minor allele in the first case is now the major allele. So this is a very clear demonstration of why it's important to know what population we're talking about when we study the frequency of a SNP. Because if you started-- if you believe these numbers, if you start with the wrong population, you're going to get the wrong results. That's what happened in this case. It's a very good example of how important it is to know the population you're talking to. and then you try to run association studies in the SNP on a different population, you're going to find totally different numbers. So this is just to show that the advantages of having an integrated view that brings together information from different sources, and allows you to get a clear picture of what the SNP does and everything that it does, is very important. And this doesn't have anything to do with disease-- you are not looking at the same population. And the baseline frequency of this SNP and the two populations is very different. is known about it. The sequence of a protein is-- well, it contains portions that are active domains, they are the portions of the protein that then physically do something. For example, this is the active domain of the proteins that are involved in cell division. This is the domain that is involved in the cell division of a certain type of protein. The active domain is the one that is responsible for cell division in the human body. It is also responsible for the development of the human nervous system. domain here is the extracellular domain, is the main that goes outside the cell. This is a calcium binding domain. So these are structures of the protein sequences that are known to have some function, they are important because they do something. And if you have a SNP that affects the cell, it could be a sign that something is wrong with the body. It could be that the body is not producing enough of a protein that is needed for the body to function properly. It may also be that there is a problem with the way the protein is encoded in the genome. one of them, that SNP, in turn, might cause a protein to work-- it can change the function of a SNP-- of a protein. And we get so many because all all the SNPs do is change a protein's function. This is not meant to be an accurate prediction of what the SNP does. It's just an example of what we can do with SNPs to try to understand what they do and what they don't do. We don't know the full story yet. these domains are overlapping. And this information comes from Swiss [INAUDIBLE] database of protein information. And so you see for example, this first domain covers almost all of the protein. AUDIENCE: So six would be the maximum number? ALBERTO RIVA: No, no, it's just that these domains can be overlapping, just because the Swiss people, they annotate the protein sequence saying OK, from here to here, we know that this happens. But-- well, well, there are some domains that cover the entire protein. can be overlapping. It doesn't necessarily mean that the SNP affects all of them in some meaningful way. This one is probably the only one that could be affected by the presence of a SNP. Because it's a binding domain, so it might be that it doesn't work anymore. It might be a sign the SNP isn't working properly. It's a sign that something is wrong with the system. It could be that the system is not working as it should be. It may be that some of its functions don't work properly. LocusLink is a curated directory of binding domains. So don't get confused by this place. Just a list of Swiss [INAUDIBLE] domains that include that location. Now, the next step I'm going to talk about genes again. And the starting point, when we talks about genes, it's LocusLink. The starting point is Locuslink.as a binding domain. The next step is to look at genes and how we use them in our work. We'll talk about that in a few minutes. Genes are discovered either experimentally, or by programs like GenScan that look at the DNA sequence and tell you where a gene might be. Then the gene has to be studied in order to know what it does. The word curated here is very important. Genes from 13 organisms were curated by scientists at the University of California, San Diego. The genes were discovered by looking at DNA sequences and then by studying the DNA sequences of 13 organisms. The results were published in the journal Genome Research. what all its relationship to other genes and biological processes are. So LocusLink is basically a repository of information about genes, and it collects everything that is known about the genes. So they say their central function is to establish an accurate connection between the defining sequence for locus and the biological processes that make up the gene's function. They say their main aim is to make sure that all the information about a gene is accurate and up to date, and that it is linked to all other genes in the same way. other descriptors. It basically means, you have a stretch of DNA, you know that there is a gene, let's collect everything that is known about that gene. So it gives you information about the sequence, itself, about the functions of the gene, links to other databases, aboutThe gene, different descriptors and so on. It's a very useful tool for people who want to find out more about their gene, or a gene that they're interested in, for example. names for the gene, phenotypes that are known to be associated with that gene, homologous to other genes in the same organism, or in different organisms, the location of this gene in several different maps. This is all information that you can find in LocusLink. And the most important thing-- at least from our point of view-- is that Locus Link provides a nomenclature of genes. No Locuslink assigns a name to each gene, and if you stick to that name, then you're sure that everybody knows what you're talking about. hard to know exactly how to reconcile different ways of naming genes. It might seem a trivial problem, but it's not. And it's also complicated by the fact that, as I was saying before, genes may appear in several different forms. There are variants of the same gene, there are different ways to name them. It's a complicated problem, and we don't know how to get to the bottom of it, but we're getting closer to the answer. We'll have to wait and see. are genes that are very similar to each other. So sometimes they are considered to be the same genes, sometimes they're not. And all these are things that make the naming genes kind of a complex and not a deterministic task. So UniGene is another resource at NCBI that takes that into account and tries to make it easier to identify genes that may be similar or not be similar to one another. For more information on UniGene, visit www.ncBI.org/uniGene. a slightly different approach. It's an attempt at collecting all the GenBank sequences that refer to a region of the genome where a gene is known to be. So essentially, if we know that a certain region of our chromosome contains a gene, then we can go into GenBank and find out where the gene is located. We're trying to collect all the sequences that relate to that region. We'll publish the results in a book called The Genome Project, which is published by Oxford University Press. look at all the sequences that fall into that region. All the sequences ultimately come from that gene or part of that gene. And UniGene puts them all together in one cluster. And then tries to provide a description of why all these sequences-- of description of the features of the gene. It's called UniGene and it's run by the University of California, Los Angeles, and is based in California. It was founded in 1987 and is now run by a group of scientists. It has been in existence since the 1970s. of all these sequences. So they're all similar, they all come from the same location. But they might represent multiple forms of the same genes, so they're probably not identical to each other. They might come from different tissues, sothey might have different forms of genes. They may also be from different regions of the genome, or even different species of human. They could also have different types of DNA, or different DNA sequences, or other types of proteins, or DNA from different parts of the body. different properties, and so on. And again, this is the URL for UniGene. It includes information for 38 organisms. And I think that one year ago, this number was something like 14. So it's growing very fast. And the interesting thing is that this is an automated process. So LocusLink is a tool to help people find out more about organisms they might be interested in finding out about. It's a tool that helps you find out about organisms you might want to investigate. a curated directory, means that there are people who spend their days going through gene records and adding information, checking it, correcting it. UniGene is an automated system, so it's actually an automated procedure that looks at all the GenBank sequences and tries to build these clusters based on the data. It's an automated process that tries to building these clusters. It is not a curated directory. There are no curated directories. There is no curated directory of gene records. There's no curated database of gene data. HomoloGene is a database of all orthologs. They compare each sequence with all the other sequences in GenBank, at least in a set of organisms. If they find a good match between the two sequences, then this pair is added to the HomoloGene database. Right now it encompasses 25 organisms. In these 25 organisms, they have 470,000 ortholog pairs-- so pairs of genes from different organisms. It's interesting to study homologies between genes and different organisms, he says. that are highly similar to each other. All these are put into the database. And then if you find there are three organisms that share a similarity relationship, then this, in turn, is marked, because it means that you're finding a match that has an even higher quality. So if you're looking for a match, you're going to look for organisms that are very similar to one another. You're looking to find a match of a very high quality. That's what we're trying to do here. you find that organism A shares a gene with organism B, and B shares it with C, then you've built what they call a triplet. And that's a confirmation that actually this gene might be really the same gene that A and B share. That's what we call a 'triplet' and that's what the study was trying to prove. It was to prove that the gene A shares with B and B with C is the same as the one A and C share with A. is conserved across all these organisms. This one is partly curated, partly calculated. So they have an automated procedure that looks at sequence similarity using all the many algorithms to do that. And they give the similarity score. And then they have a subset-- this is not mentioned here. But a subset of the genome is conserved in this way. It's not the whole genome, but it's part of it. And it's a subset that's conserved by this algorithm. So that's what we're looking at. then, most of these entries in [INAUDIBLE] are also manually curated to make sure that they are really-- that they're really similar genes. AUDIENCE: I think it's a Swift-- no, it's part of the [? blast ?] score. Yeah, they have a threshold of something-- I don't know what it is, but they have to be at least at a certain level to be eligible for the gene pool. It's a little bit of a mystery. remember. But they give it the score in addition to all the other information. OK, Ensemble-- this is not part of NCBI. This is something that comes from Europe, from the EMBL-- European Bioinformatics Institute, the Sanger Institute. It's something that is pretty similar to LocusLink in scope. Again, it's again, a project that is not a part of the NCBI, but it's a separate project from NCBI in some ways. a software system for the automated annotation of genomes. It's basically means it's a system that discovers genes and tries to find as much information as possible about these genes. And then all the information is available through a search interface. The system is limited to 10 organisms, but it provides a lot of information about these organisms. It also provides a way for people to annotate their own genomes, which is a big part of genome research. The software is available for free on the company's website. lot of information about the genes in this-- about this organism. It provides information about genes, about proteins, diseases, SNPs, cross-species analysis, microarray data. So it's essentially a combination of LocusLink, dbSNP, HomoloGene, and a few other things. It has a very powerful data access interface. It's actually very, it's actually a very, very, powerful tool, and you can use it to get information about any organism. very nice, very easy to use. So you can do queries on this huge database in a relatively simple way. One of the biggest problems with this system, at least from our point of view, is that it uses its own way of naming genes. This is essentially what I do with my own genes. I use my own name to name my genes, and this is what I use with my other genes. It's a very simple way to do it. I don't think there's a better way of doing it. Not everybody uses the LocusLink way of naming genes. They have their own alternative scheme for naming genes and going from one to the other is sometimes tricky. There are links between the two databases. But of course it's not-- they're not connected by any kind of link. They're just two different ways of naming the same thing. It's just a different way of using the same name for different people. That's the way it's always going to be. But it's sometimes tricky to switch between them. Gene regulation is an extremely complex mechanism. Our understanding of how gene regulation works is still very limited. Under certain conditions, a certain set of genes is highly regulated, is highly expressed, or under expressed, and so on. But this doesn't necessarily match up with what is actually going on in the human body at the time. The human body is very complex, and we don't know exactly what is going on inside our bodies at any one time. We need to work out what is happening in our bodies. is a consequence of the fact that there is a very complex machinery behind it that determines which genes are active or not, and how much, in different conditions. And this is actually a system that integrates a lot of different factors that might include, in no particular, the following: the environment, the temperature, the food, and the environment in which the gene is active or inactive. And so on and so on. It's a complex system, and it's a result of a number of factors, including the environment. The set of genes that are expressed in one tissue is very different from the set of gene that is expressed in another tissue. Developmental stage genes are not the same as genes expressed during the development of the embryo, for example, are not same. We know very well that the genes are very different in each tissue. We don't know why this is, but we know that it's because of the way they're expressed in the different tissues. We're trying to figure out how to make them more similar. that are expressed in an adult organism. The time-- the time can mean either a time of day, for the case like the circadian rhythm. Or time at a larger scale, there are processes that take place at different times of the day in an organism. For example, in the morning there are genes that are expressed that are not expressed in the evening. In the evening, genes that were expressed earlier in the day are expressed later in the night. In other cases, genes are expressed at a time that is different from other times of day. years to complete, like puberty, for example. So there is this regulation mechanism is able to work at very different temporal resolutions. External signals, of course, all response to external stimuli. And it also depends on the expression state of any number of other genes. Because genes regulate each other, they can work at different times of the day, and at different levels of expression. It's a very complex system. It can be very, very complex, and it's very complex to understand. through feedback loops and so on. So again, it's a very complex system. We're slowly working to try to understand how it works. So what we have for now is some understanding of what transcription factors-- the transcription factors are proteins that bind to the upstream regions of the genes, and are able to control their expression, their activity. And these complexes then activate the transcription machinery, that then gives rise to what starts everything, and that's the gene-recognition process. And so that's what we're working on. The gene is expressed, because it was latent in the protein is produced. And the transcription factors, as I was saying, don't act alone. They have to interact with the target gene, but they also interact with each other in a combinatorial fashion. And in the end, you get the gene is express, because the gene was latent. Elsewhere in the article, we also look at the role of transcription factors in the development of the human body. For more, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories. What this means is that, looking at the individual transcription factor is usually not sufficient to understand what it's going to do. Because the same transcription factor in different combinations with other transcription factors might have different roles. So what we need to look at is the pattern of transcription, not just the individual one, as we did in the case of the human genome, says Dr. Richard Branson, the author of The Human Genome: A Biologist's Guide to the Biology of the Human Gene. factors that binds to a certain gene. That, in turn, will determine the spatial, temporal, dependent expression of the target gene. And again, we are still doing the very early steps in the process of trying to understand how these patterns are actually structured, how they work. So what do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments below or post a video on CNN iReport on our Facebook and Twitter pages. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @cnnireport. The first thing you need to do is need to be able to reliably identify which transcription factors bind to a given gene, and where, exactly, in the promoter region of the gene they bind. So the first step, again, we're moving the first steps. And transcription is a key part of the process of learning how to make a new drug. We'll be back in a few days to talk about the next step in the development of a new type of drug that could be used to treat cancer. factors bind to locations that are called transcription factor binding sites. They're small stretches of DNA that are recognized by the factor. And so if you know where the binding sites are, you have a first idea of what factors bind to this gene, and how they may be arranged. For more information on how factors work, visit the National Institutes of Health's Genome Research Institute. for more information about the Genome Project, visit the Genome Project's Facebook page. spatially. So if you know that two factors have to interact with each other, probably their binding sites will have to be close to each other. Or, at least, let's say if you find two binding sites that are close to Each other, there is a very high chance that they will interact. Spatially, if two factors interact with Each other and are close together, then they will be bound together. If they are not, then the binding sites are not close together. two factors will interact. And it might be that when they interact, they act in a certain way. Where they don't interact because they're far apart, and they acting in a different way. And so knowing the map of binding sites, and the promoter of a gene is something that is important, says Dr. David Perry, a professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, and author of the book "The Gene Gene: A Biologist's Guide to the Biology of Gene Regulation" can give you some initial information that it can build on. It's still something that's very hard to do computationally. The ways that [? truth ?] that people have been using to do this are usually based on pattern matching. So the binding site, as I said, is a small site, and it's a very simple thing to build on to a larger site. It can be done in a number of ways, but it's very, very difficult to do at the moment. stretch of DNA, usually goes from five to about 20 or 25 base pairs. So they're really short. And they're characterized by [? concentric ?] sequences-- in general, they are not very [? concern-- ?] not very precise. So it's essentially impossible to look at a piece of DNA and say, "Oh, that's what this is," or "That's what that's supposed to look like," he says. "I don't know what to do with it," he adds. say, well, OK, I'm sure that this location here is a binding site. So you can try using deterministic methods, just looking for instances of the motifs. Sorry, thought I had something on this. But you can look for instance of motifs using either deterministic. methods, or probabilistic methods, which are similar to those used in the above example. If you find an instance of a motif, you can use either of the two methods to look for it. TransFIC is the largest available database about transcription factors. It's a database that provides information on the factors, themselves. It provides examples of their binding sites. And it provides descriptions of theirbinding sites. It is free to use, and it's free to download. For more information, go to TransFIC.org or call 1-800-847-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. of their interactions with genes. And the important thing is that most of the information in TransFIC is experimentally validated. So for example, the binding sites, these are binding sites that have been observed experimentally. So you can actually trust the fact that that particular piece of sequence they give you is the one they gave you, and not the one that they gave to you in a previous version of this article. For more information on TransF IC, visit: www.transfic.org. is the binding site for the transcription factor in question. And so in the end, without going into too much detail, what you can do is can take these binding sites, you can use them to train your favorite pattern matching method, and then you can try scanning new sequences. It's a very simple process, but it can lead to a lot of interesting results, if you know how to use it. It can also be used to train new pattern matching methods, such as pattern-matching software. looking for binding sites. And this is one of the things that we're currently working on at CHB-- there are various ways of doing this. And again, it's a rather difficult problem, from a computational point of view, because these patterns that you have to look for are not very very large. But we're working on it and we'll have a better idea of how to do it in the future, says CHB's chief of computer science and engineering, Dr. John Houghton. specific. They are not very clear. On the other hand, doing it computationally-- sorry, does it experimentally is very slow, very expensive. So you can only do that for a small number of genes, and asmall number of factors. If you have a method like this, if you have the right genes, you can do it. If not, you have to do it by hand, which is very, very slow and expensive. You can't do it at all if you don't have the correct genes. a computational meter to detect binding sites that works well. Then you can think about doing this on a large scale, looking for example, all the binding sites for a certain factor in all the human genes. And that will give you a very interesting picture of everything that might be going on in the human body at the time of the gene binding. It will be very interesting to see how the human genome is affected by these binding sites. It could be a very exciting time for gene research in the future. be regulated by that factor. So we're not there yet. This is one of the things we are working on in our lab. And it's going to take a lot of work but the rewards are potentially very interesting because this is something that will then allow you, if it is successful, to make a lot more money in the future. It could be a game-changer in terms of how we make money in a number of different ways. It would be very exciting to see what the future holds. works, to automatically build the networks that describe how genes regulate each other. And that is something that, of course, has a lot of potential interest. OK, we've talked about gene expression, we talked about microarrays. You might have already heard about these things, but I was just going to go ahead and say that I was going to talk about them, too, because I thought it was a good way to get to the heart of the issue. So, I'll be back in a few minutes. GEO is a database of gene expression and hybridization array data. The Stanford microarray database is a repository of all the-- of a large number of micro experiments performed at Stanford. There are lots of different queries that are common when you work with microarray data. They provide a very useful search interface that allows you to select the data sets we're interested in, and to extract data from these data sets and look at, for example, the behavior of the same gene in different experiments. of these are public. NCI60, again, from Stanford, is a famous data set that includes gene expression profiles for 60 human cancer cell lines. And the information on drug activity correlated with gene expression patterns. So they measure how the gene expression pattern change when these cell lines are subject to drug treatment. The data set is from the National Cancer Institute, which is based at Stanford University in California, and is open to the public. The information is correlated with drug activity, and the information is public. Other resources for gene expression are found in different PGA projects, PGA are programs for genomic applications, they are are large projects managed by the NIH. So the [? tracks ?] PGA, for example, offers 565 microarrays from mouse and rat models of sleep, infection, hypertension, pulmonary disease. Cardio genomics provide microarray data on mouse models of cardiac development and signal transduction. And finally, human gene expression index-- these are just some of the most important most useful public resources of micro array data. going to go through this final part very quickly because I'm almost out of time. And if you'd rather stop me with questions, or if there's anything you would like to discuss about what I said so far, we could stop here, or I could just run through this last part. If you have any questions, please feel free to contact me at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk or on Twitter at @jennifersmith. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. portion quickly. The protein world is much more complex than the protein databases. The situation in protein databases is a bit different from what we've seen so far. So this last part was about the last step in the process from proteins to phenotypes. I was going to talk about protein databases, but that's not what we're going to do here. We'll talk more about phenotypes in the next part of the series. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. DNA and RNA world for the reasons that I've explained at the beginning. Some of the reasons are that proteins interact with each other in very complex ways. They combine in three dimensions, they catalyze chemical reactions. They have a behavioral that is much harder to describe in [INAUDIBLE] terms. It's a very complex world, and it's very difficult to describe it in terms of DNA and RNA. It is a very different world. It has a lot of different components. than everything else we've seen so far. So what protein databases give you is usually information about the sequence of a protein, and that's the easy part. The known or computed three dimensional structure, the known or inferred function domains. And ideally, also, the functional protein, what the protein does. That's the hard part. And that's what these databases are designed to give you. They're designed to help you find out what a protein does, and what it does not do. in different conditions. But again, this is-- we're getting to the area where things start becoming hard to formalize and to represent in a computational system. So as a consequence, protein databases, first of all, tend to be older, because they were started earlier than genomic databases. They are less formal, but they are still very useful in terms of understanding how proteins are made and how they are processed. It's a very interesting area of research, but it's still very much in its early stages. integrated, they are less complete. Nomenclature is much less standardized. So it's harder to work on protein databases than with all the other resources we've seen so far. The biggest database is SwissProt, 120,000 sequenced centuries, 9,000 human proteins in SwissProt. That's a pretty small number if you think. It's a lot of work, but it's worth it, I think, in the long run. I think it's going to lead to a better understanding of human biology. that we already have complete information in Golden Path about 20,000 genes, and each gene is known to, on the average, code for probably two or more proteins. So these are the proteins for which we know something, and they're very, very,very small number compared to the total number of genes we know about. That's the good news. The bad news is that we know very little about the genes that make up the human body, and we don't know how to use them. of proteins that are thought to be in our cells. It's composed of a core set of data elements, this sequence, the references, taxonomic data for this protein. And then our [INAUDIBLE] about the functions of this protein, domains and sites, the structure, similarities, association with diseases, variant forms of the protein, and so on and so forth. And it's a set of the data elements that we use to build our understanding of what this protein does. the protein. And again, it's hard to link this database with LocusLink or UniGene, but is its own identifiers for proteins. But don't need to go into these problems now. This is a graph that shows you the growth of SwissProt in recent years. And as you can see it's growing fast, with the number of proteins in the database doubling every two years. But it's still not as big as some of its competitors, such as Locus Link or Uni Gene. growing but at a much smaller rate than GenBank or other resources like that. We have databases about the three dimensional structural proteins like PDB, different visualization options. MMDB is essentially the same thing, but implemented at NCBI. PFM at the Sanger Institute is a database of protein domains and PFM is a Database of Protein domains and protein domains at the University of California, San Diego. We also have a database about protein structures at the National Institutes of Health called Protein Structure Database. protein families. They look for domains in the proteins, and then they look for similarities between proteins on the basis of the domains that were identified. They use similarity measures, they use hidden Markov models. Again, they have a curated portion with a small number of protein families. With the protein families, they looked for similarities in the domains and the similarity measures that were used to identify the proteins. They looked for similarity measures and they used hiddenMarkov models to identify similarities in proteins. notation there is a high quality. And then there's a second portion of PFM that has smaller families of lower quality. This is an example of a display, a PFM display, of a protein with all the different domains that were found in the protein with the tails here. So there is one high quality and a second high quality portion of the PFM. And there is also a second low quality PFM of the same protein with smaller families. So that's what we're looking at here. give it this nice graphical display. I'm going to skip protein interaction databases. And I want to get to the end. We're getting to the phenotype and to the spectrum, finally. And there's just a couple of resources that have to be cited because they're extremely important. One of them is a protein interaction database, and it's a very good one. It's called the Protein Interaction Database. It was created in the 1970s and 1980s by the University of California, Los Angeles. is OMIM-- OMIM is a catalog of human genes and genetic disorders. It's basically a collection of text articles that talk either about a gene or about a disorder, and they're linked with each other. So if you're looking at the entry for a gene, if you want to know more about it, you can go to the OMIM website. For more information on OMIM, go to www.omim.org or call the National Center for Biotechnology Information at 1-800-273-8255. you can find a description, mechanical feature, the function mapping, and then you can find all known correlations between that gene and diseases, allelic variants, so all known polymorphisms of that gene with the corresponding clinical outcome if there is any. And then, you can also go the other way around and find the correlation between a gene and a specific disease, such as cancer, for example. You can also find the clinical outcome for that gene as well, if there's a correlation between it and that disease. Around.around.com has 14,000 entries. It's been growing at least at this speed or faster since '98. And finally, PubMed, is a search engine for medical journals. It has more than 1.5 million entries, and it's growing at a faster rate than any other search engine. It was founded in 1998, but it's now one of the world's largest search engines, with more than 100 million entries. The site has been around since 1998 and has grown at a rate of about 10% a year. Papers is a database of citations from the biomedical literature. It contains 12 million entries starting from the mid-'60s. It provides references, abstracts, linked to online resources. It's one of the most used resources in the world of medicine. It also provides full text articles, in some cases, supplementary materials, and it's a great source of information for researchers. It was founded in 1958 and is based in the University of Oxford, where it's been used since the 1970s. Gene ontology is something that stays at a slightly higher level, above everything that we've seen so far. The idea is to build a dynamic controlled vocabulary that can be used in a variety of ways. They claim they receive 30 million searches per month. This is a guest appearance by the co-founder of the company that created the technology. The company is based in San Francisco and has offices in London and New York. It was founded in 2000 and is now valued at more than $1 billion. used to describe biological concepts. If you look at something like OMIM or PubMed, you're going to find a textual description, for example, of a disease. concepts that need to be precisely defined so that we all know what we're talking about the same thing when you use the word 'disease' to describe it. For example, a disease that references concepts such as 'fungal cancer' can only be described in terms of a specific type of cancer. For more information, visit www.omim.org and www.pj.org. The purpose of gene ontology is to try to do this in at least three domains-- molecular function, biological process, cellular component. So it's organized in three taxonomies, and each taxonomy contains concepts and sub-concepts. So that when you want to refer, for example, for to a certain component of a cell, instead of just saying its name, you can cite the gene Ontology term that describes that component, and everybody else can use the same word. will be able to go to gene ontology and see what's the exact definition of the word you're using. It's a work in progress-- still very far from being complete. It has all the usual problems that occur when you're trying to build taxonomies that it's very hard to formalize. It is still very much a work-in-progress, but it's a step in the right direction, he says, and it's getting closer to being finished. things that come from natural language. So it could find exact definition of all the terms that people use, especially in this field is very hard. But this is where they are now, and it's a work in progress, so it will keep growing in the future. And this is what they are working on now, so they will continue to grow in the near future. But it's still very much a work-in-progress, and this is just the beginning of what they can do. a view of taxonomy, for example, for biological process. If you are talking about site communication, then response to external stimulus is a subclass of communication. And if you want to talk about the immune response, the first response is a subset of all this. And so on and so on until we get to the end of this article. We are happy to answer any questions you may have about the theory. We hope to hear from you as soon as possible. Back to the page you came from. you can cite this biology term, and everybody will be able to go to gene ontology and see exactly where this term is in the taxonomy of concepts about biological processes. OK, I think we're out of time. Well, just a conclusion slide that I'll just let you read, because I'm going to end with this slide, because it's a good one. I'll be back in a few minutes with the next slide, which will be on the next section of the book. I think it's just repeating what we're saying so far that we are drowning in data and converting this data into knowledge is not easy. We need automated tools to access this data, to make sense of it, to convert into formats that we can use. And of course, this is just one example of how we need to use these tools in the future. I think we're going to see a lot more of this in the next few years, and it's a good thing that we're working on it. is a challenging task, because as we saw, biomedical data covers the whole spectrum of knowledge representation and management techniques that we know about. We are trying to make the most of the data we have, and we hope that it will help us understand more about the human condition. We hope that this article will be of interest to people around the world who are interested in biomedical data and data management techniques. For more information, go to: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-and-biomedical-data/bio-data-measurement-mechanical-data.