Cú Chulainn, hero of Ulster, stood at the ford at Cooley, ready to face an entire army singlehandedly. The army in question belonged to Queen Meadhbh of Connaught. Enraged at her husband’s possession of a white bull of awesome strength, she had she had him killed by Cú ChULainn. The story is told in the book, "The Battle of Cooley," by Cú Chulain n. set out to capture the fabled brown bull of Ulster at any cost. Unfortunately, the King of Ulster had chosen this moment to force the goddess Macha to race her chariot while pregnant. In retaliation, she struck down him and his entire army with stomach cramps that eerily resembled childbirth. The story of Macha is told in the book of the same name by the Irish playwright William Butler Yeats, who also wrote the novel "The Book of the Lost King" in which Macha was revealed to be pregnant. all except Cú Chulainn. Though he was the best warrior in Ulster, he knew he could not take on Queen Meadhbh’s whole army at once. He invoked the sacred rite of single combat in order to fight the intruders one by one. But as Queen Mead hbh's army approached, one of the warriors turned on the queen and killed her. The story of the Battle of Lough Erne is told in the book, The Battle of the Lough Eerne, which is published by Macmillan. thing worried him more than the grueling ordeal ahead. Years before, Cú Chulainn had travelled to Scotland to train with the renowned warrior Scáthach. There, he met a young warrior from Connaught named Ferdiad. They lived and trained side-by-side, and soon became close friends. When they returned to their respective countries, the pair became close again. They remained friends for the rest of their lives, until the end of the war in Scotland. Cú Chulainn knew Ferdiad was marching in Meadhbh’s army, and that if he succeeded in fending off her troops, they would eventually meet. Day after day he defended Ulster alone. He sent the heads of some homes back to their owners. He knew they would one day meet, and he was right. He was right, and they did meet, but not in the way he had feared. They were on opposite sides of a war. of his adversaries back to Meadhbh’s camp, while the rushing waters of the ford carried others away. At times, he slipped into a trance and slayed hundreds of soldiers in a row. Whenever he saw the queen in the distance, he hurled stones at her— never quite hitting her, but never quite leaving her alone. He was never quite able to kill her, and she was never able to destroy him, but he did leave her with a wound in her leg. once coming close enough to knock a squirrel off her shoulder. Back at the Connaught camp, Ferdiad was laying low, doing everything he could to avoid the moment when he’d have to face his best friend in combat. But the Queen was impatient to get her hands on the prize, and she was determined to get it now. The Queen was ready to take the fight to the enemy, even if she had to fight her way to the top of the hill. The battle for Connaught was expected to last for several days. bull, and she knew Ferdiad was her best chance to defeat Cú Chulainn. So she goaded him and questioned his honor until he had no choice but to fight. The two faced off at the ford, matching each other exactly in strength and skill. No matter what weapons they used, they matched each other's strength and Skill no matter how they used them. The fight ended in a stalemate, with the dragon winning by a single blow to the head. Ferdiad began to gain the upper hand over the exhausted Cu Chulainn. But their teacher had shared a secret with him alone. She told him how to summon the Gáe Bulg, a magical weapon. It was the key to defeating Ferdiad and Cú Chulainen's final battle. To watch the rest of the film on BBC2 click here. To read the full film on CNN.com visit the website here. to watch the full video on CNN iReport. spear fashioned from the bones of sea monsters that lay at the bottom of the ocean. Cu Chulainn called the spear, stabbed Ferdiad to death, and collapsed. Meadhbh seized her chance and swooped in with the rest of her army to capture the brown bull. At last, the men of were able to kill the beast and take back control of the land. The battle was fought in the Battle of the Five Armies, which took place in the 7th century BC. Ulster were recovering from their magical illness, and they surged out in pursuit. But they were too late: Queen Meadhbh crossed the border unscathed, dragging the brown bull with her. The bulls were well matched, and struggled into the night, dragging each other all over Ireland. The brown bull’s victory meant nothing to him. He was tired, injured, and devastated. Soon after, he died of a death of his own at the hands of his wife's men. broken heart, leaving behind a land that would remain ravaged by Meadhbh’s war for years to come. “I will never forget you,” he wrote to his son. ‘I will always love you.’ “You are my son,’ he replied, “and I will always be your son.” “And I will never leave you, my son. I will forever love you’, he said, ‘even though I’m no longer your son’.