Ribonucleotide reductase is the only way in all organisms that you make the building blocks de novo that are required for DNA biosynthesis and repair. If you inhibit this enzyme, you have no building blocks. You have no DNA. You don't have DNA. So if you inhibit it, you can't make DNA. It's the only cool enzyme in the world. You can't inhibit it. You just can't. You're not going to get it. can't survive. So from a practical point of view, it's the target of drugs they use therapeutically in the treatment of cancer. And I think in probably not so distant future in the antibacterials because I think there are sufficient differences between humans and bacteria reductases that you could make it, he says. He adds: 'I think there is enough difference between human and bacteria reduction that you can make it in the future' 'I'm not saying it's going to happen in the near future, but I think it's possible in the not too distant future,' he adds. specific inhibitors. Why am I interested in it? Because the chemistry is sort of unbelievable. So I mean it was the first example where you learn, or you hear about-- you heard from John-- radicals. They're reactive oxygen species and nitrogen species that you can't control. They want to pick them up, and they want to use them as inhibitors. So that's what we're trying to do in this study. It's a very exciting time for us, and I'm looking forward to seeing what the future holds. up an extra electron and form a stable octet. And if you leave them to their own demise, they react with anything and destroy it. Well nature has figured out how to harness the reactivity of radicals to do really tough chemistry with exquisite specificity. And ribonucleotide reductases have been a key part of the process. They have been found to be the key to the creation of the first DNA molecule, the nucleotides, and to the formation of the DNA double helix. the paradigm for thinking about that. And from bioinformatics now there are 50,000 reactions in metabolic systems that are going to be radical mediated transformations, yet we never talk about radicals in introductory courses. So I think that's all going to change. So why is it unusual? Well, for the sake of the students, I think it's a good idea to talk about radical mediated transformation. I think we're going to see a lot more of it in the next few years. human ribonucleotide reductase, the key to making this work catalytically is the amino acid side chain tyrosine needs to be oxidized. A tyrosyl radical in solution has a half-life of a microsecond. In the active site of these enzymes, the half- life of a tyroSyl radical is less than one second. The key is to oxidize the amino Acid side chain Tyrosine to the tyro Syl radical. of the enzyme can be on the order four days. If you reduce it with an electron and a proton, the enzyme is completely dead. So this was the first example of-- it would be another example of a radical, which is again one electron oxidized amino acid. And this radical is again a one electron oxidation of an amino acid-- if you reduction it with aproton and an electron, it's dead. It's a radical that can be reduced to just one electron and one proton. Nature has figured out a way. How do you do this oxidation? She has a little metal cluster right adjacent to where this tyrosine is. And the function of this little metal. cluster is to put this. post-translational modification that we talked about earlier-- modifying your amino acids. And so nature has figured this out in a way that works for her. It's a very complex process, but it's working for her in this case. And it's a way for her to get her amino acids back. into the oxidized state, which is essential for the way the enzyme works. So the other thing that's amazing about the enzyme is the chemistry. There are two subunits. The chemistry all happens in this subunit, but the tyrosyl radical is there. And this oxidation-- normally when you do an enzyme, you do it in the oxidation state, and this oxidation is crucial for the enzyme to work. So that's what we're trying to do in this study. oxidation the two atoms are sitting within a few angstroms of each other. So that's unprecedented. It involves hopping radicals which no one has ever seen before. And so that was another thing that was completely fascinating from a chemical perspective about how the world works. It was a very exciting time for us at the University of California, Los Angeles, as we learned more about the chemistry of the human body and how it reacts to the environment. It's been a great learning experience for all of us. system works. The other reason that people in biology are interested in this, besides the fact that makes a building block for DNA, is that if you believe in an RNA world where we have a ribosome where a catalysis of peptide bond formation is all with the RNA, not the DNA, then this is a big deal to people who believe in that world. It's a very exciting time for scientists in the U.S. and around the world, and I'm looking forward to finding out how this all works. with the protein. How do you get from an RNA world to a DNA world? The only enzyme that does that transformation making these building blocks. And there are many classes of ribonucleotide reductases-- one uses this tyrosyl radical. But they all have the same active site, and they all do the same thing. The only difference is that one uses a different active site than the other, but it's the same one. The enzyme that makes DNA is called a ribon nucleotide reducase. and do the same chemistry, but they have different metal cofactors depending on where they evolved. And the function of the metalCofactors in all cases, even though one's cobalt, one's iron sulfur cluster,. one's manganese, one’s iron-- the function in all case is to generate a radical in the molecule. The function of these cofactor is to create the radical in a given molecule, which is called a radical. This is the way that radical formation occurs in the body. active site and then the chemistry is the same in all these things. It's the same thing in all of these other places, too. It just takes a little bit of time to get used to it, but it's very, very good. It makes you feel like you're doing something, and it's like, 'Oh my God, I've got to do this again' It's a great way to start the day, and then it just keeps going on and on, until you get to the end.