For a particle traveling in a circle, we've seen that the velocity can be written as r d theta dt. In the theta hat direction, theta is increasing. And so the particle is traveling around the circle in this direction. You can call that the counterclockwise direction. We've also seen that d thea dt can be negative, in which case the angle is decreasing. So the particle's traveling around this direction, which we could call the counter clockwise direction, for example. call clockwise. Let's now look at rotation in an arbitrary plane. So if I have a plane like this and I have some particle traveling in a circle like this, then it will see this rotation as being in the counterclockwise direction. If I have another observer down here and they're looking up at this plane, they'll see the motion as being clock wise. So you can see we have a need for the more formal definition for the rotation of this. And so. what we're going to do is use the right hand rule to define a direction that tells you both the direction it defines the plane and it also tells you what the positive direction of rotation is for that plane. So the way we'll do this right hand Rule is to define the direction that is the most positive for the plane. We'll use this direction to show that the plane is rotating in a positive direction. We can then use that direction to determine the direction of the rotation of the plane as a whole. we'll take our right hand, we'll curl our fingers in the direction of the rotation. And our thumb will point in thedirection of the positive direction that we're defining. So in this case, I'm going to have an arrow like this. I'll call it n hat to indicate that that's the direction we want to go. We're going to go in the opposite direction of what we're trying to define. We'll go in a different direction each time we do this. it's the normal unit vector to that plane. All right. Let's come back to this example now, where the plane of the motion is this plane. And let's look at our two cases again. So in the case of d theta dt positive, our circle looks something like the following. It's a circle with a circle around it, and a circle inside it. It looks like the circle has a circle in the middle of it. And the circle around the center of the circle is the circle with the circle at the top. like this. And you can see that if I use my right hand rule, the plane, the vector that I've defined, is out of the board. And I'm going to use this symbol, a circle with a dot, to indicate this direction. In our other show, we'll show how we can use the same technique in a different way. We'll show you how to use the technique in the next show, in the second half of the show, and then in the third. case, for d theta dt less than zero, our particle is traveling in this direction. And for that, I'm going to draw this as an x in the circle. And so you can see by my right hand rule that now the direction that I've defined is into the board. And that's the direction of the particle that we're going to be traveling in for the rest of the game. The particle is going in the opposite direction from the direction we've defined. So these are symbols that you'll see throughout the rest of the course, the out of the board and into the board symbols. And so now, let's look back at our coordinate system that we've defined. We have r hat direction and a theta hat direction. And in this coordinate, we have the r direction and the theta direction. The r direction is the direction of the sun. The theta Direction is thedirection of the moon. And this is the coordinate of the r and theta directions. system, there's a third direction that's defined, which is the k hat direction, which you can see is out of the board. And so now, I'm going to define what we actually call the angular velocity as omega. And I am going to write that as d theta dt. Now, in in the system, there is a second direction that is defined, and that's the k hats direction. And that direction is omega dt, and I am defining that as omega dT. the k hat direction, in this case, it could be in an arbitrary n hat direction. Depending on what you're playing of motion is. In this case I'm going to call it in the k hats direction. Now you can see that these signs are going to line up. The k hats and the n hats are pointing in the same direction. The n hat and the k hat are pointing towards each other. The result is that the k and n hats point in the right direction. with these directions. omega, as d theta dt k hat, when d thea d t is positive, k hat is in the same direction as this unit normal that we've defined. And so this is how we define angular velocity. So we can define d thet to be the component of the angular velocity omega z, because it's in the k hat direction. And we can also define the angular speed, which is just omega as being the absolute value of this angular Velocity omega. dt. So when a particle's undergoing circular motion, it has a. velocity that you can describe, which is the tangential motion around the circle. And it also has an angular velocity, which we define as being in a direction. that's perpendicular to that direction of rotation. And so it's defined by the angular velocity of the particle, which you can also describe by the angle between the two.dt.dt and the speed of light, which can also be described as the angle of light between the Earth and the sun. the right hand rule. And now that we have defined this omega z, the component of the angular velocity, we can rewrite the velocity as just being equal to r times omega z still in that theta hat direction. And so this is another way that we can write the right handRule of thumb: The velocity is equal to the ratio of r to omega z in theta direction, or r/ omega z is the angular speed in that direction, and omega z/r is the velocity in that other direction. velocity and connect it back to the angular velocity. Connect the velocity and angular velocity to get the speed of the object. The speed of a object can be compared to a speed of light. For more information, visit the National Aeronautics and Astronautics Association's website. It's also on Facebook and Twitter: @aeronautica and @aerontica. It also has a YouTube channel: Aerontica, @aerotica, and @ Aerotica_Inc.