Professor Christine Hayes: I was talking last time about the concept of election or choice, God's choice of Israel, Israel as the chosen one, which occurs for the first time in the Book of Deuteronomy. And I wastalking about the fact that for Deuteronom the election of Israel was God's. And so, in the Bible, Israel is God's chosen one. And that's what the Bible says. That's what it says. And it's what I believe too. election of Israel means or entails the idea that Israel is a holy people. Israel is holy in the sense of separated to God--that root meaning of holiness which means to be separated from the common or the ordinary. So that separation entails separation from alien peoples and practices that are inconsistent with Israel's identity as a holy nation. Israel's separation from the world means separation from other nations and cultures that are not holy to God. Israel has a special place in the history of the world, the Bible says. with the worship of God. So for this reason, intermarriage with the Canaanites is prohibited in Deuteronomy. And, in fact, they are to be utterly destroyed. All alien practices are toBe removed from the covenant community. Now, given that there were probably no Canaanites at the time of Deuteronom's, there was probably no intermarriage between Canaanites and the Israelites at that point in time. So the Canaanite population was probably much smaller than the Israelite population. composition, according to some scholars. These texts may be understood as a kind of internal polemic against those elements of Israelite society whose practices didn't conform to Deuteronomy's Yahweh-only policy. This is an idea we will come back to in a minute. I just want to throw it out there for the sake of brevity. It's a good idea to throw out the whole thing, and it's a great idea to have it in the Bible, too. The privilege of having been chosen or singled out, of being a holy people to God entails. Separation entails also separation to God's service. That means, of course, the observance of his laws, especially the laws of purity, the rejection of pagan practices, and so on. It's a privilege to be chosen, to be singled out and to be a holy person to God. It is a privilege that must not be taken for granted. It must be respected and respected by all. obligations and responsibility. At the same time, it's interesting that Deuteronomy seems to be aware of some of the dangers in this idea, the danger of a superiority complex, a moral danger involved in the notion of election. It is by no special virtue or merit or merit that we should be able to elect people to office, he says. He adds: 'We should not be afraid of the consequences of our actions' and 'We are all responsible for what we choose to do' that Israel was the one chosen. And Moses admonishes the Israelites not to suppose that their inheritance of the land of Canaan is due to their own powers, or on account of any righteousness or virtue that they possess. In fact, he says, far from it. Israel was chosen by the Lord himself, and he chose Israel to be his chosen people, not the other way around. The Lord has chosen Israel for his purposes, and the Lord is the God of Israel. The LORD has chosen the Israelite people to be His chosen people. Yahweh in an act of spontaneous love--;it does not imply her perfection. And the election was entirely God's initiative and is no cause for Israel to boast. So Deuteronomy 7, verses 6-8 read: For you are a people consecrated [made holy] to the God of the Bible. And you are not to boast of your victory over the enemy of the Lord, but to thank God for his help and help you in your struggle against the enemy. Lord your God: Of all the peoples on earth the Lord your God chose you to be His treasured people. It is not because you are the most numerous of peoples that the Lord set His heart on you and chose you --; indeed, you're the smallest of peoples. The Lord chose you because you're small, says the Bible, and because he loves you more than any other people on earth. The Bible says that God loves you because of your smallness, rather than because of how many people you are. but it was because the Lord favored you and kept the oath He made to your fathers that the Lord freed you with a mighty hand and rescued you from the house of bondage, from the power of Pharaoh king of Egypt. So don't be tempted--Moses later warns the Israelites--don't. Don't. be tempted, Moses later warns them. don't. Be wise, be strong, be wise, and don't let your hearts be tempted. Be strong and never give in to temptation. Deuteronomy 8:17: "My own power and the might of my own hand have won this wealth for me" Deuteronomy 9:4: "The Lord has enabled us to possess this land because of our virtues" Don't believe that your virtues have won the land for you, but that the Lord's power and might have won it for you. Don't think that your virtue has enabled you to possess the land because you're a good person, but because you are a son of God. he emphasizes, it is only because the wickedness of the Canaanites is so great that the Lord has to drive them from his land. Now he is giving you a chance. But it is conditional for you, just as it was for them. Don't fail him or he will, he says. He warns that if you fail him, he will not let you go back to your home. He says, "Don't fail me or I will kill you, and I'll kill you." drive you out just as he drove out the Canaanites. That's a theme in Deuteronomy. We are going to see in a moment how important that is, or in a few lectures, how important this idea is for the Deuteronomistic historian in general. But we will get there. Another theme is that the Bible is not just about the Bible, it's about the history of the Bible. It's about how we understand the Bible and how it relates to our lives today. in the Book of Deuteronomy is the theme of providential concern. God's providential love and care for Israel is expressed through various metaphors in the Bible. And the prophet Hosea, who seems to have very strong connections with the Book, is also mentioned in the Deuteronomist's book. The prophet is said to have said, "I have seen the glory of God, and I have seen his providential care for his people" in Deuteronomic 8. In the book, the prophet also says, "God has shown me his love for Israel." Hosea will develop further this image of parent and child that occurs in Deuteronomy 8. So in a way, the language we were just referring to was really the language of husband and wife, you know, someone who simply loves someone, not because they are perfect, but that is their. That's what Hosea was talking about in the book of Deuteronomic 8. It's a language of a husband and a wife, not of a parent and a child, but of someone who loves someone because that is who they are. choice. They love the person, and they make a bond with them. It does not imply anything about other people. It is simply that is the person who has been the focus. So we have a lot of sort of love and marriage imagery, husband and wife. They favor them. They like them, they love them. So they favor them and they like each other. It doesn't imply that other people like other people, it just means that they like the person that has been focus of their attention. imagery, used for God and Israel, but we also have this parent and child imagery that appears. In Deuteronomy 32:10, the image is that of an eagle that bears its young on its wings. He found him in a desert region, In an empty howling waste. He engirded him, watched. The image of the eagle is from the book of Deuteronomist, which is published by Simon & Schuster. The book is available in hardback and paperback. over him, Guarded him as the pupil of his eye. Like an eagle who rouses his nestlings, Gliding down to his young, So did he spread his wings and take him, Bear him along on his pinions. The Lord alone did guide him.… It almost seems to play on the theme of the bird of prey, as the song is sung by the birds of prey. It's almost as if the bird is singing the song itself, as if it's trying to sing along with the song. idea that when teaching its young to fly, the eagle will push them out of the nest, swoop under them, bear them up for awhile over and over until they get the idea. So God is repeatedly testing and correcting the Israelites until they are ready for the Promised Land. The Israelites are repeatedly tested and corrected until they're ready to go to the land of the promised land. The God of the Bible is a God of patience, love and mercy. He doesn't give up on his children. So Deuteronomy's content, which are these farewell speeches and the death and the burial of Moses, are a fitting capstone to the Pentateuchal narrative. But at the same time, deuteronomy really does not bring closure to this narrative, because at the end of Deuteronomic, the promises still are not fulfilled. It's a fitting end to the story, but it doesn't bring closure. It doesn't end the story. It just ends the story of the Bible. The people are still outside the land. Some have suggested that this is quite purposeful. It points to an exilic date for the work's final composition. That is to say when it was finally redacted, the redactors were in exile, writing for a people living in exile. And the Deuteronomist was written for the people who were living there at the time. And it was written by a man who was living there. And he was writing for them. And they were writing for him. wants to make it clear that it is fidelity to the Torah, rather than residence in the land, that is critically important. Deuteronomy is not simply the concluding book of the Pentateuch, or the story that began in Genesis. It's also the first part of a story that begins in Genesis, and is called the Book of the Deuteronomists. It is the first book in a series of books known as the Torah's Books of Moses. The book of Deuteronomic is also called the "Deuteronomy" book. much larger, longer literary work, as I mentioned last time, a work that runs from Deuteronomy through to the end of 2 Kings. And we are going to consider today the program and the work of this so-called Deuteronomistic school. But before we do that, I wanted to just make clear that this is a work of fiction, and that it is not meant to be taken seriously by anyone but those who have read it and are interested in the history of the Bible. a few concluding remarks about source theory and the Pentateuch. We have talked about the Documentary Hypothesis. And one of the things I mentioned a couple of days ago is that scholars believe they have been able to identify the different sources that make up the five books of the Pentatesuch. That is a very important part of source theory, and I think it's a key part of our understanding of the source theory of the Bible. I think that's a really important thing to know. of times are some of the debates that occur on the question of dating. There is a great deal of ideological baggage that is involved in the dating of the sources. One of the issues that I think is a real problem is the fact that the Priestly source, P, is the source of many of the questions that are asked of us in the book. The book is published by Simon & Schuster and is available in hardback and paperback. For more information on the book, visit www.simonandschuster.com. is so often misjudged and maligned. I hope that the little bit of time that we have spent on the Priestly. materials gave you some appreciation of its transformation of older Israelite rituals and traditions into symbolic practices. It would communicate basic convictions about morality, convictions about holiness. We hope that you will take some time to read through this book and the other Priestly materials. It is a great resource for those who are interested in the history and culture of the Israelite people. it gave you a sense of its communal ethic as opposed to an individual morality, the idea that the actions of every individual have an impact on society as a whole. But the anti-priest, anti-cult sentiment, of European Protestantism, is apparent in the history of biblical scholarship in the last century. It's a very interesting time to be alive in the world of the Bible, I think, and I'm looking forward to finding out what the future has in store for us. The Priestly source, which emphasizes cult and ritual, had to represent a late degenerate stage in the evolution of Israelite religion, Wellhausen says. So for wellhausen, the PriestlySource was a negative development. And it is apparent in that scholarship's negative assessment of thePriestly source of the Bible, he says. Few centuries. The Priestly Source was a Negative Development. It had to be a negative Development. This is what it meant to be negative. degenerations. These are movements away from true spirit-filled religion in his view. So according to Wellhausen, the early period of ancient Israel must have been characterized by a free, more natural form of religion, an intimate relationship with God, unencumbered or unsullied by the legalistic cultic obsessions of priests and priests. He says this is what the ancient Israelis would have called their religion, and it would have been a free form of God-loving religion. In 586, with the destruction of Jerusalem and the people were taken into exile in Babylon, that was when the priests were able to assume control. He argued that the priests played on the exiles' overwhelming feelings of guilt and failure. The priests were also able to play on the people's feelings of failure, he said. In Babylon, the priests took control of the city and the city's government. The people were forced to live in fear and fear of the priests, he added. able to construct a new identity and religion that stressed the sinfulness of the people, and the need for ritual purity and ritual observance. And they were able to write themselves back into the narratives and stories of Israel's past. And this, in part, is the story of the birth of the modern Jewish state. The story of how Israel became a nation of law-abiding, law-enforcing Jews. The history of the Jewish state is the history of Israel, and of its people. according to Wellhausen, was a degeneration. He says this reconstruction of the evolution of Israelite history, Israelite religion, excuse me, is really driven more by theological prejudice than it is by historical evidence. It stems from an obvious projection of the Protestant-Catholic tension onto Israelitehistory. It also is driven very much by a secessionist account of Judaism as being something that was moribund at the time of Jesus. Jesus came and revived this as a spirit-filled religion again, when it had decayed and withered and degenerated. that all scholars who date P to the post-exilic period are motivated by the same problematic assumptions. That is certainly not the case. There are scholars of all stripes and allegiances who view P as late; and there is some very good objective evidence for dating parts of P to post-Exilic period. There is also evidence that P is not as late as some scholars believe it to be, and that it may have been as early as the 4th century BC. It's a very long way off, but there is evidence to suggest that P was much earlier. the post-exilic period, just as there is good objective evidence for dating parts of D and the other sources to the post- exilic period. So when it comes to dating the sources, certainly I would say all scholars agree that the Priestly materials reach their final form in the exile or exile or the time of the Crusades. But there is no consensus on the exact date of the end of the Roman Empire, just that it was a period of transition for the people of the region. post-exilic period. So that is the sixth century, right? (You're going to find out, we are going to return from exile in the 530s, o.k.?) So when we talk about the post- exilic period, we're talking about the period after the return. So the period of the exile is. So this is the period before the return, and this is during the exile. This is what we call the period between the return and the return of the king. the sixth century, the bulk of the middle of the sixth century. So it certainly reached its final form in that period , as did Deuteronomy, and the Pentateuch probably generally. Nevertheless, there are many data that suggest that the Priestly sources retain very early strata, just as D contains D. The Priestly Sources contain D, as well as D, which contains D, and D, among other sources. For more information, visit the Priestly Sources website. P espouses a communal ethic, and post-exilic priests are going to turn increasingly to an individual ethic. Many sections of P do not seem to assume a central sanctuary. Remember that the idea of the central sanctuary really took hold in 622, with Josiah and Josiah's. P is a collection of early material, not all of it is known to be from the time of Josiah. It is not clear whether the material is from the early period of P's existence, or from later. reform. texts that are happy with the existence of shrines throughout the land of Israel are probably pre-Josiah, pre-622. Texts that insist on a central sanctuary are probably Josiah's time or later. And there are many sections of the Bible that are very hostile to the idea of a central sanctuary in the first place. The Bible is a work of art, not a book, but a collection of works of art. It is the work of a group of people who have spent their lives trying to understand the Bible. P contains no universal ban on intermarriage. It does not employ its purity laws or language to mark an inseparable boundary between classes within P. There are sections of P that do seem to assume a central sanctuary. But P does not seem to have a single 'princess' or 'principal' in any section of the book. It is more like a series of 'purity laws' for different classes of people. P was written in the 19th century and has been updated several times since. Israel or between Israelites and gentile others. The use of purity and purity language to inscribe boundaries between Israel and other nations is very characteristic of the post-exilic period. We are going to see that when we get there. So it is very hard to understand P's silence in this. It is very difficult to understand the silence of the Israeli government in this matter. It's a very serious matter. We need to find a way to deal with it, and we need to do it now. regard, if it stems entirely from the post-exilic, priestly circles. So I think that instead of charting an evolution or a degeneration--as I have over on the side of the board- -an evolution from JE, the pure spirit-filled religion, to D, the humanitarian, ethical religion. to P, I think it's better to chart an evolution from P to JE than from J to D to P. I'm not sure if that's possible, but it's a start. cultic obsessiveness and guilt-ridden legalism, as is done or implied in some classical source theory. It may be better to see these three as really representing three distinct and roughly contemporaneous strands of ancient Israelite tradition and experience told from their own perspectives. These materials were transmitted from one generation to the next by the oral tradition of the Israelite people. The material was transmitted by oral tradition from generation to generation. It was then transmitted by orally transmitted oral tradition through oral tradition to oral tradition. and developed by different circles within Israelite society over centuries, and they crystallized at different times. JE has fragments that are quite old, but it probably reached its final form before the centralization of the sanctuary. It is still comfortable with the existence of many sacred places throughout the land, and is comfortable with its existence as a separate entity from the rest of the Israelite population. It also has fragments of its own that are still quite old and can be found on the internet. so probably before 622. Deuteronomy contains northern traditions from before the fall of Israel, which was in 722. There are many passages that make it clear that it's written from an exilic perspective. And the Priestly source, likewise, contains many, many older traditions. It was clearly finalized in the exile, but it was written from a northern point of view, as well as a southern one. It's written in the language of the north, not the south. traditions, but reached its full and final form in the exilic or post-exilic period. So each of these complex, multi-layered sources--in each one of them you can find different layers. Each one possesses its own emphases, its own agenda and its own perspectives. Sometimes they complement one another, sometimes they challenge and Sometimes they challenge. and challenge and challenge each other. And that's what this book is all about, I think. It's all about. contradict one another, but they are not best seen as linear, as telling a neat, linear story about Israelite religion flowering and fading. Their diversity has not been flattened or homogenized by the final editor of the text. It has been preserved in a manner that stimulates reflection and debate, the author says. The book is published by Simon & Schuster, which also publishes The Israelite Book of the Bible, published by Macmillan, £16.99, and The Hebrew Bible, £12.99. We are going to move on now to the second major section of the Bible. We have been discussing the Torah, or Pentateuch, and now we are moving on to the section that is referred to as the Prophets. The Former Prophets will concern us for the next few lectures. They include the books of Joshua, Judges, 1 and 2 Samuel,1 and 2 Kings, and the book of Zechariah. They read the Bible in two parts: the "Former Prophets" and then the "Latter Prophets." This material is a theologically oriented account of Israel's history from the conquest of Canaan, to the destruction of the state by the Babylonians in 587-586 BCE. This material is therefore crucial background to reading the Latter.as a historical narrative. The Latter is a book of the Bible, published by Simon & Schuster, with a focus on the Bible as a historical text. It is available in English, Hebrew, and Aramaic, with an emphasis on the Book of Mormon. Prophets. Now the Latter Prophets is a collection of books, each of which bears the name of the individual whose prophecies it purports to contain. These prophets delivered their oracles at critical junctures in Israel's history, in the nation's history. So their words are only going to make sense to us now, as we look back on our own history and that of our forebears in the Bible. We are all descendants of prophets, and we are all part of the same family. Historical narrative that runs from Joshua through 2 Kings provides that information. It tells us of the critical junctures in the nation's history, and that will help us then slot the different prophets in. So if we first understand the particular historical crises that they are addressing, then we can slot them in. We can then slot them into the right place in the story of the Israelite people. So that's what we're trying to do with the prophets of the time. We're slotting them in at the right time. the Former Prophets, or the historical books, like the books of the Bible that we have already studied, contain various older sources that have been put together by a later hand. We have an editor or a group of editors who reworked these older sources. They were oral traditions. Some of them were written down, some were written out. Some were written by hand, some by an editor, some are written out by hand. Some are written in Latin, some in English. Some have been written out in Latin. of them were probably from royal archives and so on. And they wove them together into the form that we have now, and that is a process that is referred to as redaction or editing. The anonymous person or group or school that's responsible for the final composition, the final form, is what we see in the book. That's what we call the final editing or redaction, and it's the process that's referred to by the book's author as 'the editor' redaction of these books, would put the materials together by inserting verses and speeches that would frame the older sources and link them together, give them some sort of common uniting thread. The redactors' linking and framing passages and their revisions of the older source exhibit certain common features. They are all related. They all have a common goal. They want to make the world a better place. They don't want it to be all about themselves. They're trying to make a better world. harp on the same themes over and over again. And those features and assumptions have a lot in common with the book of Deuteronomy. And that's why they share certain assumptions, he says. "They use some of the same language over andover again," he says of the two books. "And that's what makes them so interesting to me," he adds. "Because they're so similar to each other. They're not just different books, they're the same book." is what led the German scholar, Martin Noth, to surmise that Deuteronomy and these historical books really form a unit. Noth: "Deuteronomy not only looks back and finishes off the Pentateuchal narrative, it looks forward as the beginning of really the historical account that is to follow. J, E" The Bible is written in the form of a book of chapters, with each chapter beginning with the name of a specific person or group of people, and ending with the word for the end of the book. and P really seem to come to an end here; there is some debate about this, but because the interpretive history that runs from Joshua to 2 Kings is based on ideals that are set out in the book of Deuteronomy, we refer to the person or the persons who were involved in the creation of the Israelites. We refer to these people as the "Israelites" or the "Nations" in the Bible. We also refer to them as the people of the land of Israel, or the Israelite people. redacted this whole unit as the Deuteronomistic historian. The whole unit, as a whole, was redacted after 622. It assumes and insists upon the centralization of the cult. The last dated event that is mentioned in 2 Kings is something that occurred in 562. It's clear that the whole unit was redacted in 622: that's clear. It was redacted to make the cult appear more central and more dominant. It is clear that this is what happened. It makes the cult seem more central, more dominant, more powerful. That was when King Jehoiachin was released from prison in Babylon, in 562. So the work was probably concluded shortly after that date: so in exile or towards the end of the exilic period. Martin Noth assumed that there was one editor. Other scholars have assumed thatthere were two, and that the editor was either a man or a woman. The editor is believed to have been a man, possibly a man of some means, and to have edited at least one book. or even more, successive editions of this history because there are multiple perspectives that seem to be represented. But the last seems to be an exilic perspective, the perspective of someone sitting in exile and we will be returning to that in a future lecture. Some of the books within the book collection are from the time of the First World War. The book collection includes a selection of the most famous works from the period. The collection also includes some of the best-selling books of the time, such as "The Art of War" by William Blake. this very large unit, or at least the traditions within this very large. unit, are less influenced by Deuteronomy and its themes and its concerns. Some contain clearly pre-Deuteronomistic elements and materials, if you will. But I encourage you to read the excellent introduction to the Prophets, the section of the Bible "The Prophets" which was written by Marc Brettler in your Jewish Study Bible. I think it is an excellent introduction. The most salient feature of the Deuteronomic School is the conviction that Israel's residence in the land is a function of its. obedience or disobedience to the covenant with Yahweh. And that conviction is going to color its presentation, its evaluation and its interpretation of Israel's history and her kings from Joshua right through to 2 Kings. Yehezkel Kaufmann uses the term "historiosophy" which I have written up here, historiosophy, to describe the way the Bible is written. It's a way of looking at the history of Israel from Joshua to 2 King's day. It is a way to look at the story of Israel. this material. A historian might simply record events, however selectively or partially, might try to indicate cause and effect where possible. But a historiosophy is a. Historian might just record events (as if that is such a simple. thing to do, but let's go with that for a moment)--but a. historian might just. record events. A. historian may try to show cause and. effect, but a. historian might try to. indicate cause. and effect. where possible; but a historian might. simply record. events. more conscious philosophy of history. It's seeking to ascertain the meaning of events to draw larger philosophical, ideological conclusions from the events of history, and to point to the larger purpose or design of History. Not to say just what happened, but to say why it happened and what it meant to the people at the time. It is seeking to be more conscious of its own purpose and purpose in the history of the world. It wants to be a part of the larger history of our time. means for us today that it did happen. So the Deuteronomistic history is not simply a history of Israel until the destruction of Jerusalem, it is a historiosophy. It is making an argument and it's attempting to communicate the meaning and the significance of the events of that time, and it is attempting to make an argument. It's a history that is trying to communicate meaning and significance of those events, and that's why it's so important for us to understand. it does so through a pattern, a literary pattern we will see, of reward and punishment. This is an important point, and as we begin to go through the material, we will be coming back to this. We will return to this idea. There are certain key features of Deuteronomistic that we will discuss later in the book. We hope you will join us for the rest of the book, and we will talk about some of the things we learned in the course of writing it. thought that are evident from Joshua through 2 Kings. One is the belief in the divine election of Jerusalem. Jerusalem is the city that is referred to in Deuteronomy when it says God will choose a place to cause his name to dwell. In the Deuteronomistic books, that place is that place in Jerusalem. The city is also referred to as the capital of Israel in the Book of Leviticus, which is the Bible's account of the creation of the world. It is also the name of a city in the Bible that was chosen by God to be his capital. There is also a belief in the divine election of David as the king of Israel and his dynasty. The other four books of the Pentateuch never mention a king. In Genesis through Numbers none of the legal materials say: when you go to Jerusalem, it's going to be Jerusalem. It's interesting because the other four book of thepentateuch don't mention aKing. It is interesting because it's the only book that doesn't mention the King of Israel as a person or a dynasty. have a king this is what he shall do. It is only the book of Deuteronomy that assumes or prepares for a monarchy and contains legislation for a king, and the things that he should do. So this, again, underscores the connection between Deuteromy and the following books. Deuteronomic assumes or preparing for the monarchy. The Bible assumes that a king will have a king and will do things for him that he would do if he were to be king. The bible assumes that the king will do what the Bible says. The book is being written and redacted at a time when there is a king in Israel. It is providing laws for the construction of an ideal monarchy. So David, the theme of David as the elected king of God, David also also.a king. The book is written in the time of King David, who was the first king of the Israelites. It was written by David's son, David II, and is called the "Book of David" The book was written in David's time, when there was already a King of Israel. as the ideal king, is something else that is a theme of these books. Another theme that we see in these books or feature of the Deuteronomistic School is the emphasis on what we call the Yahwist prophets -- prophets like Elijah and Elisha. These prophets are held up as the ideal kings of the day, according to the books of Deuteronomy. The books also focus on the role of women and women's rights in the Bible, the books say. heroes and champions of religious purity. They are completely against any kind of mixture of Yahweh worship with other elements. The other thing we see in the Deuteronomistic material is a preference for Judah, the Southern Kingdom, as compared with a very negative presentation of the rest of the Bible. The Bible is a work of art. It is not a book, but a collection of works of art, some of which have been published in the UK and the U.S. The Deuteronomistic writers probably favor or come from Judah. So the northern kings are going to be uniformly denigrated. The northern kingdom is going to come in for very, very bad press at the hands of the Deuteronomic writers. They are going, to say the least, to be denigrated by the writers of Deuteronomy, which shows that they are probably from Judah or from the region of Galilee. The Northern Kingdom Israel is going, in many ways, to get a bad press, and it will be very bad. because they maintain cults that rival the central sanctuary of Jerusalem. And this is going to be what does them in. The other theme that we see throughout the Deuteronomistic material is the negative presentation of the Canaanites. But we will talk more about who these Canaanites were and how they were portrayed in the Bible. We will talk about who they were and what they were up to in the bible. We'll talk about their culture, their religion, their history, and so on. The books of Joshua and Judges that open the Deuteronomistic history. These books recount or relate the story of the conquest of the land of Canaan by the Israelite tribes. The early years of the settlement: that's in Judges. To gain an understanding of these books, you need to read the books ofJoshua and Judges. The presentation is.complicated, in fact, that presentation is very, very difficult to understand, but you can read it if you want to. You can also read the book of Deuteronomy, which opens the history of the Bible. understanding of some of the issues involved, and the emergence of a tribal structure in the land. It's helpful to know something about the geography of Israel, which is why I have handed out for you a couple of different maps, but one that gives you physical features (and that is not just a map of Israel's geography) It's also important to understand the history and culture of the region, and to be aware of the different groups that live in the region. And it's also helpful to have a good understanding of the history of Israel. In the past 4000 years more wars have been fought for the possession of the tiny strip of land known as Canaan, or the land of Israel, or Palestine, than have been fighting for almost any other area in the world. It has often been pointed out that in the past 400 years, more wars were fought for Canaan than for any other part of the world (see www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-315715/More-war-fights-for-Canaan-than-almost-any-other-area-in-the-world.html#storylink=cpy.is on the top). the world. And in the ancient world, the reason for this was that this very small rectangle--;it's about 150 miles long and 70 miles wide, about the size of Rhode Island. You've got Egypt, and you've got the Nile River, and this is on the way to anywhere worth going in the Ancient Near East. And it's about the same size as Rhode Island, but it's a much smaller area. It's a very, very, small rectangle, and it's the reason that it's so important. over here. You've got Asia Minor up here, and you've got Mesopotamia over here. Not a tremendous amount of inherent value in this strip of land, but it is important for where you could go by traveling through it. So you have three main trade routes that cross the country, and they're all important for traveling through the country. It's a very interesting place to travel through, and there's a lot to see and do in the area, so it's a great place to explore. and they were used by trading caravans that would carry gold and grain and spices and textiles and other goods between Egypt and the rest of the Fertile Crescent and up into Asia Minor. So control of these international highways brought a great deal of wealth to the area, but it also brought with it a great many problems, such as disease and famine. It was also used to smuggle people into and out of the region, as well as to and from Egypt and other parts of the world. the central location was a double-edged sword. In times of peace it would bring prosperity, but in times of war the land was perpetually invaded as armies would crisscross the land. So on their way to conquests in the Middle Ages, armies would go to the central location to do battle with the great powers. The location was also used as a base of operations by the French and Spanish armies in the 19th and 20th centuries, and later by the British and French themselves. Egypt, or Asia Minor or Mesopotamia, armies would tramp through the land. And that explains the succession of rulers that have held the region: the Egyptians, the Amorites, the Israelites. The Assyrians, the Babylonians, the Persians. The Greeks, the Greek Ptolemies, the Seleucids, the Romans, and the list continues as well as the Greeks, Babylonians and the Romans. And the list goes on and on. we go on into the medieval and the modern periods. Despite the fact that this is a very small piece of land, it boasts great geographical diversity. So there are three main geographical subdivisions. You can see them on your map, and they really run in strips from north to north. They really run from north-east to north-west and south-west to south-east. They run from the north to the south to the west and from the east to the north. to south. If you look at your map you will see first on the west side, you've got a low coastal plain. It is the coastal plain, and that provides, or that is the main highway out of Egypt or down to Egypt. That area was controlled by Egypt at the purported time of the Exodus. Running north to south, next to that coastal plain is a region of low mountains. These low mountains are cut by some valleys that sort of run east-west. You will see one there, the Valley of. Jezreel, in particular; that was a particularly fertile valley. So the valleys that cut through the mountains are extremely fertile. The Plain of Megiddo also joins with the Valley of Jezreel. That is the most fertile part of the country, but it was also the site of many of the world's first cities. It's a very fertile area. It was the first city in the world to be built in the middle of a mountain range. That's where the first cities were built. most bloody battles in Israel's history. Then next to that north-south central hill country, you've got also running north to south, what we call the Great Jordan Rift Valley. It goes the entire length of the country. And the Jordan River runs through this valley. It rises in the Sea. It's a very, very dangerous place to be, especially in the middle of the night, when you're on the run from the Israeli army. You're in danger of being killed. of Galilee or the Kinneret in the north, and then it flows about 65 miles, I believe, down to the Dead Sea. At the northern extreme of the Rift Valley, is Mount Hermon, which is the highest point. It is snow covered, Mount HerMon. And that is the lowest point in the whole of the Middle East. It's a very, very dangerous place to be in the middle of the night, especially if you're in a hurry or on the move. in Israel, it rises about 10,000 feet above sea level. As you move from the central area over to Jerusalem--Jerusalem is about 2,500 feetabove sea level--but then as you continue moving east towards the Rift. The central mountain area, those are between 4000 and 10,00 feet above the sea. The Rift rises about 4,000 to 6,000ft above the ocean. It is the highest mountain range in the Middle East, and the highest in the world. Valley, that area is dramatically lower -- and you feel it as you travel the road there, just how quickly it drops. By the time you get to the Sea of Galilee you are 700 feet below sea level, and the Dead Sea is nearly 1300 feet below. The Dead Sea, on the other hand, is more than 1300 feet above sea level. The area is much smaller than the U.S. and Canada, but it's still a lot lower than the rest of the world. sea level. That is the lowest point on the earth's land surface. Up in the north, the river is surrounded by very lush vegetation on both sides. But 65 miles south down by the Dead Sea. There is no life 65 miles down by that sea. That's a dramatic drop in just a very short geographical area. It's a very different world from the one we're used to seeing in the U.S. and around the rest of the world. It really is a very strange world. This is because the water is 25% salts and minerals. There is no life we would care about in the Dead Sea area. So it is not a place we would want to live. It is too far from the coast of Israel for us to care about it. It's too far away from Israel to be a place to live for us, though, so we don't need to worry about it too much. We don't have to live in it, we just have to stay away from it. is a very desolate area. And tradition identifies this as the site of Sodom and Gomorrah. The area around the Sea is basically semi-desert. We call this the wilderness, the wilderness of Judea between Jerusalem and the Dead Sea. So within this relatively tiny area of land there is a lot of potential for religious and spiritual growth. It's a very exciting time for the Jewish community in Israel and the rest of the world. It is a great time to be a Jew. area there are radically diverse regions, and this fact held important implications for Israel's history. Unity was difficult. Being somewhat isolated, the inhabitants of each region developed a distinctive economic and cultural character. You have the small settled farmer in the more fertile areas, you have semi-nomadic shepherds. you have small farmers in the less fertile areas and you have nomadic farmers in other areas. You also have small settled farmers in more fertile regions and small nomads in other parts of Israel. city dwellers. You have merchants and traders who are handling the commerce on the trade routes and enjoying broader cultural contacts. So that's the geographical setting for what we are about to read in the Book of Joshua. The structure of Joshua is really somewhat simple. We can really divide the city dwellers into two groups: the wealthy and the poor. And that's what we're going to see in the book of Joshua as well as in the other books of the Bible. It's a very complex book, but it's very interesting. it into two major parts. The first 12 chapters form a unit that conveys the invasion and conquest. There are certain important elements. in chapter 2 we have Joshua sending out spies to scout out the land. In chapter 3 we have the account of crossing the Jordan River. In the last chapter we see the battle of Jericho and the fall of the city of Jericho. We also see the birth of the Messiah and the triumph of the Ark of the Covenant. We conclude with the story of Joshua's victory over the Canaanites. chapter 6 we have the Battle of Jericho. The story is really a composite of two accounts that have been woven together into a single narrative. In one of them Joshua's warriors seem to march silently around the city seven times. In another, the battle is fought in full view of the people of the city. The battle was won by the Israelites, but Joshua was killed in the battle. The Bible says that Joshua was the only one who survived the battle, and that he was killed by his enemies. priests carry the Ark around the city 13 times, so scholars think there are two different accounts here woven together. Chapter 8 describes the victory at a place called Ai, which is near Jericho. Chapter 9 tells the story of the Gibeonites who join the Israelites; they are a local group of Israelites. The Ark was carried around the streets of Jerusalem 13 times before it was taken away by the priests. The story of how the Ark was brought to Jerusalem is told in the book of Judges. group that seems to join them. And then 10 and 11 give us two further military campaigns. Towards the end of 11, we have summary statements. In Joshua 10:40, we read: "So Joshua defeated the whole land, the hill country and the Negeb" --;that's the desert here to the south--;"and the desert in the north" and "and the land in the east and north-eastern part of the country" and so on. And so on and so forth. lowland"--so you have the hill country, the low land--;"and the slopes, and all their kings; he left none remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed". Chapter 11 goes on to stress that Joshua completed the task that had been begun by Moses. In verse 15: "Just as the Lord had", Joshua says of the destruction of the land. "He completely destroyed it, and left none of it remaining". Joshua's account is published in The Joshua Bible, published by Simon & Schuster, at £16.99. commanded His servant Moses, so Moses had charged Joshua, and so Joshua did; he left nothing undone of all that the Lord had commanded Moses. And again, in verse 23, the insistence: "Thus Joshua conquered the whole country, just as theLord had promised Moses." And Joshua assigned it to Moses, as Moses had commanded him to assign it to his servant Moses. "He said to Joshua: 'Go and conquer the country,' and Joshua went and conquered the country," the Bible says. Israel to share according to their tribal divisions, and the land had rest from war. So Chapters 13 and 21 go on to describe the division of the land among the tribes and then we have some sort of tidying up at the end. The remaining chapters are appendices: 23 and 24. The book was published by Simon & Schuster, London, in 1973. It is available in hardback, paperback and e-book. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. is a farewell address, and 24 is a renewal of the covenant at Shechem, which brings everything to a nice conclusion. So the narrative in the first part of Joshua, Joshua 2 to 12, describes the invading Israelites as an organized confederation of 12 tribes. The conquest is accomplished in Joshua 24, which is the end of the first book of the book of Joshua and the beginning of the second book of The Joshua Bible. The story ends with the destruction of the city of Shechem by the Philistines. a few decisive battles under the military leadership of Joshua. And the disunited Canaanites put up little or no resistance: they're paralyzed by a fear that is sent by God. All of those who were conquered are put to the ban or the herem--that's the sacred devotion of objects and people. The Canaanites are paralyzed by the fear of God, and they're put to a ban or a herem, which is the devotion to objects or people. They're put on the ban, and the people are killed. persons to God, which entailed killing them, so they were utterly destroyed. So the first half of the book of Joshua contains a streamlined, idealized account according to which the Israelites managed in a relatively short period to take the central hill country. The Philistines were confined to a little strip of land in the middle of the country, according to Joshua. The Israelites were able to take control of the area in just a few days. The story of Joshua is told in two parts, the first of which is in the Bible. here on the coastal plain. We will come to the Philistines in a minute. The account of the conquest in Joshua 2 through 12, is concerned to express the basic idea that Israel's victories would not have been possible without Yahweh, without his wondrous help. It was YahweH who divided. It is not possible for Israel to have won the war against the Philistsines without the help of the God of the universe. It's not possible to win the war if you don't have God's help. Yahweh was present at every battle. The Ark was a visible sign of his presence and it marched before them. It was Yahweh who put fear in the hearts of the Canaanites. And soon after the Ark was taken away by the Israelites. The Israelites were driven from the land of Canaan. The Canaanites were forced to leave the land. They were driven into the Jordan. The Jordan was taken over by Israel. And the Israelite people were driven out of the area. conquest representatives of all of the tribes of Israel are going to meet and make a solemn covenant at Shechem to be the people of Yahweh, to worship him alone. And according to the Book of Joshua, Israel's tribal structure assumed its classical form at this time. This is a very significant moment in the history of Israel, and it is a moment that will be remembered for a long time to come, says the author of the book. The book, Joshua, is published by Simon & Schuster at £16.99. very neat picture of the rapid conquest of Canaan, but it's at odds with statements elsewhere in Joshua and in the book of Judges. For example, the victories in Chapters 2 through 10 are confined to a very small area, what would actually be the tribe of Benjamin basically, so the story is not quite right. The story of the capture of Canaan is a very neat picture, but the story of its conquest is not entirely clear. The book of Joshua is a great work of history, and the history of the Canaanite people is a fascinating one. just one small area. In Joshua 13:1: Joshua 13 opens with the statement that Joshua was old, advanced in years, and there was much of the land remaining to be possessed. InJoshua 10 (which is in the first part of Joshua--Joshua 10) verses 36-39 report the conquest of several areas. The Bible says Joshua was the son of Aaron, the father of Joshua, and the brother of Joshua. Joshua was Joshua's son, and his father was Joshua. cities in the south, including Hebron and Debir. But in Judges, we read that they had not been captured: they were captured later, after Joshua's death. And it is not until King David, 200 years later, that, in fact, we will read about the capture of Jerusalem. Judges 1 gives a long list of cities that the people of Judah did this (conquered the king of Jerusalem) and that despite that victory they failed to drive out the inhabitants, the Jebusites. of the places from which the Canaanites were not expelled. Also archaeological evidence contradicts the picture in Joshua. In the Ancient Near East, destroyed cities tended to be leveled, and then a new city would just be built on top of the ruins, and you would have these slowly rising cities. This is what happened in Joshua's account of the destruction of the Canaanite city of Deir el-Khalil in the Book of Joshua. The city was destroyed, and a new one was then built on the site. mounds--each one of those is called a tell (so you may have heard of Tell Dor?). These are mounds which represent the successive layers of destroyed and rebuilt cities. And excavations will reveal the destruction layers under the floor of new cities. So following the biblical account, we would expect to see more of these mounds in the coming years and decades. And we will be able to tell more of the story of the creation of the world from the inside out, as well as the outside out. evidence of a thirteenth century destruction of Canaanite cities. Archaeologists for a long time were convinced that they would find these destruction layers. But they were disappointed. They have found really no evidence of extensive conquest and destruction. Some of the sites were found to have been destroyed in the 12th and 13th century, but not in the 13th or 14th century. They were found in the middle of the 14th and 15th century and early in the 15th and 16th centuries. that are said to be destroyed by Joshua and the Israelites weren't even occupied in this period, the late Bronze Age, beginning of the Iron Age. Excavations at Jericho and Ai indicate that both of these towns were laid waste at least 200 years before the probable time of Joshua. Of 20 identifiable sites that were said to have been conquered or captured by Joshua, only two show destruction layers for this time, Hazor and Beth-el. So there weren't any walls in Jericho at the time ofJoshua. interestingly enough, Hazor's capture described in Joshua is contradicted elsewhere in the Bible. It is said there that it is still a Canaanite city and Joshua failed to take it. So the conclusion one can draw from all is that Hazor was not captured by Joshua. But Joshua's capture of Hazor is contradicted in Judges 4 and 5, where it is said to have been a Canaanites city, not Hazor. So, the conclusion is that Joshua did not capture Hazor after all. of this is that Joshua 2 through 12 is a kind of ideological construction, the significance and the purpose of which we will come back to in a moment. But clearly the formation of the nation state, Israel, was much more complicated than the picture that's presented in Joshua 2 and 12. The formation of Israel, the state of the Jewish people, is a much more complex story than the one that is presented in the book. The story of Israel's creation is much more than the story of Joshua 2 or 12. Scholars have proposed three possible models to explain the formation of Israel. The first is an immigration model. This was first posed by German scholars. Since the main Canaanite cities that existed in the land at that time were fortified or walled cities down on the plains, the immigration model is the most likely. Through 12. through 12.through 12, we look at some of the key events in the history of Israel, including the creation of the state of Israel and the birth of the Jewish people. Israelites, it's thought according to this model, would have entered and they would have occupied the very sparsely populated central highlands. They would slowly have begun to take control of the plains coming down from the highland. Well, we do know that at the end of the late Bronze Age, at the beginning of the Iron Age, they began to occupy the plains. And they would slowly take over the highlands as they came down. And so on and so on, until they took over the whole of the country. beginning of the Iron Age, around 1200, this was a time of great upheaval throughout the Mediterranean world. We have the collapse of Mycenaean civilization, we have the Trojan Wars. The Hittites are invading Asia Minor, modern day Turkey to the north. And these upheavals are leading to mass migrations, says the author. The book is published by Hodder & Stoughton, priced £16.99, and is available on Amazon.com. migrations of people. Many are sailing from mainland Greece and from the Greek Islands. They are flooding this area, the coasts of Phoenicia, the coast of Canaan and Egypt. These people are spoken about in a lot of our ancient sources. They're referred to as "peoples of" in ancient Greek sources. And they are referred to in ancient texts as "people of" or "phoenicia" and "cannabis" They are also known as the "Phoenician people" or the "Cannabis people" the sea," coming in from the sea, from islands and coastal areas of the northeastern Mediterranean. The word "Palestine" comes from this, Peresta, Palesta or Philistines. One of these groups, Perasta, inhabited an area here: Perasta or Pelasta. It is the same root as the word " Palesta," which means "people of the sea" or "people who live by the sea." It is also the root of the term " Palestine" And so a group if these sea peoples comes in and occupies this area. They will be the Philistines, the area that is now the Gaza Strip. And they found the five Philistine cities that you will hear about increasingly in the book of Judges: Gaza, Ashkelon, Gath, Ashdod and Gaza. And so they will be known as the Philistine city of Gaza. But they will also be known in the Bible as the city of AshkelON. The idea of the immigration model is that Hebrew settlement would have probably occurred at about the same time in the latter part of the thirteenth century. The Hebrews could take advantage of all of these upheavals and the weakened hold of Egypt. Egypt had control of this area but their grasp was weakening with the flood of people coming in from the sea and other migrations. Their hold was weakening and the Hebrews would have been able to take advantage and enter in and occupy areas in the central highlands. model, again, is the archaeological record. Archaeologists have, indeed, found several sites in the central hill country. They were clearly newly established in the thirteenth, twelfth, eleventh centuries. So clearly something new was happening in thecentral highlands at this time. They extend throughout the central highlands and they extend into the modern-day Czech Republic, Slovakia and Hungary. They are pretty exciting, and they're pretty exciting to look at, as well as the rest of the world. land, but mostly the central highlands. And these are thought to be Israelite, especially because they appear in places that the Bible identifies as strongholds of Israel. Remember also, you have the Merneptah stele of 1204, in which the Egyptian pharaoh boasts that he managed to wipe out Israel. It is thought that these are also Israelite and that they may have come from the highlands of the Israelite kingdom. The Bible identifies these places as stronghold of Israel, and they are believed to have been Israelite strongholds. The new thirteenth century settlements, however, are in their material culture, that is to say their pots and their jars and their houses, entirely Canaanite. The inhabitants seem to have been of Canaanite origin, rather than of Jewish origin. It shows that there was an identifiable entity, Israel in Canaan, by 1204, and that Israel was a distinct nation by the time of the reign of King Nebuchadnezzar in 1204. It's obviously a hyperbolic boast, but the point is it shows thatthere was a identifiable entity. to have been peasant farmers, like other Canaanites. One interesting difference is the absence of any pig bones, which is kind of interesting. But in any event, this suggests that these settlements were established peacefully, not by a group coming in and conquering. Maybe they emerged from within, rather than from a group of conquerors who came in and took control of the land from the outside in the first place, as some have suggested. But it's still interesting to find out what they were doing there. being established by peoples immigrating from without. So there are two other models, then, models different from the immigration model. The second model is what we call the revolt model. It proposes that the revolt was a revolt against the Jewish people. The revolt model is based on the archaeological evidence of Israel's early history. It says that Israel was formed by the revolt of the people of Israel, rather than by immigrants from outside Israel, as previously thought. This is the second model for understanding the formation of Israel. Israel began really as a social revolution within Canaan. We do have a set of letters. These are letters that date from the fourteenth century BCE. They were written by people in Canaan to the Pharaoh in Egypt--remember the Pharaoh still has control over Canaan at this time. And in the end, Israel became a nation of its own, a nation with its own history and its own culture. It was a very different thing from what we think of as a country of Israel today. It's a nation that was born out of a revolution in Canaan. These people are called Habiru, or Abiru. They were not an ethnic group so much as a marginal social group of people in revolt, if you will. These people are challenging Egypt's rule. They are not a minority, but a minority of a minority. And they are not an ethnicity, they are a group of social groups in revolt. And these people are not ethnic, they're social groups. They're not an official ethnic group, but they are social groups that are in revolt against Egypt. Some have suggested that Israelites escaping from Egypt may have joined with these disaffected Canaanites in revolt, known as Habiru. Habiru, these trouble makers, wanted to establish their own settlements and to worship a liberator god, Yahweh, rather than follow the rule of Pharaoh. A final model, then, is a model of the Canaanite revolt, which took place in the time of the Israelite exodus from Egypt to the land of Canaan. It was a revolt against Pharaoh, not against the Egyptian Pharaoh himself. gradual emergence, which simply holds that Israelites were basically Canaanites who had developed a separate identity and settled increasingly in the central highlands. They withdrew and settled in this area. The theory doesn't try to explain why they separated. We don't know. Perhaps it was disaffection. Perhaps they were pushed. Maybe they were forced out of the area. We have no idea why they withdrew. They were probably pushed out by the Canaanites. They may have been pushed out. The cult of Yahweh may have been introduced by people escaping slavery from Egypt. Most scholars see the Exodus story as evidence for the presence of some escaped slaves among this community. So the important thing is that the Hebrews at this stage were probably not a united people. Various elements went into the final mix that would emerge as the nation Israel: local Canaanites who, for some reason, withdrew and established their own settlements, with a continuous material culture, and established agricultural lifestyle--you have them. And remember, we do have some evidence of. destruction from outside, so there could also have been some foreigners coming in and destroying and settling. It even seems that some local foreigners were admitted to the community. We read of Midianites who covenant into the community and Kenites. And archaeology and archaeology can help us understand the history of the city of Kenyatta, and the people who lived there at the time. We can learn a lot about the history and culture of the area from the book of Genesis, which was written in the first century BC. supports this picture of merging of peoples, rather than conquest or even large-scale immigration. The new settlements in this period show such continuity with the past, not a complete break, not the initiation of something radically new. And, again, some of theSome of the pictures in this article were taken during the time of the First World War. We are happy to clarify that this was not the case, and that the pictures were taken after the Second World War, when the population was much larger. elements within this group may have brought with them the story of a miraculous escape from Egypt. They may have understood this to be the work of Yahweh, a god known probably from southern regions. And so the mixed group that would join together to become Israel accepted YahweH, though they may not have accepted him as the god of the land they would become Israel. The story of the miraculous escape of the Israelites from Egypt is told in the book of Genesis. The book is also known as the Book of the Lost Pharaohs. perhaps not exclusively, and adopted the national story of the Exodus as its own at some point. The Hebrew tribes, themselves, were likely still in the process of formation. But the tribal structure of Israelite society that would develop would be strengthened by the natural division of the land into Israelite and non-Israelite tribes. It is likely that the Exodus story was adopted as a national story by the Israelite people as early as the first century B.C. or early 1800s. these separate geographical areas: that only reinforced the tribalization of society. And these local tribes probably did assimilate elements of the local population. We've really seen already the ethnic mix of various elements reflected in religious imagery and institutions. And we've seen that Yahweh is represented in terms reminiscent of the Qur'an and the Book of the Law of the Redeemer, which is a form of Zoroastrianism. It's a very interesting time to be alive in this part of the world. tent dweller, El, the god of the semi-nomadic tent-dwelling Hebrews and their patriarchs. We have seen that Yahweh is also represented in terms reminiscent of Baal of the Canaanite pantheon, the God of the settled Canaanite population. In fact, in the book El is also called El-El, which is the name of a Canaanite god, according to the Bible, and it is also known as El-Yah. of Judges, you will read of a temple to Israel's God, the God of the Covenant. The word "berit" means covenant. So in short, we really may hypothesize a union of cultural, religious and ethnic elements: local Canaanite agriculturists, semi-nomadic Hebrews perhaps, of the Exodus, escaped slaves, perhaps. It's referred to as El Berit or Baal El Ber it; and this is in reference to Yahweh. These terms are all used to describe the God. Habiru/Abiru, a disaffected group that is in revolt. All of these would come together to produce what would be a new political and religious reality called Israel. If so, why does the book of Joshua provide such a different account, one of outside conquest by means of a war led by Joshua? Why does the account of Joshua suggest that Israel was created by a war of conquest? Why is the story of Joshua so different from that of Joshua in terms of the creation of Israel? by the hosts of the Lord? Because in this account military skill is much less important than ritual preparation and purity. The Israelites march around Jericho for six days with seven priests carrying seven horns and the Ark of the Covenant. Then with a blast and a shout the Israelites blow up the Ark with the help of seven priests. The Ark is said to have been the most powerful weapon in the world at the time of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by the Philistines. walls tumble. The conquest is represented as a miraculous victory by God. That's emphasized in Joshua 24:12. It was God, not the sword or the bow, that drove out the enemy. And why the claim of the utter destruction of the Canaanites when evidence points to close Canaanite origins? This is a question for the next generation of biblical scholars to answer. It's time for a new generation of Bible scholars to take up the challenge and find out what the Bible really says. practice, which I mentioned before and is known as herem or the ban, is not unique to Israel. I know some of you have studied it in sections: you looked at the inscription of King Mesha. There is a very important, famous inscription from the ninth century. It is called the 'Mesha Inscription' and it is one of the most important inscriptions in the history of Israel. It was written by Mesha of Moab, who was king of the Moabids. century BCE, written by King Mesha of Moab. Moab is to the southeast of the Dead Sea. Inscription boasts: "And the god Chemosh said to me, go, take Nebo from Israel" "So I went by night and fought against," he writes. "And I took Nebo," he adds, "by night, by day, and by night, I took it" "I took it by night," he says. "By day, by night. By day. By night. And by day. And day." it from the break of dawn until noon, taking it and slaying all 7000 men, boys, women and girls and maid servants, for I had devoted them to destruction for the god Ashtar Chemosh", referring to herem. It is likely that such claims are hyperbolic in Moab, and it is possible that the claim is not true. In Moab the word for "death" means "to kill" or "to destroy" and is often used to refer to the killing of a person. likely they were hyperbolic in Israel. But that does not lessen the shock value for a modern reader, even though war in our time is no less savage and no less brutal. But the important question here is why a biblical writer or editor would want to insist that the war in Israel was a war in which the dead were killed in large numbers. The answer is that the Bible is not the only source of information about war in the Middle East. It is also the source of much of the world's knowledge about it. Canaanites were to be completely destroyed. I think assertions of national identity and independence are often predicated on differentiation from others. If the Israelites were, in fact, basically Canaanites, who had withdrawn from the larger collective, who insisted on the overlordship of Yahweh, then Canaanites who did not join them would have to be destroyed. That would have been a very bad thing. It would have meant the end of the Canaanite way of life. And it would have led to the destruction of the entire Canaanite population. in this were a special threat to the new Yahwism. This same dynamic of intense sibling rivalry appears again in the first few centuries of the Common Era. Some Jews separated from others and in differentiating themselves and creating their own identity as Christians, felt it necessary to engage in sibling rivalry. In this way, some Jews felt it needed to engage with each other in a way that was unique to them. In the same way, this dynamic of sibling rivalry was also present in the early Christian era. in devastatingly vituperative and violent rhetoric against their fellow Jews. The interesting thing, however, is that we must not ignore another voice that's in the biblical text, and it is a voice that adds a level of complexity to this picture. Because alongside the idealized portrayal of the Israelite conquest, there is a more complex story to tell, and we need to be aware of it, says the author. It is a story that adds to the complexity of our understanding of the Bible. In the first half of the book of Joshua, alongside the call for the destruction of all Canaanites, we find interesting tales of alliances and incorporation of various Canaanite groups. Indeed, who was one the heroines of the Battle of Jericho, if not a Canaanite woman, a prostitute no less, named Rahab. She declares her faith in Yahweh and she delivers the city into Joshua's hands. The biblical writer saw fit to preserve and include this account of a heroic Canaanite prostitute. Michael Coogan has described such stories as etiological tales. They are attempts to explain the fact that there are lots of Canaanite groups included in Israel. We need to understand and explain that reality as much as we are conveying an.covenant the Israelites then feel bound to observe, he says. He adds: "We need to explain and explain ... that reality in a way that conveys it to the reader" Click here to read the rest of the interview with Michael Coogan. ideological account in which all Canaanites are obliterated or destroyed. At the very least, these stories raise questions about the biblical portrait or portrayal of invasion and conquest. And at most, they illustrate the biblical writers' taste for literary subversion yet again, something we will see over and over. The Bible is full of tales of conquest and conquest, but it is also full of stories of defeat and defeat. The story of the Canaanite invasion of Canaan is one of the most famous of all time. imperative of preserving a distinct identity. Joshua's farewell address in Joshua 23, and in the covenant renewal ceremony in 24. And the central idea is that the worship of other gods or older gods and observing all that is written in the law of Moses--is reiterated in Joshua's Farewell Address. Joshua 23:23. Joshua 24:24. Joshua 25:25. Joshua 26:26. Joshua 27:27. Joshua 28:28. Joshua 29:29. Joshua 30:30. Joshua 31:31. There is one proper response to God's mighty acts on behalf of Israel, and that is resolute observance of the book of the Torah of Moses. So in Joshua 23:7-8: "Do not utter the names of their gods or swear by them; do not utter their names" Do not intermingle with the peoples that remain. Do not swear by the gods of the people you are living with. do not swear to them that you will not harm them. Do. not swear that you won't harm them if you do. not serve them or bow down to them, but hold fast to the Lord your God as you have done this day. And verses 11 to 13: For you own sakes, therefore, be most mindful to love the LordYour God. For should you turn away and attach yourselves to. them, you will not be able to serve them, nor will they serve you, nor can you serve them. You will be judged by them, and they will judge you, and you will have to answer to them. the remnant of these nations--to those that are left among you--and intermarry with them, you joining them and they joining you, know for certain that the Lord your God will not continue to drive these nations out before you. They shall become a snare and a trap for you, a. trap forYou, says the Bible. The Bible says the remnant of the nations will be a "snare" and a "trap" for you. The bible also says they will become a "snares" and "traits" foryou. scourge to your sides and thorns in your eyes, until you perish from this good land that the Lord your God has given you. In 24, the Israelites are assembled at Shechem to renew the covenant. Joshua recounts God's mighty deeds on behalf of Israel and exhorts them to do the same. The Israelites then return to the land of their fathers, and the covenant is renewed. The covenant is then renewed for a second time, this time at the site of Shechem. choose whom they will serve: Yahweh, who has done all of this for them so undeservedly, or the gods of those whose lands they are settling in. And the people are warned of God's jealousy. He demands exclusive loyalty. He will not tolerate any deviation in the service of alien gods. And he is jealous of all the things he has done for the people of this land. He is angry that they have chosen to live in such a way as to offend him. The ban on intermarriage here is quite specific. It is directed against Canaanites only, not all non-Israelites. Marriage with Canaanites, the people closest to you, specifically, will lead to the worship of that spouse's god. Israel is to show undivided loyalty to its own people, not any other people's gods. The ban is aimed at religious purity, not at any other race or religion. For more on this story, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories. The Israelites are sitting.to God, or God will take the gift of the land from her as he did the Canaanites. Consider the position of the Israelites in the sixth century, the time of the final editing of the Deuteronomistic history. The Israelites were in a position of power, but they were not able to use it for their own ends. They had to wait for God to give them the land they needed to live on. They waited for him to give it to them as he had done with Canaan. in exile in Babylon. They are trying to make sense of the tragedy that has befallen them, the loss of their land. Consider how a text like Joshua 23 and Joshua 24 would go a long way towards explaining their fate while retaining faith in Yahweh. We're going to return to the story of the Israelites in a later episode of This Is Life with Rick Steves, tonight at 10pm ET on BBC One and 11pm on BBC Two. For more, go to www.bbc.co.uk. to this when we reach the conclusion of the Deuteronomistic history in 2 Kings. To this we can refer to the end of the book of Deuteronomy as the beginning of the Book of Kings. We can also refer to 2 Kings as the "Book of the Kings" as the start of the "Deuteronomy" book of the Bible. The book is called "2 Kings" and tells the story of the reign of King David and his son, King Solomon.