The applications of luminescence and fluorescence in service to biology are incredibly important. Today we'll talk about the nuts and bolts of fluorescence. And then on Wednesday, we'll start on the science of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) The difference between fluorophores that we can encode into proteins through genetic engineering and fluorophore that we use that are made by chemists in the lab but then appended to molecules. The difference is between the two is the difference between the different types of light emitters. to see some of these tools that you've seen images of. We love to wow you with images of fluorescent cells and cells in action. But I want to step back and actually show you how that all came about. Where do these fluorescent proteins come from? What are we trying to do with these tools? Let us know in the comments below or on Twitter @cnnireport and @MailOnlineCannabis. Back to the page you came from. Click here for more information. looking for? How much protein engineering was done to make these such an amazingly useful set of molecules, macromolecules to really allow us in real time to study biology? And there are many, many other applications as well. So we're going to talk about luminescence and fluorescence in general. Luminescence, fluorescence and protein engineering: What do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments below or tweet us @CNNOpinion. Back to the page you came from. is the general term. And fluorescence is a little bit more specific. There are different types of luminescence. And you'll get to see some of those varieties of luminecence. I've put a decent amount of our content today on the screen. So we'll go up here and take a look. So luminescent in general is the emission of light not associated with heat, not like a burning flame which has a lot of light accompanying it. But rather the emission. of light in the absence of heat. experiments to illuminate life, to understand details of cellular activity. But also as reagents in diagnostics in all kinds of imaging modalities. And through these two-- three lectures, actually, because Professor Martin will give you one that has even more imaging in it-- you'll sort of really get to understand what's going on in the cells of the body. It's a very exciting time to be alive, and I hope you'll join me for the next few days. It will be a great experience. where these pretty magical reagents come from. Two types of luminescence that we won't discuss in detail today, first of all chemiluminescence. This is a molecule known as luminol sitting in a little bile. I think I like fluorescence so much because the images are so captivating. Now, let's go to the lab and see what we can do with these amazing reagents. We'll be back next week with the results of our experiment with a new type of fluorescence. things like luminol, has anyone heard of luminol before? Does anyone-- yeah, do you watch a lot of CSI or-- yeah. So tell everybody what people use luminol for. AUDIENCE: To pick up on a blood spatter or remnants of blood. PROFESSOR: Yeah, so when you see these TV shows, that's what they do. They use it to pick up blood spattered on the floor or something like that. It's a blood-spatter detector. and there's this beautifully clean motel room and nothing looks like it ever happened there. But people thought there was a murder took place there. And you'll notice they come in with these spray bottles. And spray all over the carpets, and the drapes and the chairs. And then there's a scene in which they spray the entire room. And it's like a scene from a horror movie. It's just like a horror film, but it's a murder scene. And they spray it all over. great moment where they turn off the light and luminol interacts with the heme of blood at an amazingly sensitive level, such that when the lights are turned out, the room's just sort of this battlefield of bright luminescence that indicates that this was a crime scene. So that's the great moment. That's the moment where the light is turned off, and the room is just this battlefield. And that's when the blood is on the floor and the blood's on the walls. most famous luminol sort of example. Another pretty useful type of luminescence is bioluminescence. I've done a lot of scuba diving in my life. And there's nothing more exciting than a scuba diver's luminescent experience. It's a very exciting time for scuba divers, and it's a great way to learn about the world around you. I'm looking forward to seeing what the future has in store for us. I hope to see a lot more of them in the future. dive at night where the whole ocean is this sort of inky black. And sometimes you'll move your arms through the black water at night. And you'll see all these, like, little fireworks. And many, many marine organisms actually undergo bioluminescence. It's a biological reaction that causes luminescent. And this is a great example of how that can happen in the marine world. And it's a really exciting thing to see. It really is a lot of fun. is a cuttlefish shown here in this image in the corner where they are brightly lit at night. And actually, it's just a whole party there at night in the ocean where all sorts of organisms are signaling to other organisms through bioluminescence and reactions such as luciferase reactions. So that's what we're looking at here in the image of the cuttle fish. And that's why we're showing it to you in this picture. We want you to see it in a different light. in bioluminescence, a molecule of ATP is generally used and combined with another molecule through the action of an enzyme that ends up kicking out light energy. So those are both important. But what we're going to talk about principally is fluorescence. This is a more specific term. And you can find out more about fluorescence at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in Washington, D.C. or at the NIST website at: http://www.nist.org/. may wonder why I'm putting this in capital letters. The first thing to learn about fluorescence is how to spell fluorescence. So if you look at the word fluorescence and the first word first part of the word looks like flower, you know the stuff you bake your pumpkin pie. It's called "fluorescence" and it's a type of light that can be seen by the naked eye. It can also be seen in the eye of a person who is looking at it from a distance. with, you spelled it wrong. It actually is fluor, F-L-U-O-R-E-S. What are you guys whispering about? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: Did I get something else wrong? Audience: The E-S, yeah, well, forget about that part. There's another C in there. There we go, we snuggled that in. So there we go. So we went with that. the important part is the first part. So make it look like you know what you're talking about and spell fluorescence correctly. I cannot tell you how many papers, scientific papers I read where they spelled fluorescence wrong. It's really hysterical. There's two or three amazingly common typos in people's slides. One of them is spelling fluorescencewrong and the other one is spelling complement wrong. Complement as opposed to compliment where you're telling someone they look good. Anyway, but fluorescence is a key point. Fluorescence is the absorption of light energy by a molecule. It could be a small part of a fluorescent protein molecule that has a particular structure. But it will absorb light energy at a certain wavelength. So let's put it to the test with a small organic molecule. The results will be published in the Journal of Chemical Theory and Theory of Molecules (JCDTM) in the next few weeks. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. this into just a cuvette experiment. These are the kinds of little containers that we use for certain types of fluorescence. We could use a plate and a plate reader. But this is quite common. So you shine light on this molecule. Do you want to nab the doors, the doors of the cuvette? You can do that. You can take a picture of the doors. You could take a photo of the inside of thecuvette. You might be able to do that too. outer doors on both sides? I don't know. Everybody's pretty happy today. Anyway, and the molecule goes. And I'm going to just draw something, you know, with a bunch of double bonds and things. And the molecule absorbs light and goes to an excited state. So this is the ground. This is the floor. This was the ground, and this was the floor, and that was the ceiling. And this is what the ground looks like when you're standing on it. state before light. After light you get the molecule in an excited state. So it has absorbed that light energy. So you've hit it with a wavelength of light. And I'm going to redefine all these terms properly in a moment. Lambda excitation of a particular wavelength. Once that molecule has absorbed light, there's a very transient period until the molecule lets out energy in the form of light and returns back to its ground state now. So that the photo physics of fluorescence involves the excitation. of a molecule with light of one energy. That light energy is at a particular wavelength so it's called its Lambda of excitation. That molecule very, very transiently, it's usually picoseconds or nanosecondS for organic molecules. It may be a little bit longer for other types of complexes and may stretch to the microsecond or millisecond. But most of what we talk about is a very transient moment in a molecule's history. It's a very,very short time period for an organic molecule and a very long time for a complex. will be picosecond to nanosecond lifetime. Once it's excited, it just drops its energy back out and goes back to the ground state. The most important thing that you want to remember is the wavelength, which is given in nanometers. And the wavelength for emission, which are also also also in nanometer, is also also known as the wavelength of the light. It's a very exciting time for scientists and engineers around the world. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/science/science-and-technology/nano-light-emitting-light. in nanometers. This wavelength is higher energy. Obviously you don't create energy when you shine light on something. You'd be breaking a few fundamental rules if you did. When you excite a molecule, you'll take it to the excited state. It'll sit and vibrate there a little bit. Then it will kick back energy out at a longer wavelength. Lower energy are longer wavelengths. And that is a rule for fluorescence. And for the majority of the fluorescence experiments that we do in biology, the wavelengths that you see emission at are in the visible. range. Whereas the wavelengths that you might excite your molecule at are often in the UV or a bit longer, ideally, longer. And these things are going to come up. This isn't the first time that you're going to see them. And it's not the last time you'regoing to go to them. It's always going to be a little bit different, but it's always a good thing to be prepared for the possibility of seeing them in the future, he says. see them. So let's take a look at fluorescent dyes in the electromagnetic spectrum in the next couple of slides. So what you see here, you see a bunch of little eppendorf vials with fluorescent molecules that emit light at all different wavelengths. These would be down at the ultraviolet end of the spectrum, for example. These are the fluorescent molecules we use to make the fluorescent ink. We use them to make ink that can be used in a variety of different ways. end of the electromagnetic spectrum. These would be up in the very red end, the lowest energy. So these emission wavelengths, these would be emitting at the lowestenergy, longest wavelength. These will be emitting the shortest wavelength, lowest to highest energy. Is everyone following me? So just make sure you're following me. So just making sure that you're paying attention to what I'm saying. And I'll be back in a few days to talk to you about the next phase of the project. sure you remember that. And just this principle rule that you can't possibly break with respect to the wavelengths of light for fluorescence experiments. So what we're going to see is the relationship for the electromagnetic spectrum. There's a little bit more detail in a minute. And then look at the results of the experiment in terms of the amount of light that is absorbed and absorbed by the light. And the amount that is refracted and refracted by different wavelengths. And so on and so on. some fluorescent dyes that are very, very commonly used in biology. You will have seen a lot of cells stained with these dyes even so far in pictures that you've seen on the screen. And then we'll talk about the application of antibody reagents and where does it come from. We'll also talk about how antibodies are applied to cells in a variety of ways. We're looking at how antibodies can be used to create new types of cells in the lab and in the real world. that come in with respect to fluorescences. So let's take a look at fluorescence and the electromagnetic spectrum. So here it is, going from wavelengths. The ultraviolet wavelengths would be shorter than 400 nanometers. So ultraviolet, so beyond violet. And here you see the relationship between wavelength, and then what the light emitted would look like. So if we're looking at here, what we would expect to see is if we've got a fluorophore and it shows fluorescence, we would be exciting the fluorophores in wavelengths. in this region. But a cardinal rule is that we excite with a shorter, higher energy wavelength and observe emission at a longer, lower energy wavelength. Straight away the most common dye that you will see is the blue dye. And we would see emission in wavelengths in this region, but not in the red or green region, which is where the blue and green wavelengths are. The blue dye is the most important dye, followed by the green dye and then the red dye. The red dye is also a very important dye and we see it in the green region. Fluorophores have lots of rings fused together with lots of double bonds in them. This is the structure of a compound known as ethidium bromide. It's a dye that intercalates into DNA. When the dye changes its environment from being in water to being snuggled in between stacks of base pairs in DNA, it changes its fluorescent properties and it becomes fluorescence. So fluorescence isn't just the intrinsic shape of the molecule and what it looks like. very often related to what's around it. Why is that the case? It's because the excited state may behave differently in different environments. Maybe stabilize for a while, and that's why you might see fluorophores experience a change in their fluorescence as a function of their environment. Is that clear? If so, please send us a picture of your fluorophore to jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. If not, send a photo of your own. to everyone? So the molecular environments, if I'm a fluorophore and I'm in water, I'm going to feel pretty differently in my excited state. It's pretty dramatic when you see it. So when you mix ethidium bromide with DNA, you're going to get a very different reaction. It is a very exciting time for us at the University of California, Los Angeles, as well as the rest of the world. We're looking forward to the next generation of fluorophores. The ethidium bromide will intercalate into the DNA. And it will light up as a bright orange dye. It could be in a cell or it could be a lysate from a cell where you're capturing the DNA and trying to manipulate it in recombinant biology. So here, say, say you're trying to make a new type of DNA. You could use this dye to create a new kind of DNA, which would be different from the one that's already been created. we've got a gel that we've run DNA on. We might have a set of standards. And in other places, we're looking for the size of DNA. Remember that great experiment we saw where we saw how quickly small and large pieces of DNA ran through an agarose gel? So far, we haven't found a way to measure the size, but we're working on it. We'll let you know what we come up with in the future. Back to the page you came from. here is what the DNA gel would look like if you soaked it ethidium bromide. So here's the gel as a ladder of bands. But then let's say you wanted to do some work on a piece of DNA and maybe ligated you see DNA pieces at different wavelengths. That's what a ligated DNA gel looks like. And that's what the gel will look like when ligated to a different DNA ligated substance, such as an ethidium-bromide gel. have different mobilities based on size. We couldn't see the DNA directly. So we have to use ways to visualize it. One way is to radio label it. We don't really want to do a lot of that if we if we don't want to be Messy. We can't pick it up, we can't see it, we couldn't visualize it, so we use radio labels. We have to do it in a way that makes it look like it's in the air. can avoid it. The other way is simply to soak a dye into the gel. And the dye, because of the positive charge here, the counter ion gets displaced. The positive charge gets attracted to the DNA and associates with it quite tightly. So that would be a way to avoid the problem in the first place. But it's not the only way to prevent it in the long term. It could also be used to create a new type of DNA, for example, or to create new proteins. that you would observe DNA bound to dye in a gel. And this fluoresces a pretty long wavelength. So this fluoreces this bright orange that's actually at about 605. So you can see, this is really in the visible range. 605 would be right around here. And it has this bright kind of orange fluorescence. And the wavelength that you would use to irradiate the dye on the DNA would be a shorter wavelength. You will often have a prescription, excite at this wavelength. molecules. Now, ethidium bromide is a dye that can get into cells. And we can look at DNA within cells. Here's a picture of how it would look. And here's a pair of stacked bases, this one and this one. And there he is, that's the DNA in a cell. That's what a DNA molecule looks like. And that's what DNA looks like when it's inside a cell, inside a DNA cell, within a DNA DNA cell. right in the middle. See that ring coming towards you is that. And then here's this thing that slides straight between the bases and might cause a little bit of a bulge. And we would call this a DNA intercalator. It slides into the DNA. And you can see over the middle of the ring and then here is that ring. And here is the ring that comes towards you and then there is this thing which slides straight into the base of the base. And this is the DNA Intercalator, which is what we call it. DNA ethidium bromide can't be used to make new DNA because it's toxic. It's not the bromides that are toxic, it's the fact that it can't slide between the bases. The structure of DNA is similar to that of the human body, but the DNA is much more complex. It can take up to three times as much DNA as the human DNA is made to make a new type of DNA, but it's much more difficult to make. It takes a lot of work to make the new DNA. dye does when it gets to the DNA. What would that do to things like replication and transcription? It just kind of messes it up. And so these are toxic dyes that can only be used in fixed cells to do observations of cells. So we use it a lot, and it's a toxic dye, so we don't want to use it in people's cells too much, but we do use it to do experiments in the lab, and we do it a a lot. We need to be careful of it because if it gets absorbed through our skin, it could get into our cells. And it could interfere with replication and other cellular processes. Because it would accumulate on our cellular DNA. And in fact, the interesting thing that a lot of molecules do is that they can get absorbed through the skin and then into the cells. So we need to make sure that we don't get too much of it in our bodies. We need to keep an eye out for it. that actually have these sort of flat, pancake shapes with lots of double bonds are actually pretty important in biology. Because they end up being chemotherapeutic agents. So what I've shown you here is what's known as an anthracycline structure. I believe this is adriamycin, I could be off. But it could be Adriamycin. But I believe it is. But we're not sure. It's a pretty interesting structure. It looks like a pancake shape. it's a natural product that's isolated from bacteria. It has this structure that also makes it a DNA intercalator. And it's used as a cancer chemotherapeutic agent because it interferes with cell division and proliferation. So we actually exploit that property. But only with cells that we want to use it on. It's used to treat cancer, but it's also used for other types of cancer. It can also be used as an anti-depressant. kill or stop dividing. So you could picture, well, I don't want to use something that's going to interfere with cells if I'm doing live cell imaging. Because I'm going to have trouble with the properties of the cells. So fluorophores are great, but you've got to worry about them, says Dr. David Schulder, a stem cell expert at the University of California, Los Angeles. He says the new technique could be used to detect cancer cells. because they can get transferred through the skin, through cellular membranes because they're often quite greasy. So because of this, there's been quite a revolution in the work done with DNA binding agents that bind a little differently, says Dr. Michael Bociurkiw, a scientist at the University of California, San Francisco. "There's been a revolution" in the way DNA binding agent are used, he says. "We're seeing a lot of new approaches to DNA binding," he says, "and it's a very exciting time" DAPI and HOECHST, H-O-E-C-H-S-T, were discovered in a bio company in Germany. They are different kinds of dyes that fluoresce on binding to DNA. So they are less toxic. and are way less toxic than traditional dyes. And they can also be used to create new drugs that are more effective at targeting cancer cells, for example. They can be found on the Internet at www.cnn.com/science. are still useful in that same context. You can in fact substitute ethidium bromide with these dyes. But they bind to DNA pretty differently. And I want you to take a look at these pictures. So here in green and blue-- and apologies to the color blind-- you see a dyes that binds to DNA in a very different way to the ones that bind to other parts of the DNA. And here in red and blue, you see the same thing but in a different way. molecule of this compound here bound to DNA. So it's pretty clear it's different from intercalation, right? You can see it's more sliding around one part of the DNA. And when those molecules bind to DNA in water, they don't fluorescence. When they Bind to DNA they fluorescent an intense an intense light. And that's what we're trying to do with this compound. It's a new type of DNA binding technique. We don't know if it's going to be used in the future. cyan blue. So that's at a shorter wavelength from the ethidium bromide. So taking a look at this structure, does anyone want to explain to me how the molecules might bind to DNA? We wouldn't call it intercalation. We know interCalation is perpendicular to the axis of the DNA. So we know intercalated is perpendicular. to the DNA axis. So this is a different type of binding. It's a different kind of binding, but it's the same thing. where, looking at this, do you think these bind? A while ago when I was talking about the structure of DNA, I like to think of DNA as having two grooves, two places where things combine to it. And that's a minor groove. And then this big trench is what's what's called a 'major groove' and that's where these molecules are bound to each other. That's what I think of as a major groove. I think that's what DNA is all about. called the major groove. Certain molecules bind in one groove. And other moleculesbind in the other. Where do you think it's binding? Just by inspection. Yeah. Audience: Looks like it's in the minor groove. PROFESSOR: That's correct, it's just snuggled just perfectly in theMinor groove. If it's not in the Minor groove, then it must be in the Major groove. That's where it's supposed to be. It must be the Major Groove. was in the major groove, it would be swimming around in that groove. It's almost too big. So what's really cool about these dyes is they slide in between into the minor groove. And they also make some contacts with the phosphodiester backbone. But it's not that they're dancing on. They're not dancing on at all. They just slide in and out of the major and minor grooves. That's what makes them really cool. They slide into them. the phosphodiester backbone. They're literally in the groove. But there's some opportunity for electrostatic interactions. And so these compounds would be known to bind in the minor groove. And in fact, they bind in particular regions of DNA where there's AT, not GC. Those are the places where there’s just a little bit of electrostatic interaction between the two molecules that are in the same region of the DNA. It's a very, very interesting area of research. the pair of hydrogen bonds instead of the trio. That's just their habit, their personality. So chemistry was very important here. You had a good dye, but it was toxic. But improved dyes came along that could be used in living systems that are not toxic. Because if you bind them, they bind each other. So you can't bind them together. You have to bind them in a different way. So that's what we've done here. We've created a new type of dye. in those grooves and you're dissociating easily, you're not going to interfere so much with replication. Does that make sense? So it's a weaker force. Now, I moved this slide up. I realized he was in the wrong place in the slide. I moved it up and he was still in the same place. It's not a big detrimental effect. It just means he's not in the right place at the right time. It doesn't mean he can't do it. This is just an application of the DNA minor groove binder CEOCHST. And in this case, we're looking at three cells. These two are not actively dividing. But take a look at this cell, it's actually clearly in the state preparing for cell division. And what you can see is that the cell is in a state of readiness to divide. It's in the process of doing so, but it's not yet ready for division. The cell is still in a stage of development. here is that in the nucleus, the DNA is pretty diffuse before things really start to condense and line up for DNA replication and cell division. And what's intriguing to me is that this rather diffuse blue dye, that's probably a bit more loosely associated with DNA, becomes much clearer. It's a rather diffuse dye, but it's a blue dye that's very similar to DNA. And it's the same dye that is used to make DNA look more like a protein in the human body. and brighter when the chromosomes are in the state they're in for cell division. So you can see them here. And one question here. So, if you're looking at cells, you're trying to observe cells, where else in the cell are you going to see DNA? So we can see here. We can see there. And we can also see them in other parts of the cell, such as the nucleus, where the nucleus is located. And so on and so on. the nuclear DNA, we can see what stage of the cell cycle it's in-- Yeah, Carmen. The mitochondria. So you know that there's not DNA running around everywhere. It's in the mitochondria, and you could also spot that within the cell if you're at a sufficient amplification. So that's what we're trying to do with the DNA in the cell. We're looking at the nuclear DNA. We want to know what stage it is in, and where it's at. literally in very specific places with the cell. These dyes will bind also to other nucleic acids. But they don't bind so well. Because those don't have the really repetitive, double stranded nucleotide structures. But there are other dyes that bind much more specifically to RNA. But we won't discuss that. We're not going to get into that right now, but we're going to talk about the dyes we've been using for the last few years that have been shown to be very effective. them. So nucleic acids seem to be something that we can definitely pinpoint with fluorescence. We can see where it is. We could follow cell division. For example, upon adding things to a cell, can you see-- remember very, very very very quickly that it's a cell. It's a living thing. It can't die. It has to live and it has to die. We have to keep it alive. We need to keep the cell alive. And that's what we're trying to do. early on, we showed you movies of cells dividing. You could do that with this kind of dye because it's a non-toxic dye. So, great, so far, so good. So the key thing, though, about biology is we have so many other entities within a cell that we want to explore. We want to find out what happens when the cells divide, how they divide, and what happens to the cells that are left after they divide. We don't know what happens after that. be able to track and monitor. And what we needed, what is absolutely essential are reagents to do that. So I want to talk to you about biological tools of monitoring. And you know what these are? These are antibodies, monitoring proteins. And in fact, you can also coax antibodies to work in your own body. And that's what we're going to do in this article. We'll be talking about antibodies and monitoring proteins in the next few days. We're looking forward to hearing from you. to recognize carbohydrates. But they're a little bit harder to bind to antibodies. But nevertheless, those are useful. So we're going to talk now about antibodies, which are agents of the human adaptive immune system. And how they have been exploited intensively. So I'm going to just put these here. But I'm also going to put these in the next section of the book. The next section is about the role of antibodies in the human immune system and how they've been exploited. to study biology. What you will learn from Professor Martin in two or three lectures time is much more about the nuts and bolts of the immune cells. And how it mounts a response to disease and other features. I'm going to focus completely on the immune system and how it responds to disease. It's a very exciting time to be a student of biology in the U.S. and a great opportunity to learn about the world around you. I hope you will join me for the rest of the year. the technological side of antibodies and how they are useful reagents to study biology. Because if you want to recognize a protein in a cell, you need a particular entity that will bind to that protein and show you where it is through some kind of signal, for example, fluorescence. For more information on antibodies, go to: http://www.bbc.com/news/science-and-technology/bio-biologists-discuss-antibody-reagents-and how-they are useful reagents. So what I want to do is give you the minimal description of antibodies so you can understand this. But later you're going to revisit it in a bit more complicated venue. But for the time being, I'm just going to talk about B cells, which are cells that produce antibodies. And I'm going to give you a very brief description of what B cells are and how they are used to make antibodies. So that you can get an idea of what antibodies are and what they do. The adaptive immune system is an amazing system where you can do combinatorial biology and basically recognize any target entity you're interested in. And I'm going to talk to you about how they recognize their targets. So let's take a look at this, keeping in mind that we're talking about a very specific type of immune system, called the adaptive immune System. We're going to look at how it works and how we can use it to help people in the fight against cancer, for example. in mind that this is us exploiting biology to make reagents to do biology. It's kind of a cool sort of cyclical process. So the cells of the hematopoietic immune system, those are the ones that are important in blood cells. They form a lot of different-- wait, wait, they're blood cells, aren't they? Yes, they are, but they form different types of blood cells as well. So they're important in the immune system. a minute, I'm on triple-- triple tools here. There are a bunch of different cells that are produced from the pluripotent hematopoietic cells. They're either the white cells or the red cell types. But what we're going to focus right in on are the B cells. These are the cells that make up the body's immune system. They are the ones that are responsible for fighting infections and other conditions like cancer and heart disease. The B cells are the key to fighting these conditions. of the immune system that produce soluble antibodies, OK. When you challenge a B cell population with a foreign entity, the B cell. population will go into gear to produce antibodies that very specifically recognize that foreign target. In the human adaptive immune system, that might be a wonderful tool to get rid of that foreign entity. So we're going to focus exclusively on the B cells and the way that they mature to produce soluble antibody. Those are down at the bottom here, based on what they've been challenged with. is you have a bunch of different B cells. And there's something you want to recognize. What you might do is challenge this population with the cytokine. And then you will end up with B cells that produce a lot of an antibody to a cytokine such as EGF. I'm truly dumbing this down. I just want you to get the gist of it for the purpose of this discussion. Now B cells are not the only ones that are at risk for developing cancer. adopt a very classical shape. And I'm just going to show you the quaternary structure of a B cell-- of an antibody in linear form here. So it doesn't look very exciting right now. There are two light chains, which I've just shown in schematic form. These are just polypeptide chains. And there are two heavy chains. All right, so that's their basic structure. It's held together in a stable quarternary structure with this complex. High.high.high: The key thing about antibodies is that the majority of the structure stays fairly constant. When B cells mature, there's loads of rearranging in that structure. So this doesn't get modified when B cells maturity. But another part of the. structure is variable. High. high. high: The most common type of antibody is an anti-bacterial antibody. It's a type of anti-tumor antibody that's used in the treatment of HIV/AIDS. variable section in order that it adapt to bind to target. So what you've seen here is that the target-- see if this little fellow works anymore. No. Ah. What you see here is the light chain in green, heavy chain in blue. And it's a double version of it. And that's the way it's supposed to work. It's not supposed to look like this. It is supposed to be this way. It doesn't look like that. It looks like it's not working. We always draw antibodies as this V shape. And an antigen-- you've heard this word before-- it's a foreign entity that's foreign to the immune system. The antigen binding site is right here at the tips of the antibody. And I think the picture up there is kind of clearer. It's a little bit of a different way of looking at it, but it's the same thing, I think, and it's kind of the same as the way we draw the antibodies. Let's put that forward again. And you can see very specifically the structure. The C's designate constant regions. See C all the way through here. And V's represent variable regions, which I've shown you. And at the tip of the V's are the antigen binding sites. So you're going to be going to see very specific the structure of the human immune system, which is very different from that of the animal system. It's very different, and it's very complex. There are hundreds of thousands of antibodies in the immune system. But what you want to accept is that these are biological macromolecules that particularly evolved to recognize target antigens. And you can use them reliably as biological reagents. All right, so how do you achieve the diversity? There are hundreds. of thousands to choose from. There are also hundreds of millions of different types of antibodies. They can be used as reagents, as well as as natural products. They are very versatile. of different antibodies in the human system. If we had a gene for every single different light chain and every heavy chain, you know, our DNA would be completely swamped by being dedicated to the genetic material for antibodies. So instead there is a particular system which provides little portions of the DNA for the different antibodies, which are then passed on to the next generation in the same way as normal DNA. It's a very complex system, but it works very well, I think, and it gives us a lot of information. of the DNA structure that are in little pieces of variable components that can get zipped together through transcription and slicing events to give you a bunch of antibodies. And this is what's known as the BDJ system. And you'll hear more about that from Dr. Richard Quest. And we'll also talk about the role of the human genome in the development of the body's immune system. For more, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @SylviaWriters and @cnn_world. Professor Martin. So basically what you want to think about is it's a combinatorial system to take little pieces of DNA into a super molecular structure to give you antibody combining sites that can recognize virtually any target. Anyone got any questions here? I'm seeing a few worried faces. Somebody Somebody Somebody. I'm sorry, I've got to get back to work. Back to the page you came from. Click here to read the rest of the interview with Professor Martin, or click here to watch it live. ask me a question if you feel I could clarify a component of this or are you OK with this? Anybody? OK, I'll move forward. So we talked about antibodies. When you get a population of B cells that produce antibodies to a particular target, these may be what are what are called B-positive antibodies. These are antibodies that are directed to a specific target. These may be B-negative antibodies. This is what is called a B- negative antibody. It's a type of B- positive antibody. A polyclonal antibody, as might be suggested by the name, is an antibody-- let's say it recognizes a molecular entity. A monoclonal antibody would be a single population that recognizes a single antigen or epitope in your antigenic molecule. And the way those are made is through the engineering method where you fuse spleen cells with myeloma cells. And that's the way they're made in the U.S. and many other places in the world, too. then you get a hybrid-- what are known as hybridomas that produce very specifically just monoclonal antibodies. So that's a bit of background there about the antibodies. You'll see it on the rerun when Professor Martin talks. But I just wanted to give you a little bit of exposure to this. It's a very, very serious disease. It can be deadly. It has been known to kill millions of people in the U.S. and around the world. But it's also very treatable. So let's now look at how antibodies can be useful. So let's say you want to visualize in a cell-- let's move straight to a real targeted application. We want to make an antibody that might recognize actin and a different antibody that may recognize tubulin. To take a look at tubulin, let's make a new antibody that recognizes tubulin and a new one that recognizes actin. We can then visualize tubulin in the same way as actin in the cell. The way you generate antibodies is through laboratory animals. And very commonly we use either mice or rabbits for antibody production. The rabbit is used when you need a lot more antibody material. The mouse will satisfy for some experiments. So this would be the foreign agent or antigen that you want to make an antibody to, which would normally bind at the variable region of this immunoglobulin molecule. You inject the mouse with that antigen. Excuse me-- that's a rabbit. You know, you know what I'm talking about. I haven't been in biology very long, but I can tell that's a rabbit, right? Anyway, so you inject the rabbit with a human protein. If you-- what would happen if you injected the Rabbit with rabbit actin or with rabbit tubulin? What would you-- would you expect to see? I don't know. I've never seen it. I'm not sure what it would look like, but it would probably look like a rabbit. It would look a little bit like this. a response? No, right? Yeah. Because the organisms are adapted not to recognize their own proteins unless there's some disorder like an autoimmune disease. So you would inject the rabbit with a human epitope, so for example human actin, generate antibodies with a specificity for actin. And then you would then be able to test the rabbit's immune system for response to the epitope. The rabbit would be injected with a rabbit epitope and then tested to see if it had a response to it. label those antibodies with a fluorescent marker, so you could track it or follow it through chemistry. Alternatively, you might want to make a different antibody for tubulin. And then you would differentiate the antibody against tubulin from the antibodies against actin by labeling it with a different color fluorophore. If you want to track an antibody, you can use a different fluorescent marker to identify it. For more information, go to the National Institutes of Health's Antibody Discovery Center. So you've really got two types of macromolecule that can be interacted with a fixed cell. So what's important here is that you don't use the protein from-- if you want to study human cells, you use antibodies produced in rabbit or mouse. You're not going to produce the antibodies in the same host. Nowadays-- yes, yes. You've got to know that you have the correct antibody, like if that is the right one? Right. OK, so OK. you would prepare the-- you would do them. There's a lot of screening takes place. So you inject the mouse or rabbit. And then you collect the serum. And you look for whether the serum gets enriched and enriched in antibodies that recognize the target. And so you'll see an increase in the number of antibodies that are recognized by the target, which is a mouse or a rabbit, for example. It's a good thing to have antibodies that can recognize a target, so that you can treat it. in what's known as the titer. And then once you get a high titer, you'll-- unfortunately, you can just collect the serum or depending if you want to make monoclonal, you'd have to sacrifice the animal to get the spleen cells. But then you collect the antibodies through an affinity and then you can make the antibodies. It's a process that takes a long time, but it can be done, and it's very successful, if you have the right equipment. method that's directed just at antibodies. Then you've got your population. And you can throw a fluorophore dye at it and chemically label it. So it's a good point there. There's a lot of work being done now with antibodies from different organisms, in fact, you'll see them from camels. It's a very exciting time for the field of immunology, and I'm looking forward to seeing what the future has in store for us. I think we're going to see a lot more of it. And they're also ones from shark. And the reason why they're kind of interesting is that they sort of have mini antibodies that are much more useful for technology. So let's see what we can do here. We can do fluorescence experiments. In order to do this with an antibody. We have to use an antibody to make the fluorescence work. So we have to make an antibody from shark to make a fluorescence experiment. And we can then make a fluorescent experiment from shark antibodies to make it work. And this is going to highlight a shortcoming of antibodies. You may take a cell that you want to observe different proteins in that cell, you have to fix the cell to make it permeable. Why do I need to make the cell permeable in order to use these antibody? I don't know the answer to that, but I think it's a good question. I think the answer is that antibodies don't work well in this situation. I'm not sure why, but that's the way it is. reagents? Do you think the antibodies are just going to cross-- DAPI gets into a cell easily. But what about antibodies? Can they cross the plasma membrane to get into the cell to label a target? What do you think? Who say yes? Who says no? Good. Thank goodness. OK. We're ready to go. Back to the page you came from. Click here to watch the full video. Click HERE to read the transcript of the interview. Click below to watch it. They're too large to get into cells. So you have to fix the cells on a glass side and permeabilize them, for example, with methanol so that the antibodies can gain. They just can't float into cells, he says. They're just too large. He says he knows the answer. But he won't say much. He's not allowed to talk about it. He just says: "I know you know the answer here. But I know you're right." access to all parts of the cell. So here is a bright field view of cells. That's a little bit more specific. But this is what I really want to show you. This is what you could achieve with DAPI and an antibody to the actin and actin. And that's what you can do with an antibody and an DAPI. And you can achieve that with an antibodies and DAPI as well. You can do that with a lot of different antibody and D API combinations. an antibody to tubulin. And you can look at the various colors of the fluorescence emission. You see here what you've got is an anti-actin antibody with a red dye. You can see that at the perimeters of the cells. You've got anAnti-tubulin antibody witha green dye. and you can see this at the end of the cell. It's an antibody to actin with a green dye and a green antibody totubulin with a blue dye. dye. And you can see the filamentous structure there. And then you've got DAPI staining bright blue where the nuclei are. So you have three unique labels that fluoresce at different wavelengths and you can directly pinpoint things. So fluorescence is extremely valuable for looking a biological systems, because we don't have a lot that fluorsces in the body. So a cell in general, if you irradiate it with light, you won't see any major fluorescence at all. fluoresce, but it's so dim. You wouldn't see those kinds of signals at all. It's really what we call extrinsic fluorophores, fluorophore from outside that shine very, very brightly. Many of these fluorideophores shine so brightly they can be used to look at in single molecules-- many of them are very small. They're called "fluorophores" and they're used in the study of DNA and other proteins in the body. professor Martin described to you single molecule DNA sequencing. That actually exploits very bright fluorophores that are so bright that you can see just a few of them in one place very, very clearly. OK, how am I doing? I just want to actually leave you with something that's another subject that's very interesting to me, which is the use of single molecule sequencing to sequence DNA. That's another topic that is very exciting to me to work on, and I'm looking forward to working on it. With all of what we've seen so far, you could almost target any cell with an antibody that's specifically raised to a particular protein that's within the cell. So we can see-- in the next class we'll discuss what the limitations of that are. Technology.technology.com: Do you know more about this technology? If so, please email jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk and we'll feature you in our next show, "The Next Generation of Technology," on Monday, November 14. But we've already talked about the fact that we have to use antibodies with fixed, not living anymore, cells. So they are really dyes that can only be used in that way. The other place you can use fluorophores is for labeling DNA and from looking at DNA. And a fluorophore can also be used to make antibodies that can be used for other purposes, such as to make new drugs or to make drugs that can't be made by cells that are already dead. particularly important technology is known as a DNA microarray has anybody heard of these? Yeah. So DNA microarrays absolutely exploits the complementarity of DNA sequences. So if you want to probe for a particular sequence of DNA, you would make the complementary strand and label it with a fluorophore. And that's what we're doing with this new technology. We're using it to find out what's going on in the human genome. It's a very exciting time for scientists. It could be the beginning of a new era in DNA research. DNA microarrays are just the size of just a microscope slide. On this slide through arranged technologies, you can literally spot 40,000 distinct sequences. New could, out of thousands of DNA stretches, literally light up the stretch of DNA that's complementary to your target. And so DNA microarray-- what you see here is just theSize of just an ordinary microscope slide, but it can be used to spot DNA sequences that are complementary to each other. It can also be used as a tool to identify new DNA sequences. of DNA in grids to recognize. So these DNA microarrays can be used for profiling genetic material or for profiling not just DNA, but RNA. We'll see how at the beginning of the next class, in order to probe for particular stretches of DNA that might be disease related, we'll use them in a new way. The next class will be called "Disease-related DNA Microarrays" and will be available in the U.S. in the next few months. and have single nucleotide polymorphisms. So in order to actually just give you a little bit of a warm up to that, I want you to go-- I'm going to put a link to this in the web site. And it actually just shows you a virtual running of a single-nucleotide-polymorphic test. It's a very simple test, but it's a good way to get an idea of what's going on in your body. And you can do it in your own home. DNA microarray experiments and how you can use it to profile disease states and cells versus healthy cells. At the beginning of the next class, I'll describe how you get information out of DNA microarrays. But at the end of the day, you're always using the fluorophores as a tool to help you get the information you need. The next class will be on how to use the DNA microarray to identify cancer cells and cancerous cells in the human body. It will be held at the University of California, San Diego. the probes for where certain things are, OK. And the thing to remember here. Fluorescence is a magnificent tool. We can use fluorophores on their own, we can use them as attached to antibodies, and we can also use them to attach to DNA sequences. The DNA microarray experiments show you how you can use Fluorophores to attach DNA sequences to a microarray. The results are published in the book, "Fluorophore: A Biologist's Guide to DNA Microarrays" OK. And I'll see you in the next class. I'm sorry I didn't get to meet you in person, but I'll be in the class next time. Thanks for the memories. I'll talk to you soon. I love you. I really do. I will see you again. I hope to see you at the end of the year. See you then. I've got a class to go to. I won't see you next time, though. I promise.