In Western astrology, it's a constellation determined by when your birthday falls in the calendar. But according to the Chinese zodiac, or shēngxiào, it is your shǔxiàng. And of the many myths explaining these animal signs and their arrangement, the most common is that it is the sign of the lion or the scorpion. It is the animal assigned to your birth year, according to Chinese astrological tradition. The most common myth is that the sign is that of the bull or scorpion, or the animal of the snake. most enduring one is that of the Great Race. As the story goes, Yù Dì, or Jade Emperor, Ruler of the Heavens, wanted to devise a way to measure time, so he organized a race. The first twelve animals to make it across the river would earn a spot on the list of the world's best-loved animals. The winner of the race was the first to reach the top of the river. The race was won by the first animal to cross the river in record time. the zodiac calendar in the order they arrived. The rat rose with the sun to get an early start, but on the way to the river, he met the horse, the tiger, and the ox. Because the rat was small and couldn't swim very well, he asked the bigger animals to help him cross the river. The tiger, the ox and the horse helped the rat to cross the River of Life, and he was able to get to the other side in the morning. for help. While the tiger and horse refused, the kind-hearted ox agreed to carry the rat across. Yet, just as they were about to reach the other side, the rat jumped off the ox's head and secured first place. The ox came in second, with the powerful tiger right behind. The tiger came in third and the horse came in fourth. The rat came in first and the tiger was in second. The horse was in third place and the ox was in sixth. him. The rabbit, too small to battle the current, nimbly hopped across stones and logs to come in fourth. Next came the dragon, who could have flown directly across, but stopped to help some creatures she had encountered on the way. After her came the horse, galloping across the river, and then came the rabbit, who came in fourth, and the dragon. After the dragon and dragon, the horse and the rabbit came in fifth and sixth, and finally the dragon came in seventh. The Jade Emperor looked out at the river and spotted the sheep, the monkey, and the rooster all atop a raft, working together to push it through the river. But just as she got across, the snake slithered by. The startled horse reared back, letting the snake sneak into sixth place. The Jade Emperor then said: "I am the Jade Emperor, and I will not let the snake get to sixth place" The snake then slithered into sixth position and disappeared into the water. The sheep, the monkey and the rooster all made it across the river. The dog, who was a great swimmer, frolicked in the.weeds. The trio agreed to give eighth place to the sheep, who had been the most comforting and harmonious of them, followed by the monkey. The monkey was the first to get to the shore, then the dog, and then the sheep. The rooster, the sheep and the monkey were the last to make it across. water for so long that he only managed to come in eleventh. The final spot was claimed by the pig, who had gotten hungry and stopped to eat and nap before finally waddling across the finish line. And so, each year is associated with one of the animals in this year's race. The winner will be announced at a ceremony in New York City later this month. For more information on the race, visit the event's official website or watch it live on CNN.com. The traditional Chinese calendar is made up of two overlapping systems. The animals of the zodiac are associated with what's called the Twelve Earthly Branches, or shí'èrzhī. Another system, the Ten Heavenly Stems, or tiāngān, is associated with the Ten Earthly Stems. The cycle starts over every 60 years, with the animals starting at the beginning of the year. The zodiac is based on the 12 zodiac signs, but the animals start at the start of each year. is linked with the five classical elements of metal, xīn, wood, mù, water and fire. Each element is assigned yīn or yáng, creating a ten-year cycle. When the twelve animals of the Earthly Branches are matched with theFive elements plus the yāng, the cycle continues for a further ten years. The cycle ends when the element is added to the five elements and the cycle is complete. The twelve animals are then matched again with the elements and again for a total of 10 years. of the Heavenly Stems, it creates 60 years of different combinations, known as a sexagenary cycle, or gānzhī. So someone born in 1980 would have the sign of yáng metal monkey, whileSomeone born in 2007 would be yīn fire pig. In fact, you can also have an inner animal, such as a fire pig or a fire monkey. For more information, visit the Heavenlystems.org.uk or the HeavenlyStems.org website. based on your birth month, a true animal based on. your birth date, and a secret animals based onyour birth hour. It was the great race that supposedly determined which animals were enshrined in the Chinese zodiac. But as the system spread through Asia, other cultures made changes to the system. The system is still in use today, but has been updated to reflect the changing times in Asia. It is still based on the birth month of the year and the birth hour of the month. reflect their communities. So if you consult the Vietnamese zodiac, you may discover that you're a cat, not a rabbit. If you're in Thailand, a mythical snake called a Naga replaces the dragon. So whether or not you place stock in what the zodiac says about you as an person, it's important to know what it says about yourodiac sign. For more information, visit www.vietnamzodiac.org.uk or www.thai zodiac.com. individual, it certainly reveals much about the culture it comes from. It's a great example of how culture can influence the way a person thinks and acts. It also shows that a person can be proud of who they are, even if they're not proud of what they're doing. It is a wonderful example of a culture that can influence a person's thinking and behavior. It can also be a great symbol of who a person is, and how they're different from other people in the same culture.