So, we will come back to these the uses of these assumptions and these axioms, but before that I just want to summarize that what we have learned through theseAxioms through these properties. So, the first we learned rationality, rationality axiomioms - completeness, reflexivity and transitivity. These three we we learned the three we need to be able to make sense of the world. We need to know how to use these three properties to understand the world around us. have learned. And when our when someone’s preference exhibit these three properties, what does it mean that he is able to completely rank all his choices all his potential choices, with also possibility, with possibility that there are more than one bundle at some ranks this is a possibility. One of the things that we have learned is that when a person has a preference for a certain thing, it is a sign that he has a strong preference for that particular thing. We have learned that when someone's preference is for a particular thing, there is a strong possibility that he will rank it in a certain way. thing also I should add that he will be able to rank only if he has finite consumption set and also what we have learned that this will translate into a utility function. So, if these 3 axioms are satisfied you will get one utilityfunction. In case, of finite. consumption set, he will rank only in the top 10. If he ranks in the middle of the top ten, then he will have been ranked in the first place in the list. If not, then his rank will be in the bottom 10. consumption good, fine. Next we add I am not saying just continuity implies this, but continuity in addition to earlier three axioms that we have learned, continuity. And what do we get? What we get is continuous utility function and now we do not have to impose the restriction that our consumption set is the consumption set of this individual is finite. What else, what does it mean continuity? No, break indifference curve, can I say that, no break in the indifference curve would be continuous. What it means is let us see that we cannot have we cannot this. kind of indifference curve and also using all 4 above what we have learned earlier in the class that indifference curve of an individual cannot intersect two indifference curves. That is also we will get got from continuity, fine. Now, let us add that we will also get the same result if we use all 4 of the above methods. We will get the result if and only if all 4 methods are used. We have learned that an individual's indifference curve can't intersect two other individuals' indifference curve. We also learned that the two curves cannot intersect. non-satiation, but let us take example of your monotonicity, monotonic, and what would it imply? In other words, let us say that is clear that, that is through definition, but it if we translate it into indifference map what we will get is that the indifference curve has to be a curve. Non-Satiation is a state of mind that is not satisfied by satisfaction or satisfaction by itself. It is not a state that is satisfied by pleasure or pain. downward-sloping curve. Why? Because when we take here say a point we are talking, all the bundles here are. All the bundles in this blue zone are preferred over x. This is because when we say here is the bundle that we are. talking about x comma y all the bundle in thisblue zone are. preferred overx. This means that all the. bundles in the blue zone, such as x and y, are preferred. over x and vice versa. There will be a bundle in its nearby zone which a person would be indifferent between that bundle and x y bundle. So, if we combine we bring continuity there will be no difference between the two. It cannot in this zone, it cannot be in that zone, where they would be least preferred. It can only be in the middle of the two places, where it is the same as the other bundle. And that is where it can be found in the same way as in the other places. will you find that bundle? Either in this zone or this zone. So, if you keep on continuing how you will get the indifference curve? So, indifference curve has to be downwards sloping, fine. From here, from here we learned that indifference curve have to be downward sloping. What else? We are going to try and find the bundle in the next section of this article. We hope you will join us for the next part of the story. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Anything else the monotonicity would tell us? Of course, so that is clear from here the downward-sloping indifference curve. Whenever you have downward- sloping indifference. curve, MRS will be negative. That is clear. The other thing that we can get from monotonic is that indifference curve cannot be negative, that's clear. That's the other thing we can take from it, that it's monotonically negative. It's clear that that's what it is. be a thick curve. For example, we cannot have let me draw really the thickest possible it cannot be like this. Why? If I do this let me take this zone and look at it in, at the bigger scale what will happen, what we are basically seeing is that what we're basically seeing. is that the shape of a curve is not the same as the size of the curve it is supposed to be, but the shape is the same. It's the same shape, it's just that it's a different size. indifference curve is like this. So, monotonicity will be violated because if you take a bundle here then here you have a bundle which has more of both the goods, but still you are indifferent between the original bundle and this bundle that can that is not possible. In fact, in fact, it's not possible to be monotonically indifferent between any two bundles. It's just that you can't be indifferent between two bundles at the same time. That's how the indifference curve works. thickness what we talked about thickness, see downward sloping curve you will not get from local non-satiation. Local non-Satiation will very clearly give you thin indifference curve because the same you can take the same logic here. Let us say here and you have really thick indifference curve like this and here is a bundle that we have taken and we take small neighborhoods around this ok. So, you are not able to find a bundle which is preferred over the original bundle. Why? Because the indifference curve is a thick one. indifference curve has to be very thin, fine, it is clear. And now we have convexity plus conveXity. Let us say a person’s preference satisfies all the other axioms, and I draw let us say this is this is a person's preference. And I draw that this is the preference of a person who has a preference for a particular type of person. And this is called the preference for the particular type. And we can say that this person has a preferences for a certain type of people. his indifference curve is there anything wrong with this indifference curve what is wrong. So, whenever we have convexity the indifference curve will look like this. Can I say it is bowed out? As opposed to this what you here, if convexhip is not satisfied you get something like this, if it's not satisfied. We covered all these axioms let us look at one more case because we discussed. When we have satiation or in other words when we have bliss points. How would the indifference curves look like? Concentric circle around like this why I am talking about it good 2 and good 1. Now tell me is it convex in this case preference of course, this is not the zone it is just poor drawing. Ajit, isIt convex or it is not convex? Ajit. IsItConvex or is it notconvex? Is it conveX or notconcex? Are you sure it is convex, Ajit? If not, tell me what you think. Is it a convex zone or not? If so, please explain. Devesh? Student: It is a partial. Partial, I did not define anything partial in the class. It is convex, let us look at it. Let us take one indifference curve. Devesh: Let us pick any two bundle on this indifference. It's a convex curve, it's a partial, it is a convex curve. It’s a partial, I didn’t define anything particular in the class, it’ll be a partial too. All the bundles here are preferred over the original two bundles, why because here at this point utility is increasing in this direction. So, it is convex.curve. Convexity is satisfied, continuity is satisfied. rationality axioms are satisfied, what is not is that the convexity of the curve is not satisfied, that the continuity of the Curve is notatisfied, that rationality is not satisfying. That is what the rationality is about, that is what rationality is all about. satisfied here is monotonicity or local non-satiation is satisfied everywhere except at this bliss point, is it clear? So, now, what we will do we will start talking about mathematical problems, optimization, and all. We will start by looking at the problem of how to get to the bliss point. And then we will go on to talk about other problems, such as optimization and so on. And so on, until we reach the point where we are satisfied with the state of the universe.