CASEY RODRIGUEZ: We proved these two theorems last time, and we used them for-- and we had a couple of applications of them. So the first theorem, simple theorem, was that a sequence converges to x if and only if the limit as n is the same as the limit of n. The second theorem, which is more complicated, is that the limit is also the same, but it's not the same thing as the first. goes to infinity of the absolute value of xn minus x goes to 0. And then we also had the squeeze theorem, that if you have two-- If you have three sequences-- a sub n, b sub n,. and x sub n-- so that xsub n is in between the two sub ns and the sub n. So that xSubN is in the space of the subn-b-x sub n sequence. And so that the absolute value of xn plus x goes to infinity. a sub n and b sub n converge to the same thing, then the sequence x sub n converges, and it converges to the [? common ?] limit of a sub n  and b sub n. So X sub n gets x sub  n, and the a sub n and b sub n converge to  the same thing. So x sub  n gets  x sub n, and so on. The result is the same as  a sub n and a sub-n, but the length of the sequence is different. squeezed in between a sub n and b sub n. Last time we used this to prove a kind of special limit that this equals 0 if the absolute value of c is less than 1. So I had proved it for c positive, and maybe c less than 2. This time I'm going to try to prove it for a positive value. If it's positive, I'll say it's 0. If not, it'll be 0 if it's 1. I'll post the result later. but same proof works with absolute values, just because the absolute value of c to the n equals the absolutevalue of c raised to n-th power. So let's use this to do a few more special limits if you like. But first, I'm going to state the binomial. The binomial is the ratio of the number of square roots to the square root of the length of a word. The number of square roots is the number of squares to the length of the word, and the number of square roots is the length of the word. theorem. I'm not going to prove it, but it's a simple exercise using induction. And the binomial theorem says that [? for all ?] [? N, the ?] natural numbers, x, y in R, x plus y raised to the n is equal to the sum from k equals 0. It's not a proof, but a good starting point for a discussion of the theory of binomial coefficients. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/science/binomial-correspondence-and-theory/index.html. to n of n choose k, x to the n minus k y to the k. And here n chooses k-- this is equal to n factorial over k factorial divided by n minus-- times n minusk factorial. OK. So again, you can prove this by inducting on n. To prove this, inducted on n, choose k and then choose n. Then choose n and choose k to prove that n is a factorial and k is a factor of n. All right. We have a theorem, so we'll prove a few special limits. I have a real number that's positive. Then the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 over n the p equals 0. If p is positive, then limit as N goes to Infinity of p equals p. If n is negative, then the p is negative and the n is the same as the p. So if n is positive and p is Negative, then n is Negative and so on.  limit as n goes to infinity of n to the 1 over n equals 1. And the third is-- it's just that a certain limit exists. OK? Let me make a small comment here. So far in our discussion of the real numbers, we've talked a lot about the power of the square root of n. We're going to move on to the next part of the show. We'll talk about the real number in the second half of the program. We hope you'll join us for the final episode of the series. we've only defined what it means to take a real number to an integer power, but-- and n-th roots. So using that, we can then define how totake a real numbers to a rational power. OK? All of that is just to say that to define a positive real number, we need to use the elementary facts about the real numbers, the fact that it has the least upper bound property, and that the rationales are somehow dense in the realNumbers. positive real number to a positive real number or to a real number of power doesn't require the introduction of the exponential or logarithm. So all of that is just to say that what we've done up to now-- these things actually do make sense. OK? But we're just going to use the basic properties of exponents throughout all this, and we're going to call them the exponential and the logarathm. They both agree, once you do have the exponential, you don't need them. so we don't-- we haven't even talked about continuity, or derivatives, or anything like that, so we'll just use elementary means to be able to prove these statements. OK? So for the first one, we'll prove this actually just using the definition of the limit, which, remember, means for every. For the second one, let's just prove that the limit is the same as the limit of the previous one, which is the limit that we started with. So we can prove this using elementary means. epsilon positive there, we should be able to find a capital number M, such that if n is bigger than or equal to capital M, 1 over n to the p is less than epsilon. So here, again, I'm using-- an elementary fact that we all know is that, if I have a positive power here, then. into the p would be bigger than  equal toCapital M to thep. We do know that for integer exponents, but just trust me that one can define non-integer exponents. equal to 1 over capital M to the p. And by our choice of capital M, this is less than epsilon. So that proves number one. So number two we'll do-- we really only need to do two cases. One is p. So p equals 1 is fine. This is p equal to 1. And this is p equals p over capital E to the e. So this is e equals 1. and this is 1 over E to E to P to P. clear, because then I just get 1 for the whole sequence. So that's one case. Now let me do p bigger than 1. OK. And if p is bigger than. 1, the absolute value of p to the 1 over n minus 1-- this is just p to. the 1. That's the other case. And that's the third case. That is the fourth case. The fifth case is the sixth case, which is the seventh case, and so on. over n minus 1. And so I want to show that this quantity here goes to 0. OK? So we have an inequality which we proved actually in the second lecture, I think, using induction, but you can actually get from binomial theorem as well. So let me just recall. Let me just Recall. Let's say we have a quantity here that is 0.over n plus 1, and we say that we can prove that the quantity here is 0 over n minus1. And we say this quantity is the sum of n and n. this right here, that we had this inequality that, if x is bigger than or equal to minus 1, then 1 plus x raised to the n is bigger. than 1 plus nx. And so we use this inequality now with x equals p minus 1. So p-- this is equal to 1 plus p to the 1 over n minus 1 raised to. the n-th power. And as we noted here, since p is. bigger than 1, this isbigger than orequal to 0. OK? looking p-- write that better-- the limit as n goes to infinity up to the 1/n. Now p is less than 1, so 1/p is bigger than 1. This is equal to the limit of 1 over 1 over p to the1/n power converges to 1 by the case we did before. And so 1 over this converged to 1/1 equals 1. OK? OK, so let me just remark that, although we did prove this inequality for. by induction, it actually follows from. the binomial theorem. And we'll use the binometric theorem to get a little bit of a different inequality. So for number 3, we want to prove limit as n goes to infinity of n over 1 over n equals 1. So rather than keep it the same, we'll change it to 1 over 1. We'll use this inequality to prove the limit of n to infinity as n is n over n over 2 over 2 equals 2. And so on and so on until we get to number 3. writing n to the 1 over n minus 1, which I want to show convergence to 0 now, I'm going to write xn. So let xn equal n to 1/n minus 1. We note that this is bigger than or equal to 0 for all n. And the limit as x as n goes to infinity of x sub n equals 0, because then that proves that this converges to 0. And since this is equal to its absolute value, that means that n to  1/n converges to 1. way we're going to do that is using an inequality we get from the binomial theorem. Now, if we look at plus x to the n raised to then, this is just-- that's just n-- let me move it over a little bit-- plus plus x. And we can see that if we add x to n, we get the same result as if we just added n to the original n. We can do the same thing by adding n to n and then multiplying by n, and so on. x to the n raised the n. x sub n is n to the 1/n minus 1. Add 1. I get into n into the1/n-- raised to n, I get n. Now, by the binomial theorem, this is equal to sum from k equals 0 to n. So it's bigger than or equal to k equals 2 [INAUDIBLE] y2-- you'll see-- xsub n squared. All right? Now, I started off with n and I proved it was bigger than this quantity here. divide what's in front of the x of in and take square roots. So then that implies that, for n in bigger than 1-- because I need to divide by n minus 1-- 0, which is bigger than or equal to n, x sub n is less than orequal to n. That's how we get the square root of the number of square roots in the equation. The square root is the product of the square roots of n and the square of n plus 1. to 2 over n minus 1 square root. OK? And now this is just 0, so it converges to 0. This right-hand side is square root of 2 overn minus 1. Now, the limit as n goes to infinity of 2OverN minus 1 is 0. And now, the end of the story is that we have reached the limit of n plus 1. That is, we have now reached n plus n minus n. And we have arrived at the limit, which is n minus 2. of that also converges to 0. That's a fact we did from the end of last time. So by the squeeze theorem, limit as n goes to infinity of x sub n-- which, remember, this is just n to the 1 over n over n. So this whole thing converged to 0, and that's what we're trying to do here. We're going to try to do the same thing for the rest of the week. We'll see how it goes. minus 1, which implies-- OK? And that completes the proof. All right, so now we are going to study a couple of objects related to a bounded sequence. What's the underlying question we're going to try to answer? Whenever something's introduced, you should think of it in terms of, what's it all about? That's what we're trying to do here. And that's why we're starting with the question "What is the answer to the question 'What is it about the answer?'" the question that was asked that this is trying to answer? So we're now moving on to the topic of limsup and liminf of a sequence. So here's the question. So we've seen sequences that don't necessarily converge, like minus 1 to the n, but-- and we know about subsequences. We know about limsup and liminf of a sequence, but we don't know about substituted sequences. The question is: What is the difference between the two? now, where you just pick entries along the sequence. You pick one, move to the right, and pick the next one. Now, if you look at minus 1 to the n, if I just look at the subsequence consisting of picking the odd entries, the odd numbered entries in the sequence are the ones to be picked. And so on and so on, until you get to the end of the sequence, that's the way to go. And that's what we do. sequence, then I'd just get minus 1 minus 1minus 1 for my new subsequence. And this converges. It's just constant. Or if I chose the even ones, I'd get 1, 1,. And that converges, too. So this sequence, which is bounded, has a convergent subsequence, OK? Now, not all sequences have convergent. subsequences. For example, if you look at the sequence x sub n equals n, that will not have any convergent sequences. That's an unbounded sequence. we'll see, is yes, this is a very-- really a very powerful statement. And this is due to Bolzano and Weierstrass. And I'll restate it in a little bit when we get to the statement of that theorem-- namely, that every bounded sequence does have a convergent subsequence. There are a number of reasons why this is true, and we'll get to them in a bit. But first, let's look at the proof of the theorem. several different ways to prove this theorem. We're going to prove it by introducing limsup and liminf, because these are also two important objects that arise in analysis. So let xn be bounded sequence. And we define-- if they exist, there, there. If they exist and xn is a bounded sequence, then there is a bound on xn. And if xn has a bound of zero, then xn must be zero. And so on and so on. are going to be certain limits, so it's not clear that they exist at all to begin with. But we'll show that they always do exist. We define limsup x sub n. And sometimes I'll write n goes to infinity underneath. Sometimes I'll just write limsup or I'll have to just have it be limsup. It doesn't always have to be the same thing. It can be either limsup, sub n, or limsup plus n. It just has to be a certain limit. an n underneath it. This is supposed to be a number, and this is equal to the limit as n goes to infinity of a new sequence obtained from the old sequence x sub n. What are the entries of this new sequence? This is sup of x of k, k is the number of entries in the new sequence, and n is the length of the old one. The new sequence is called x sub k, and it is the sequence of n sub n, k, x. For each natural number n, I take the supremum of the set of elements x sub k for k bigger than or equal to n. So this is a bounded set because the sequence is bounded. And the liminf is similar, except it's now with infs. OK? So I get a number, a new number for each n. And I take a limit of those numbers and I define one to be the limsup, one to being the inf, and so on. liminf, if they exist-- because limits don't always exist, so it's not even clear that these two limits actually are meaningful. And the first thing that we'll do is we'll prove that these limits do actually always exist. So rather than keep writing this, I'm going to give these-- write these.liminfs. If they exist, they exist. And if they don't, we're not going to keep writing them. We're just going to stop. some symbols for these two things. So let a sub n to be-- so of course, if I forget to say this at least in what I'm talking about with respect to limsup and liminf, I'm always talking about a bound sequence. But let me continue to state that as a rule of thumb. So of course I'm referring to the bound sequence, but I'm also talking about the bound sequences as well. So I'm going to continue to refer to them as bound sequences, even if they're not bound. one of my hypotheses. Let x of n be a bounded sequence, and let a sub n be the supremum of the set of all elements x sub k. Where k is bigger than or equal to n, and b to be the infimum of xsub k, a bigger than n. For example, in the case of a bigger k than n, a sub k would be a bigger sub n. This is the case for a bigger n than k, where k is larger than orequal to n. than or equal to n. OK? So then there's couple of statements. One is that the sequence a sub n-- so let me just put over here what these things have to do with the limsup and liminf. Then the limit as n goes to infinity of the a subN's. And the liminf of x sub n -- this is defined to be the limit of the b sub n's. So in particular, since we know that, if we have a monotone sequence which is bounded, it has to converge, that means these two limits exist. the simple statement that the liminf of x sub n is less than or equal to the limsup [INAUDIBLE] x subn. Let's put the proof of this theorem to the test. OK? OK, to prove one-- so in fact, before I prove this theorem, let me prove a small simple theorem first. Let me prove this to you, and then I'll show you how to do it. OK, so let's do it! OK, let's go. on hold just for a second, and now prove a very simple theorem that, if A and B are subsets of real numbers, A, B, both not equal to the empty set, and is A subset of B-- so also need to be bounded. So if we take two non-empty sets, and let them be bounded, we can prove that A is a bounded real number. And we can also prove that B is a real number if and only if it is a subset of A. subsets of real numbers, such that [INAUDIBLE] bounded and A is a subset of B. The inf of B is less than or equal to the inf of A. And this is alwaysLess than orequal to the sup of A, and this is Less than or Equal to B. So what this says is that, if I take a subset. of B, then that increases the inf and decreases the. sup. And that inequality reverses for infs. The Inf of the smaller set is bigger than or equals the inf. of the bigger set. and similarly with the infs, so I'm not going to write-- so similar for infs. OK, so let's go back to the proof of this theorem here, that if I have a bounded sequence, then the limsup and the liminf exist. And we show that by proving that these two are the same, we can prove that they are not the same as each other. And so on and so on, until we get to the end of this article. sequences have these monotonicity properties. So proof now of the theorem we were-- started off proving-- OK. Since the set of xk's, with k bigger than or equal to n plus 1, is a subset of xK's for k bigger. than orequal to n-- because now I'm-- I have a set of sequences that are monotonically identical to each other. So that's the proof of the theory of monotonic sequences. a set where k's starting at n plus 1. This implies that a sub n + 1, which is the sup of the left hand side, by this little theorem that I stated here, is a sub of n. Here's a set with k starting atn, so this is clearly contained in here. This is the same as saying that a set of k's with n starting at 1 is the set of n+1 k-k-k sets with n-1 k. less than or equal to the sup of the bigger set. And this is just a sub n. So we've proven, for all n, aSub n plus 1 is less than orequal to a subn. Therefore, this sequence is monotone decreasing. OK? And so this uses uses a sub-n plus 1 sequence. So this uses a sub-n plus 1 sequence. And so this uses a sub n plus 1 sequence. the sup part of this previous theorem, but if we use the inf part, then we also get the statement for the b sub n. So rather than write out the details, I'll leave it to you just to flip around the inequalities for the inf in your notes. So instead of the sup part, we can use theinf part, which is the same as the b part of the previous theorem. So we get the same result for both the sup and the inf parts of the theorem. similarly, for all N, a natural number, b sub n is bigger than or equal to bsub n plus 1-- or other way. OK? Now, so that shows these two sequences are monotone. Now we show they're bounded. And this follows simply from the fact that the x sub n's are bounded. It's the same as saying b is bounded between minus B and minus 0, which is the same thing as saying B is-- xSubN is bounded between B and 0. capital B. So taken as elements of each of these sets, if you like this x of k, k bigger than or equal to n, that means minus B is always a lower bound for these sets. And this always sits below the supremum. Since all of these are bounded above by B, the supremUM has to be less than orequal to B, which I'll state here. So this implies that minus B  is always less than  equal to x sub k. in terms of the a sub n's and b sub ns-- means minus B is less than or equal to b. So these sequences are bounded. OK? So in fact, these two sequences are two different sequences. So in this case, we are talking about two different sub-n's and a sub- n's. So we are speaking in terms of two sequences, which are the a and the b sequences. We are not talking about the same sequences, but two different ones. So, we're talking about a and a. implies that-- all right, so we've shown that these two sequences that define-- that we use to define the limsup and the liminf are monotone and bounded, so therefore, the limit of these two sequence-- the limits, which define theLimsup and liminf, actually exist. So limsup, liminf is the limit that defines the lim Sup and the Liminf. The limit of the limSup and theLiminf is that they are both monotones and bounded. always a well-defined object. Now, this proves one. To prove two, this follows immediately from what we've proven right here. So by this part, we have b sub n is less than or equal to a sub n. So for all n, I have these two sequences, one sitting below the other. One sits below the second, and so on until I get to the end of the sequence. This is where I have the second sequence, which is below the first. the other. And last time we proved that taking the limit respects inequality, so limit as n goes to infinity of b sub n-- which is the liminf-- sits below limit as N goes to Infinity of a sub n. And that completes the proof. So that's what we're doing here. We're going to take the limit and let it go to infinity. And then we'll see how it compares to the other. That's what's going on here. And we'll show you how. I've shown that these two objects we defined-- the limsup and the liminf-- exist, and are well-defined for every bounded sequence. So this is kind of-- can be a little bit of a daunting couple of objects to come across when you-- especially in your first analysis class. So the two objects that we defined, the lim Sup and the Liminf, exist. And they're well- defined for every Bounded Sequence. So that's kind of a big deal. best thing to do is look at examples. Whenever you come across something that you just don't quite understand, start writing down some actual things. So for example, let's again look at our favorite example of a bounded sequence which does not converge, x sub n equals minus 1 to. For example, if n is too big, then the sequence is not converging, so n sub n = 1 to 1. If n is not too small, then nsub n equals 1 to minus 1. The set is just a set consisting of the n. Then, if I am looking at this set x sub n, n bigger than or equal to k, and writing-- instead of x sub N, let me just write what it is, minus 1 to the n, I have a set. So what is this set? This is just an example of what a set could look like. The set is the set of all sets that are equal to or greater than or less than k. The n is the number of sets in this set. of two elements, 1 and minus 1. So the limsup of minus 1 to the n is 1. This is equal to the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 equals 1. Now, if I change all these sups to infs, then the inf of this set is going to be minus 1, which is just 1. And therefore, we also get-- OK? So thelimsup is 1, and therefore, the inf is minus 1 and the sup is 1 and so on. 1. The liminf is minus 1 for this set. That's just supposed to be a squiggly line, not necessarily looking like sigma. How about our next favorite sequence, x sub n equals 1/n? So the set of elements 1/ n, such that n is bigger than n. That would be a sequence of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 67, 68, 69, 70, 72, 73, 74, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 94. This should have been a k. No, I kept writing x sub k. So that should be x subk. OK, all of that is written correctly. This should have be. 1/k I should write. Oh, so I was using some-- this should be a k or equal. Hope didn't make that mistake throughout. It's a good thing I didn't. It would have been really bad. It was like, "Oh, my God, what am I going to do?" It's so bad. minus 1 to the k-- minus 1 to k. All right, very good. So we're looking at now the set 1 over k, where n is-- where k is bigger than or equal to n. So this is just a set 1/n,1/n plus 1, 1/ n plus 2, 1-1,1-1 and 1-2. We're going to see what happens when we add the two numbers together. We'll see how it works out. As I move to the next entry, things are getting smaller and smaller. And in fact, this sequence just here now, written as-- thinking of this as a new-- so this is not a sequence-- this is a set. Taking entries to be.plus 3, and so on. OK? So as I move on, the size of the set is getting smaller, and smaller, until it's just one or two entries in a sequence. And so on, until there are no more entries left. these guys, it's easy to see that converges to 0. So anyways, let's say I take the supremum of this set, which is what I need to compute the limsup. 1/n plus 1-- that's always smaller than 1/ n, and so is 1/1 plus 1. So I'm now taking the supremUM of thisSet. That's what I'm going to use to compute my limsup, and it's the same as the previous example. 1/n is an element of the set that's bigger than or equal to everything else in the set. So the limit of the supremum here, which equals the limit as n goes to infinity of 1/n, equals 0. OK? But now let's say I look at infs of this set. Now, the infs. equals 0, OK? So I had to take sups to look at the limsup. So this supremum is equal to 1/ n. of this set-- these are elements that are getting closer and closer to 0. So there's 0, 1/n, and then they just keep getting smaller and smaller. And you can, in fact, prove this rigorously if you'd like, but I think it's a good idea to think about it in terms of a set of elements that will converge to a single number. That number will be 0, and so on and on, converging to 0, until there's nothing left. it's easy to at least convince yourself that infimum of this set is equal to 0. The smallest thing-- so first off, 0 is a lower bound for this set. And if I take anything bigger than 0, that thing cannot be an upper bound simply because of, if you like the Archimedean property, I can always find something from the set less than that real-- positive real number. So 0 must be the least upper bound. So in summary, the liminf of 1/n, which is the inf-- the limit as n goes to infinity of the inf of this. set, is just the limit as n goes to infinity of 0 equals 0, all right. So the limsup of 1/n equals 0. The liminf equals 0 as well. Now, what's the difference between these two sequences? What's the property that one holds, but the other doesn't? This is a convergent sequence and this one is not. And we'll see this is a general fact, that if we have a converge sequence, then the lim Sup and the liminf equal each other. only if the limsup equals the liminf. And we saw here that in-- on display, that the lim Sup and the lim Inf don't equal each other, and the original sequence, which we know-- or shown last time-- doesn't converge. And so one other thing I'd like to point out is that-- and we saw this on display as well, too. We saw this as well on display. We also saw it as a demonstration of the fact that the two sequences don't converge on each other. so the limsup of this guy is 1. The liminf of this guys is a minus 1. We just take the entries that we choose to be the even numbered entries, and that just gives-- produces a sequence 1. And that sequence converges to 1. If we take the odd entries of the sequence, that subsequence is just minus 1 and converging to minus 1, which is the liminf. That's also a general fact will prove, that for any bounded sequence, there exists some limsup. sequences converging to the limsup and the liminf. And that will give us the proof of this Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem. All right. And I think that's all of the remarks I want to say. And let me make one other important comment. So this sequence, which we use to define the Limsup-Liminf sequence, is the sequence that we will use to prove this theorem. And we'll use that sequence to prove the Bolziano-Weerstrass procedure. limsup and also the liminf-- in three out of these four cases, they were actual subsequences. So the sup of this set equals 1, which I can consider as a subsequence of the original guy-- and the same thing for the lim inf. The inf of thisSet was minus 1, Which I can Consider as a Substraint of minus 1 to the n. And for the sup, I got 1/n, which is just equal to the original sequence. the infimum of this set, which I need to define the liminf, I got 0 for every entry, which is not a subsequence of this original sequence. OK? So all of that is to say that the sequences I get through this process to defined the limsup and liminf are are 0 for each entry in the set. That's the way I define the Limsup and Liminf sequences. I don't know why that is, but I think it's a good way to start. not necessarily subsequences of the original sequence. OK? What I just said a minute ago about there actually being some sequences which do converge to the limsup and liminf-- this is a non-trivial fact, which we're going to prove. OK. So theorem-- and this will give us the Bolzano-Weierstrass essentially, which is essentially what we're trying to prove here. OK?" "Yes," he says. "Yes, that's right." immediately right after it-- let xn be a bounded sequence. Then there exists subsequences xn sub k and xm sub k-- so they don't necessarily have to be the same. Such that limit as k goes to infinity of x sub n sub k equals the limsup-- so it's a convergent subsequence. And so before I prove this, this immediately gives the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem, which is that every bounded sequence has a convergence. theorem, because if I take a bounded sequence, by the previous theorem, I can find a subsequence which converges to the limsup. And then that's [INAUDIBLE]. In fact, we have something stronger, in that we have at least two subsequences which converge. And that's what we're talking about here. We're not talking about just one, but two. We are talking about a set of subsequences, and we have two of them which converge, and so on. to these two numbers, which may or may not be the same. OK? So the reason this is so powerful and so strong is that it-- to get your hands on something, it doesn't require you to show something as strong as showing there is a sequence converging to that. That's why this is such a powerful tool. It doesn't need to be perfect, but it can be very, very good. It can be used to help you find something you're looking for. So quite often, you can think in terms of variational problems, where you want to show that a minimum of something always exists. Well, what you can try and do is take a sequence of guys that you stick into your-- so this is a good example of how to do it. This is a great example of a problem that can be solved with a series of people. It's a great way to get a sense of what a problem is about, how it's going to be solved. is a general nonsense that you stick into your machine or function that spits out output. And these outputs are approaching the maximum or approaching the minimum. And what you'd like to say is that there does, in fact, exist an element that you can stick intoyour machine and it's called an element. It's a bit of a cheat, but it's not a bad one. And it can be used in a variety of ways. For example, you can add an element to a function to make it work in a different way. produce the maximum amount of output. Now, maybe it's not clear how to do that. So first, take a sequence approaching-- so that the values are approaching that-- the outputs are approaching the maximum. Maybe you could show that the inputs converge to something, but that's typically really hard. But that's usually really hard, so I'll show you how to get there in this video. Click here to watch the video in its full length and watch it in full on CNN iReport. you don't have to work that hard is what this theorem says. It says that what you really need to do, and which is much more straightforward, or simpler, or impossible really, is to show that that sequence of inputs that you put into your machine to get the outputs is the same as the ones you get out of it. It's a very simple idea. It doesn't take a lot of work to get it right. It just shows that you don't need to work very hard to do it. is a bounded sequence. OK? Then you could pass to a subsequence, which actually does converge to something by this theorem, and proceed in that way. So that's a bit of a bit to get through, but it's not very hard. It's just showing that you do have some minimum or maximum-- some input that produces a maximum output or minimum output. That's what we're trying to do here. We're not trying to prove anything. We just want to show that it's possible to do it. small bit of rambling about why this theorem is so useful is that, again, it's very difficult to show convergence to that thing you want to study, or that thing exists, because there's a sequence that you can't get to. It's-- to get your hands on something that typically you. want toStudy, it is very difficult. to show converge to. that thing. The reason why it's so important is that it can be used to study sequences that you don't even know exist. come up with ad hoc actually converges to that thing. But this theorem says you don't need to work that hard or try to do the impossible. And typically, it's much easier just to proceed by showing your sequence of inputs is bounded. OK, so that's enough of that bit. Now, let's go to the next part of this article. Back to the page you came from. Click here to read the rest of the article. The article was originally published on CNN.com. of rambling about why this theorem is so useful. It's also useful in the study of PDEs, which is what I study. So I have a soft spot for it. Actually, one of its generalizations-- all right, so let's prove this theorem that there exists some sequences which converge to a certain point. That's one of the things I like about it. I like to think of it as a kind of proof of the existence of sequences that converge to certain points. the limsup and liminf. So as before, I'm going to use-- rather than keep writing the supremum of this set and-- actually, I's not even going to do this statement. I'mgoing to leave this as an exercise. I'll use this notation instead. I've already used this notation before. So I'll just use that notation. And I'll leave the rest of it as an exercise to the next person who wants to know how to do it. a sub n, as before-- a sub n b sup of x sub k's, k bigger than or equal to n. So I want to show that there's something converging to the limit as n goes to infinity. And so what I'm going to do is show that the asub n's go to infinity as well as the a sub b's. And that's what we're going to call the limit of the aSub n's. That's the limit we're talking about. is I'm going to try up a subsequence of elements between a sub n and a subn minus something which is converging to 0. So we know that there exists an n sub 1 bigger than a sub 1. So it'll be along a subsequences as well. It's going to be a sequence of elements, not just a single element. It'll be a series of elements. The first element will be the first element of the sequence. The second element will then be the second element. The third element is the third. than or equal to 1 simply by how this is defined as a supremum. A sub 1 minus 1 is not an upper bound for the set a sub 1, which is x sub k's. Therefore, I should be able to find an element from this set strictly bigger than that. And of course, it's always less than orequal to the supremum,. which is a sub1. OK? All right. So now, since a sub n sub 1 plus 1-- so a subn sub 1plus 1, not 1 plus1-- since this thing equals the. supremum of xk, such-- k is bigger than or. equal to of 1 Plus 1, there exists an a sub. n sub 2. equal to n sub 1 plus 1-- such that a sub n plus 1 minus 1/2 is less than or equal to aSub n sub 2. OK? So why the nSub1 plus1 is because I wanted to obtain nsub1plus1. I'm not sure why I wanted n sub1plus2, but I wanted it to be equal to nsub nplus1 or nsubnplus2. I don't know why I was looking for that. I just did. a new entry from the sequence that comes from farther than the index n sub 1. OK? I'm trying to build a subsequence. And like I said, the idea is I want to somehow sandwich-- this should be x sub n-- I Want to build up a. subsequence which is a new entry that is in the same place as a previous entry in the sequence. That's what I'm looking for. I don't want to start with a sequence that's already there. sandwiched between things converging to the limsup, and use the squeeze theorem. All right? OK, so since this is the supremum of this set that-- and because this thing is not an upper bound for this set, there exists something from the set. So some element k bigger than or bigger than k is in the set, and there is a limit on how big this element can be. So there is an element k that is bigger than, but not larger than, or smaller than k. equal to n sub 1 plus 1, which I'm going to call n sub 2. Since a sub 2 plus 1 is bigger than a sub n plus 1. And then I just keep doing this, until I get to the end of the list, which is the number of sub 2s that are bigger than one sub nplus1. That's what I call a "n sub 2" The result is a number that's bigger than the sum of two sub n+1s, or a sub 1+1. 1 equals the supremum of the x of k, such that k is bigger than or equal to n sub 2 plus 1. There exists an n sub 3 bigger than nSub 2, and a sub nSub2 plus 1, minus now a third, is less than 1. For example, there is an nSub3 bigger than 2Sub2, and there is a sub2Sub2 minus 1, and so on. 1.1 equals 1, where k is larger than 2sub2 plus 2, and nSub2 plus 1 is less than 1. x sub n sub 3 is less than or equal to a sub nsub 2 plus 1. OK. But now we're essentially home free. We'll just continue in this manner. Let me write down. Now, strictly speaking, I need to state the construction of this sequence as an inductive. It's not strictly true that this sequence is the same as the previous one, but it's close enough to be close enough for us to say it's not the same thing. We can now go on our way. argument, but for the purposes of this class, I'm not going to do that. I'm just going to say-- continuing in this manner. And that will be what I say for this part. So continuing inThis manner, we obtain a sequence of integers, natural numbers-- n sub 1 less. That is, we get the sequence of natural numbers, nsub 1 less, where n is the number of a square root of n. That's what we call a natural number. than n sub 2 less than n sub 3, so on-- such that what holds. Such that, for all k [? N, ?] natural number, a sub n sub k minus 1 plus 1 minus 1/k is less than or equal to x nSub k less than  equal to nsub k. such that,  for all k    natural number, a sub n Sub k is less than or equal to x n sub k less than  or equal to  n sub k less  than or equal to  nsub k. A sub n sub k minus 1 plus 1 is a subsequence of a sub n's. The limit as k goes to infinity is the limit of the original sequence, which is, by definition, the limsup. OK? So now I have this subsequence. We know the aSub n's converge to the Limsup. Now, what do we know" We proved last time that every subsequence  of a convergent sequence converges to the same thing. That's the limit. The limit as k goes to infinity of x. This guy on the left converges to the limsup minus 0, because 1/k converged to 0. So by the squeeze theorem, we get that the limit ask goes to Infinity of x, because x is the number of k that converges to infinity of k. The limit as k goes to infinity of x, and this is the limit of the squeeze theory. sub n sub k equals the limit as k goes to infinity of this and this whole thing, which is the limsup. And again, so I'll leave it to you to do the liminf part. But the point is that now, basically, this 1/k gets moved to over here, and this becomes a sub n subK minus 1 plus 1 plus1 plus 1/K. And now I just have this on sitting below this guy. All right? That's really the only change for the infs to get a subsequence converging to the lim inf. a subsequence converges to the limsup and the liminf, which gives us the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem. So let's prove that now. Let x sub n be a bounded sequence. Then xn converges if and only if limsup equals the lim inf. And there's one more part. If xn. converges, then all these limits agree-- equals the Limsup, equals liminf. OK? So the sequence converges If and onlyIf the lim Sup equals theLiminf. here. So suppose L is this common number, limsup and liminf. Then, for all N, [? a ?] natural number, we have that the inf of the x sub k's, which is for k bigger than or equal to n. As n goes to infinity, this sequence of numbers converges to the liminf,. which is L. All right? But as n goes into infinity, the sequence also converges, and L becomes L. So L is the number of numbers that converge to L. goes to infinity, this sequence of numbers converges to the limsup, which is L. So by the squeeze theorem, the thing in between, which was x sub n, converged to L. And so for the second part, it's-- follows from what we've proven-- what we proved to obtain the Bolzano-Weierstrass and the BolZano-Bolzano. And for the third part it's the same thing, but it's a bit more complicated. what we know about convergent sequences and their subsequences. Let L be the limit as n goes to infinity of x sub n. So now we're assuming that the sequence converges to something which we call L-- doesn't have to be the same L from-- so it's just L I'm just using for this limit. By previous theorem, there exists a subsequence x subn sub k, such that the limit of k is k sub n sub k. So this is for this direction. There exists a subsequence x sub n sub k, such that the limit as k goes to infinity of xSubN equals liminf of x subN. So that implies that this thing on the left is just equal to L.of xsubN. But this is a subsequense of a convergent sequence, and a subsequences of a converge sequence is convergent, and converges to the same thing, L. of xsubn. So it's convergent and convergence of the same things. L.L.: Limsups and liminfs measure just how divergent your sequence is, or at least the difference between them. If that difference is 0, then your original sequence is convergent. And therefore, the limsup and the liminf equal each other, and they also equal the limit of the original sequence. L.L: So that is the end of the proof of this theorem that the lim Sup and liminf-- when they coincide and tell you that theOriginal sequence converges.