The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality, educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open CourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. BOGDAN FEDELES: Hello, and welcome to 5.07 Bio. The author is Bogdan Fedeles, a graduate of the University of California, Los Angeles. HMG-CoA synthase is a key enzyme in central metabolism responsible for making the five carbon building blocks from which all sterols, such as cholesterol and steroid hormones are made. It takes acetyl- CoA, which we're going to encounter a lot in the central metabolism, and combines it with acetoacetyl- coA, another thioester. In this process, the one molecule of CoA is lost, and the other molecule is added to CoA. we get the product hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA or HMG-CoA, as you notice the initials H, M, and G are part of this name. We are also given an additional hint and that is the acetyl CoA substrate provides the CH2CO2 CO2. To help us understand the mechanism, a crystal structure is provided in this problem, and it's shown here. Question 1 of this problem is asking us to provide a detailed curved arrow mechanism. And for that we're going to use the information provided in the crystal structure. minus moiety in the HMG-CoA product. So the hint is telling us that these two carbons, which I'm going to label in blue from acetoacetyl- coA, are, in fact, these twocarbons, CH2 COO minus in hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA. That means that the other four carbons in the product must be the carbons from the aceto acetyl-coA. Let's label these red. So now since we have a thioester functionality in both cases, these are probably the same. and that is this bond right here. It's between the CH3 carbon acetyl-CoA and the carbonyl carbon of acetoacetyl- CoA. And in the process, this carbonyL will become a hydroxyl group. Now this is this is the crystal structure. Now, let's take a look at the structure and see what information we can gather there. And that is the structure of the molecule aceto acetyl CoA, which is a form of CoA with the same name. a picture of the active site of the HMG-CoA synthase. We notice the acetyl- CoA moiety is actually now bound to this C111. As you know C is a cysteine-- so it's actually covalently bound to a cy Steine. Now, notice this is the other substrate, which is the H MG CoA synthetase. The HMG CoA Synthetase is an enzyme that converts CoA to acetyl CoA. the acetoacetyl-CoA and bound in the active site. So as we've discussed before, we're going to make this carbon-carbon bond, and that's going to happen between thiscarbon here and this carbon here. So this bond needs to be formed. However, let's take it one step at a time. The first step is to make the carbon- carbon bond between the two carbon atoms. The second step is for the carbon atoms to form a bond between each other. reaction will start by forming this thioester between the acetoacetyl-CoA carbons and the cysteine in the active site of the enzyme. We first need a base to deprotonate. In many reactions that use a cy Steine, which is used to form a covalent bond to the substrate, we first need an enzyme base. In this case, the enzyme is the enzyme that forms the thioesters between the CoA and the carbons. the cysteine and make it a really good nucleophile, which will subsequently attack the substrate and form a covalent bond. Now, in a lot of these cases, the base is a histidine. Let's take a look if we see ahistidine in our structure. There is a Histidine in the structure, H233. But if you look at this histidine, it's quite far from our cysteines here. Well, obviously, because this is a projection, this is two-dimensional structure so that we only see here a projection of a three- dimensional structure. is, in fact, close enough to deprotonate this cysteine. So even though we have this crystal structure, from this one picture, we do not have enough information to figure out, well, what is the base that will depotonate cy Steine before it reacts with acetyl-CoA. Remember this is often the case, as we have seen in this case. We do not know what the base is that deprotons cy Steinine before reacting with CoA. with crystal structures that because of the resolution which we can collect them, we cannot see the protons. A lot of the time it's very hard to tell which amino acid residues are protonated and can serve as a general acid or general bases. And if we can't see the proton, we don't know what the amino acid is. It's very difficult to tell what is a base and what is an acid. We need to find out which is the general acid and which is a general base. researcher's intuition comes into play to draw these kind of structures. And it's only with collecting many different kinds of experimental evidence that we can put together a more definitive mechanism. Therefore, we might not know for sure from this one picture, which is the general base that deprotonates the base of the structure. We might not be able to say for sure what the base is. But we can say that it is a general base for the structure to form. cysteine at 111. Let's try to write the mechanism for that part. Here is the acetyl-CoA substrate, and here is the active site cysteine 111 with its thiol group. And again, we're not going to assign it, but there will be. There will be a mechanism for this part, but we won't assign it for now. We're going to try to do it with the same substrate and the same active site. We'll see how it goes. a base in the active site of the enzyme that will need to deprotonate this cysteine before it can react. Therefore, the reaction first involves activation of the cy Steine, is depotonated, and then cy steine can attack the thioester and form a tetrahedral intermediate. As we've seen it before, for a reaction to occur, the enzyme must first activate and then de-activate the cystein before the reaction can take place. lot of these reactions involving thioesters. In the first step, we will form four bonds to this carbonyl carbon, and we have formed a new bond between the thiol of the cysteine 111 and the starting material, acetyl-CoA. Of course, there is a negative charge here. And our base in this case is acetyl CoA, which has a positive charge of 1.5. The reaction can be carried out in a number of different ways. the active site of the enzyme will now be protonated. Now it's a general acid that will protonate a CoA. So we obtain the thioester with the cysteine in the active site and one molecule of CoA is going to be leaving. And here is our base. Notice the tetrahedral intermediate that we're forming here. We have an oxygen that develops a negative charge. And this is very similar to the kinds of kinds of enzymes that we make. intermediate you've seen in the serine protease mechanism. Now in that case, such an intermediate was stabilized with hydrogen bonds from the backbone of the protein in a structure that was called an oxyanion hole. Now let's take a look at the crystal structure of HMG-CoA to see how a hydrogen bond is used to stabilize a protein in such a way. It's called a "synthetic" hydrogen bond, and it's used in a number of ways to stabilize proteins. tetrahedral intermediate might be stabilized. Here is the acetyl of the acetoacetyl-CoA substrate. The acetyl now is bound to the cysteine 111 here in the active site. Now, let's take a look if there are any other residues close enough to this oxygen. One of them that's shown here is the cystine 111, which is close to the oxygen in the substrate. It is shown here that the oxygen is near to the acetylic acid. this NH, which belongs to an amide bond, the backbone amide, and that's part of the amino acid serine 307. So this distance here, C3.06 Angstrom, it's actually close enough for a fairly good hydrogen bond. Presumably, this interaction will stabilize the binding of acetyl-CoA in this region of the molecule, and this will stabilize its binding to the acetyl CoA. This interaction will be used to stabilize acetylCoA's binding to acetyl coA. active site and may also be involved in catalyzing the reaction with the cysteine by stabilizing the tetrahedral intermediate. In that case, this distance will have to become even smaller, that is to form a really good hydrogen bond on the order of 2.6, 2.7 Angstrom. Since this is only the only site, it is unlikely that this is the only reaction that will take place in the future. It is also possible that this site will be used to make new compounds. one snapshot of the reaction, we don't have enough information to tell if this is a key catalytical interaction. Once acetyl-CoA has reacted with the enzyme, hence, formed the thioester with the cysteine 111, we're now ready to proceed with the reaction and form a carbon-carbon bond. Let's take a. snapshot of this reaction and see how the reaction unfolded. We can see that the reaction took place with the help of an enzyme called acetyl CoA. look. So in the next step of the reaction, we want to form a carbon-carbon bond between this methyl group here and this carbon of the carbonyl of the other substrate. So first of all, we need to deprotonate thismethyl group. We're going to form an enolate. Then the enolate is going to attack thiscarbonyl. Once the enolated is formed, it's going to go on to attack the carbonium. Once again, we look for a suitable base, and we see, for example, this glutamate 79. attack this carbonyl, and this oxygen is going to start developing a negative charge, which needs to be compensated by a general acid. And it looks like this histidine 233 is close enough to donate a proton and generate a hydroxyl group here. All right. So let's try to write this out. Let's write it out. We'll start with the first letter of the alphabet. The first letter is "A" and the second is "C" and we'll write "D" and "E" a mechanism based on what we just said. Here is the thioester between cysteine 111 and acetyl. And let's show the general base. It's going to be glutamate 79. Because it's a base, I'm going to put a negative charge on it. There you go. And this will serve to. serve as a base for the next step, which is to create a new type of protein that can be used to make a new kind of drug. deprotonate the methyl from the acetyl, moiety here, and generate an enolate. So it's picking up a proton, electron move, and it's going to generate, as before, a negative charge on the oxygen, which may be stabilized by that interaction with the [INAUDIBLE] hydrogen that we just discussed. Now, let's do the same thing with the hydrogen, and we'll get the same result. We'll see how that works out. try this again. And here is our enolate. In the next step, the enolate now is going to attack the carbonyl of the acetoacetyl-CoA and form the carbon-carbon bond. All right. Next to this oxygen there is our histidine 233, which we're going to use to create the enol. We'll show you how to do it in the next few minutes. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. going to show it as being protonated. Therefore, the reaction proceeds as follows. Here we're forming the carbon-carbon bond. Then the oxygen is going to pick up the proton and it's going to form a hydroxyl group. We get cysteine 111 is still attached to the histidine and the reaction is complete. The reaction is completed by the addition of the oxygen to the oxygen-rich histidine. The end product is a new type of histidine, called a histidine-1-cyclohexane. what is known as the HMG-CoA product. So this is our carbon. This is the new carbon-carbon bond. We have here a methyl group. And our histidine, it was protonated here, now it's going to be. the new hydroxyl, which were formed here, and the rest of the molecule. The new carbon is called the carbon atom. The carbon atom is called a carbon atom and it's called thecarbon atom. It's called carbon atom 2.5. deprotonated. So we just saw how the carbon-carbon bond is formed in the course of this reaction. And now we're left with a six-carbon thioester with a cysteine 111 in the active side of the enzyme. Therefore, the last step of the reaction would involve hydrolysis of this thioesters to free the product and regenerate the system. For that, we're going to need to activate a water molecule. Once again, we don't know what's the general base, the residue in. the active site, which removed this proton from water to allow it to attack the carbonyl of the thioester. So we're going to call it a general base attached to the enzyme. So this base is going to pick a proton. from water, and then the water isgoing to be attacked by the enzyme, which is called an enzyme. The enzyme is then able to release the proton back into the water, which can then be used to create a new type of enzyme. add to the carbonyl and once again generate a tetrahedral intermediate. Say, this the OH from water, and this is the rest of the molecule. Once again, this is a tetRAhedral intermediate, very similar to the one we saw in the first step when we formed this thioester. And presumably, and presumably, the next step will be to form a thioesters. And so on, and so on until we get to the end of the process. it's going to be stabilized in a fairly similar manner. Let's also show that this base attached to the enzyme is now protonated, and it would probably donate this proton to reprotonate the cysteine and reform that thiol group. So in the second step, thiol takes the electrons, which picks up the electrons and picks the thiol. It's a very similar process to the one we used in the first step of this study. We're going to do the same thing in the next step. up the proton from the general base in the active site. So at this point, we're just going to release the thiol of the cysteine 111, and the rest of the molecule is exactly our product, which is the HMG-CoA. The curved arrow mechanism we just wrote answers part 1 of this story. The next part of the story will focus on the second half of the study. The third part will look at the fourth and fifth stages of the process. of the problem. Second question of this problem is asking about the stabilization of the tetrahedral intermediate, which actually we have just discussed. But let me reiterate as you guys saw in the serine protease mechanisms, whenever we're forming this tetrahedrine intermediate, they tend to be stabilized in an oxyanion. That's what we're trying to do here. We're looking for a way to stabilize this intermediate in a way that doesn't cause problems in the first place. hole, which is basically a structure of the enzyme, which can form hydrogen bonds with the partial negative charge or full negative charge that develops in a tetrahedral intermediate. Presumably, similar structure exists for this HMG-CoA synthase, but because we're only given one snapshot, one crystal structure, that is not the case for this enzyme. The enzyme is a type of HMG, a form of CoA, which has a negative charge of 0.5 to 0.7. sufficient information to say for sure which are the key interactions to stabilize these tetrahedral intermediates. A lot more work, a lot more experimental data is necessary to figure out the key hydrogen bonds and interactions. Question 3 is asking us to review the data we've collected so far on the tetrahedrally-stabilized compounds. We'll be back in a few days to answer Question 3. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion. The HMG-CoA synthase can accelerate its reaction rate by up to 15 times over the uncatalyzed reaction. The reaction rate is on the order of 10 to the 6 to 10 to 15 TIMES that it would be if the reaction were to be carried out in a natural setting. The enzyme is found in the body of the bacterium HMG, which is a member of the family of plants known as eukaryotes. It is thought that HMG is responsible for the development of the human body's immune system. The three general mechanisms by which enzymes accelerate reactions are binding energy, general acid/general base catalysis and covalent catalysis. Now let's take a look at our structure and figure out how each one of these mechanisms might be operating. To start off, covalents catalysis, it's binding energy. binding energy is the energy released by the enzyme to catalyze a reaction. Covalent Catalysis, on the other hand, is theenergy released to catalyse the reaction. pretty obvious here the acetyl-CoA substrate first reacts and forms a covalent bond with the cysteine of the HMG- coA synthase. So this covalents attachment to the enzyme allows this residue to be positioned just right so that it can react with the other substrate. Now, general acid/general base catalysis, we've we've gone through the catalysis of the CoA-acetyl CoA reaction. We've reached the critical point. seen all these residues that participate. Obviously, in order for this to react, we need a base to deprotonate the cysteine. Then we need an acid to stabilize and form this enolate. And we need, presumably, this glutamate 79, todeprotonated the methyl group here to form the enolate, which is the key to the reaction. We need to make this reaction happen in order to get the reaction to occur in the first place. The reaction takes place when the glutamate 79 deprotons themethyl group. hydroxyl group that will be developing on this oxygen. So covalent catalysis and general acid/general base catalysis, that's pretty obvious. Now when it comes to binding energy, this is not something that we can obviously derive from the structure, but we can postulate the number of ways in which binding can take place on the oxygen. And that's what we're going to try to work out in the next few weeks. We'll see how that pans out. energy contributes to this reaction. First of all, both of the substrates need to bind to the enzyme. In order to do that, they need to be desolvated, that is to remove all the water molecules that surround them. So that by itself requires energy. The binding energy is also also a part of the reaction, as well as the desolvation energy and the energy needed to remove the water from the substrate. It is a very complex process, but the end result is very promising. derived by when we align the substrates in the active site of the enzyme. We align them so closely the right geometry and within a few tenths of an Angstrom so that the right orbitals overlap and allow the reaction to happen. So also the ability to align this residue in the enzyme's active site is also key to the success of the reaction. We also need to be able to align the residue so that it is in the right position to allow the enzyme to work. so closely that also contributes to the binding energy. The binding energy also manifests when we're stabilizing. So if, for example, for our tetrahedral intermediate that will form here, if that transition state. is in a position relative to thebinding of the substrates, that also adds to the energy of the reaction. And finally, the bindingenergy also manifests. when we are stabilizing the reaction relative to its transition state, which is in the opposite direction to the bound substrates. or the tetrahedral intermediate is stabilized more than the substrate, then the reaction is accelerated and proceeds towards that pass. Part 4 of the problem is asking us to look up the structure of coenzyme A, or CoA and then contrast the reactivity of say, acetyl-CoA, the thioester with CoA, with a thioesters with a much smaller thiol group. The business end of the molecule is this thiolGroup, which is attached to a substantially long arm. And at the end here, we have, as you can recognize, two phosphates, the ribose and the base adenine. This is a nucleotide is ADP. There's also another phosphate here. But the business end of the molecule is this thiol group, and we're asked to contrast whether a thioester form with coenzyme A would behave. We were asked to compare whether aThioesterform with CoenzymeA would behave, and the answer was yes, it would. similarly to a thioester form with this right-hand portion of the molecule, which I wrote here. So it's a much shorter thiol. Now, it turns out these thioesters will be very, very similar because really it's only the thiol moiety that we need to form thIOester. So those thio testers will be much, much similar to the ones we've seen in the past, and they'll be very similar to each other. behave very, very similarly. The advantage of having such a long arm for the coenzyme A is that it provides a way to insert the substrate, which will attach here, to say, acetyl-CoA. Having a long. arm allows the enzyme to insert acetyl. CoA in very deep into the active site of the enzyme, which is very important for the enzyme's function. The enzyme can then be used to make the enzyme more efficient and more efficient. It can also be used as a tool to help the enzyme work more efficiently. arm to guide the thioester may be important. As you will see later in the course, fatty acid synthases, which are these mega dalton complexes, have multiple active sites. The advantage of having a coenzyme A thioesters is that it may provide some additional binding energy. That nucleotide portion of coen enzyme A may interact specifically with the enzyme near the active site, whereas, a much smaller thiol may interact with it near the inactive site. It allows it to be moved through different active sites and through the same kind of chemistry over and over again. like the one we just saw will not have that kind of interaction available. Since we've been talking about thioesters throughout this entire problem, the last question is asking us to rationalize why we're seeing thioester in metabolism as opposed to oxygen esters. Now, the key message you need to understand is that oxygen ester is not the same thing as a thioster. It's a different type of metabolite, but it's the same type of chemical. The difference between the two is that the thiosters are more likely to be found in the body. remember here is that the resonance that we observe in oxygen esters is almost completely absent in thioesters. And this fact makes the thioester less stable and therefore, more reactive. Not only their carbonyl group behaves more like a ketone group, but their alpha hydrogens are more acidic. Let's take a look at some of the compounds we can make with thiosulfonates. For example, we could make a compound that has a carbonyll group that behaves like aketone group. a look. Here is an oxygen ester that shows a proton in alpha position. And as you know, the lone pairs on this oxygen can conjugate with the carbonyl group and form certain resonance structures, one of which being this one. So the electrons can move like this, and then they can form a resonance structure, which is what we see in this structure. The electrons can then move in a similar way to form the resonance structure in this case. And so on and so on, all the way up to the nucleus. we're going to have a negative charge here and a positive charge here. The electrons on both oxygens are found in orbitals of comparable energies. By contrast, in the case of a thioester, we have a sulfur. Now, the electrons on the sulfur are in a different orbitals, so they are in different orbits. This is possible because the electrons are in orbits of similar energies, and they are not in opposite orbitals. It's called a double entendre. orbitals that are not in comparable energies with the ones on the ketyl group and therefore, this kind of conjugation does not, in fact, happen. And because this doesn't happen, therefore, the electrons on the carbonyl stay localized, and that makes thecarbonyl a better reactive site. So it's a good way to make a compound that can be used in a variety of ways, such as as a drug or as an ingredient in a drug, for example. better electrophile to react as nucleophiles behaves more like a ketone. For the same reason, when we are to deprotonate the alpha position on a thioester, the density on the carbonyl is there to stabilize the enolate much more so than it would be for an oxygen ester. Therefore, the higher the density, the more likely it is that the nucleophile will react as a Ketone. This is the case with the thioesters, for example. pKa, the acidity constant for this hydrogen on the thioesters is close to 18, which is smaller, therefore more acidic than the pKa of the alpha position in oxygen esters. This sums up Problem 2 of Problem Set 4. I hope you now have a much better idea of what is going on with the hydrogen on these thioester compounds. I'll be back in a week or so to give you an update on the progress we've made on the problem. feel of how we can use crystal structured data to propose a reasonable mechanism for enzyme catalyzed reactions. Keep in mind that writing mechanisms on paper is relatively easy. But to truly confirm that that mechanism is taking place in real life inside the cells, it takes a lot more than writing on a piece of paper. It's a long way off from being able to prove that this is the case in a real-life situation. It will take a long time to get to the point where we can actually see the results of our work. experimental work and evidence. The study of the effects of drugs on the human body was conducted in the 1970s and 1980s. The results of the study were published in a book called "The Effects of Drugs on the Human Body" The book was published by Oxford University Press in 1989. It was the first of its kind to be published in the U.S. and is published by Simon & Schuster, a division of Simon and Schuster Inc. in New York. The book is available in hardback and paperback.