The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open CourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. William Klemperer was the author of the book, "The Art of Computer Science," published by Simon & Schuster. The book is published by Macmillan, a division of Penguin Books, and is available in paperback and hardback. my thesis advisor, and he died yesterday. It also happens that the subject of this lecture is really the core of what I got from him. He showed me how to evaluate matrix elements of many-electron operators, which is the key to being able to interpret-- not just tabulate-- electronic data. He died yesterday, and I'm still trying to figure out what to do with the information he gave me, and how to apply it to the real world. I don't know if I'll ever be able to do that. properties of atoms and molecules. Our goal is to be able to reduce the complexity of electronic structure, which is really complicated. The electrons interact with each other really strongly, and there are a lot of them. And it's very hard to separate the complexity. of the many-body interactions into into separate parts of the molecule. We are trying to do that with our new technique, which could be used in the future to make more complex molecules, for example, into single atoms or molecules. things that we can put in our head and interpret. We have the vibrational problem as a way of understanding internuclear interactions-- nuclear motions. The whole goal of this course is to give you the tools to interpret complicated phenomena. we have electronic structure and the hydrogen atom as well as the electronic structure of the electrons and atoms in the nucleus. We also have the electronic structures of the atoms and molecules in the nucleosynthesis process. We can use this information to understand the structure and behavior of the nucleus and nuclear reactions. a way of understanding what electronic structure is, and to reduce it to, basically, the things we learn about hydrogen. When we go to molecular orbital theory, we take what we know about atoms, and build a minimally-complex interpretive picture. This is sort of a framework for understanding complicated molecular structures. It's a very simple way of looking at the structure of atoms and molecules, and how they interact with each other. It can be used to build a very complex picture of a complex electronic structure. interactions. One of the most important things about understanding electronic structure is, how do we deal with many-electron wave functions? And one of the terrible problems is that the electrons are indistinguishable. And so we have to ensure that the wave functions are anti-symmetric with respect to permutation of permutations of electrons and atoms and molecules and ions and protons and so on. We have to make sure that they're anti-Symmetric in a way that makes sense. every pair of electrons, not just two. In order to anti-symmetrize the wave function, we have to write a determinantal wave function. In helium we just dealt with two, and that wasn't so bad. But when we deal with n electrons, what we are going to discover is that in order toAnti-sympetriize the wavefunction, we must write aeterminantal Wave function, a wave function that can be written as a function of n. determinant of orbitals. When you expand an n by n determinant, you get n factorial times. And when you calculate matrix elements, you have n factional squared integrals. So you're not going to be handling these one at a time, and looking at them lovingly. You're going to want to want them all at the same time, one after the other, to get the full effect of them. For example, if you're working on a matrix, you'll want to work on the matrix elements first, then the matrix components. As a graduate student, I was collecting numbers about spectroscopic perturbations, where non-degenerate perturbation 3 breaks down, and interesting things. To be able to take these things and extract what is the important thing about the electronic structure that you're going to need to know, you have to know the numbers. And I was able to do that as a student, as a researcher, as well as as a teacher, as I went on to become a professor. happen. But this was something that nobody in the world was interested in because it was the breaking of the usual patterns. And I was convinced that I had collected some stuff that told an interesting story. I told Klemperer about this, and he said, well, have you thought about it? And I said, yes, I have, and I think I've got something that could be of interest to the world. And so that's what I've been trying to do. about how to evaluate these integrals-- these numbers that you are extracting from the spectrum, by doing some tricks with the many-electron wave functions. And then he showed me, on a scrap of paper, how to do it. And I was launched. That was it. That has been the foundation of my career. I've never been able to go back to the beginning and do what I was doing. I'm still trying to figure out how to get back to basics. of my career for the last 50 years. And I didn't think that Klemperer knew that. And so I'm going to try to give you at least a little bit of what I've been doing for 50 years, he says. "He just gave it to me on a silver platter," he says of his former boss. "I didn't Think anybody knew it, because Ididn't think it was knowable. But he just gave me it on aSilver Platter" least the rudiments of what it is you're up against, and how you reduce them to things that you care about, that you can think about. You can understand the hydrogen atom in rather complete detail. Or at least you can understand how one observable relates to another. And you can also understand how they are related to each other. And so on and so on, until you get the idea of what you are up against. And then you can begin to work out how to deal with it. so the relationship between the effective quantum number and the ionization energy of a state then provides a hydrogen-atom-based structural model for everything you can observe. Now spectroscopists have the unfortunate habit of saying we're interested in structure. Structure is static. Dynamics is magical, and special, and hard. But if you can make it happen, it's a miracle. And you can do it. If you can get it to happen, you've made it. You can do anything. you understand structure in a way which is not the exact eigenstates, but something that the molecule was trying to do and sort of missed. And the dynamics is just what happens when this preparation isn't in eigenstate, which would be boring. And you get you get the structure which is what the molecule is trying to get at. And that's not the same as the exact wave functions, but what the molecules were trying to achieve and missed. That's what we're trying to find out. dynamics, which you can understand, as opposed to just saying, I'm going to tabulate the dynamics too. You don't know anything unless you have a reductionist picture of what's going on. And since the hardest part of dealing with molecules is the fact that they have a lot of electrons, that's a big part of the challenge for us. We need to be able to understand the dynamics of molecules and how they interact with each other. It's a very, very complex process. this is really the core of being able to do important stuff. Now it's a horrendously complicated problem, and notationally awkward, too. And let me just try to explain it. And I'm going to try to do this without too much reliance on my notes, because they're terrible. We talked about how we got to this point, and how we're going to get to the other side of it. We're not there yet, but we're getting there. We'll get there. about helium. And helium has two electrons. And there's this 1 over r12 interaction between electrons, which looks innocent enough. You can write it down. You know, it's just a few symbols. And we can call it the first order perturbation. But that's really a lie, because it's as big as it sounds. It's just one of many things that are going on in the universe that we don't even know about, but it's a big deal. as almost everything else. And so, yeah, we can, in fact, do a series of approximations. One is, ignore it, the non-interacting electron approximation. And that's basically repackaging hydrogen, and it's not quite enough. And then we can say, OK, let's calculate the first order energy by calculating expectation values. That's how we get the energy of a hydrogen atom, for example. It's a very complex process, but we can do it. Any momentum is not 0. 1 over r12, commutated with any orbital angular momentum. So that means that l and n are E1.of h12. And that's almost enough to give us a sense of what is going on. It's a very exciting time for us at the University of California, Los Angeles, where we're working on a project to create a 3D model of the solar system. It will be the first time we've ever seen such a complex 3D structure. are not good quantum numbers. What's the definition of a good quantum number? Come on, this is an important question. Yes. You count, and then you put them into some formula. Then you can read off eigenvalues. That's maybe 70% of the time. Yes, you can do that. But it's not a good way to do it. You have to be able to take a step back and think about what you're doing. You can't do it if you don't know what you are doing. what I want. You can put it into a formula. That means it's a rigorously good thing. It means it commutes with the Hamiltonian. So hydrogen, we rely on n and l to get what we want. It's a quantum number that corresponds to a eigenvalue of an operator. A rigorouslygood quantum number is one that commutes. with theHamiltonian. The Hamiltonian is the fundamental law of quantum mechanics. It is the basis for the theory of quantum numbers. get almost everything. But here we find that, in addition to this being that small, it destroys the foundation of our picture. And so how do we think that we can make any sense of many-electron atoms and molecules? Well it turns out we can hide most of the complexity. We can hide almost everything, but we can't make sense of most of it. We have to hide the complexity of the molecules and atoms. We need to hide them from each other. Most of the complexity is just working out the rules for calculating these matrix elements. The matrix elements of operators that we care about, like transition moments, spin orbit, Zeeman effect. These are things that correspond to how we observe atomic and molecular structure. And so the main obstacle to being able to understand them is working out how to calculate them. We hope to have the first version of this article published by the end of the year. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. able to evaluate these matrix elements is the permutation requirement. And it turns out that there is a really simple way of dealing with the requirements for electron permutation, and that is to write the wave function as a determinant of one-electron orbitals. A determinant has three really important really important things. It has to be a matrix element, a wave function, and a number of other things. And that's how we deal with the requirement for electronpermutation. It's very simple. If you have two identical columns or rows, it's 0. And that is the Pauli exclusion principle-- not what you learned in.properties. One, it changes its sign when you permute any two columns. Two, itChanges its Sign when you Permute Any two rows. And three, if you Have Two identical Columns or Rows, It Changes Its Sign When They're Permuted. That's really fantastic. It's not in the book, but that's what it means. high school. What you learned is a small consequence of that. So if we can build anti-symmetric wave functions, we have aufbau, we can only put one electron in an orbital. We have all sorts of stuff, but it's too complicated to tell a student in high school that you can do it. It's just not as easy as you think it is. You can do a lot of things, but not as many as you might think. You're not going to be able to do all of them. can't-- just the question of indistinguishable electrons is such a subtle thing. But it's easy to say, you can't put more than one electron in a spin orbital. But we don't talk about spin orbitals. We say, we can'tPut more than two electrons in an orbital, because we're protecting you from unnecessary knowledge. OK, well, I'm not going to protect you. [LAUGHTER] OK, so we know that the Hamiltonian has to commute with-- these capital letters mean, many electrons' angular momenta. And this is the spin. projection of the spin. We know this is true because the Hamiltonian doesn't operate on spin. It's a trivial result, but it's a very important result. OK, so we have to worry about spin, and spin eigenstates, and other things like that. J.C. Slater was an expert in the theory of spin. He wrote a book on the subject called "The Theory of Spin and Its Eigenstates" It's published by Oxford University Press. MIT professor in physics. He invented these things in 1929. I have a reference. I don't know if I've ever read this paper, but it's probably beautiful. So basically what Slater did is showed, yeah, you can do the necessary algebra to deal with any atom, and to be able to do it in a way that is very, very simple. He showed that you could do it with atoms. He did it with electrons and with protons and with neutrinos. to reduce an atom to a small number of integrals that you really care about. And there are two ways of doing this. One is the truth, and one is the fit model. Now the truth is really boring, because you lose all the insights. The fit model gives you the insights you really need to know about an atom. The truth is boring, and the fitmodel gives you insights you need to understand an atom more fully. It's the truth that's boring, but it's the only way to get insights. you the things you have to think about and understand. And a fit model also tells you what are the import the actors. And maybe they're in costume, maybe they's not, but we can deal with them. But the truth is really very complicated. And as I said many times, as I have said many, many, times, it's a very, very complex thing. It's a lot to deal with, and a lot of people don't understand it. But it's the truth. when you go from hydrogen to helium, you can't solve the Schrodinger equation exactly. This was perhaps a little bit of a surprise, but I think it was only a surprise in newspapers. I think physicists knew immediately, when you go for a two-bodied Problem to a three-bodied problem, there is a problem to be solved. It was a surprise to us, but we knew it was going to be a problem, and it was a big surprise to the world. is no way you can have an exact solution. And that's the truth. You can't solve helium or any more-than-one-electron problem exactly. But you can do it really well, and it just costs computer time. And if the computer is doing the work, you don't really care. Because once you've solved it, you can't go back and do it again. You've already done it. It's time to move on to the next thing. told the computer the rules, then it's off to the races. The computer will tell you whether you made a mistake and you're getting a nonsense result, or that you have the correct result. You can go have lives or you can go has a life, and come back, and the computer will come back and tell you if you've got the right result. The game is available in the UK, Australia and New Zealand for £4.99. For more information on the game, go to the official website. So what we know is this permutation operator, operating on any two-electron function, has to make P 2, 1, which has to be equal to minus. And now if you apply the permutations operator twice, you get P 3, which is equal to P 4, or P 5, or even P 6, which would be P 7, if you applied it twice. So that's what we're going to do with the permutation operators. We're just going to apply them to two different functions at once. back to the same thing. So there's only two possible eigenvalues. You can have minus 1 or plus 1. And the minus 1 corresponds to fermions, things that have half-integer spin, like electrons. The plus 1 corresponds, like photons, and vibrons, and other other things. Back to the page you came from. Click here to read the rest of the article. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to Read the whole thing. CLICK HERE to see the full article. things. And actually, it's harder to construct a symmetric function than an anti-symmetric function. But the thing is, you've got lots of electrons, and you have very few quanta of vibrations in a single mode. And so the result is not symmetric, but it's more like a 'symmetry' than an 'anti-sympathetic' function. The result is more like an 'antisymmetric' function, but with a more symmetric result. boson symmetry is less important in most applications. A configuration is a list of the occupied orbitals-- not the occupied spin orbitals, which is a spin. OK, so suppose we want to talk about something like this, the 1s, 2s configuration. And so we just have to kill this one. It's not very interesting. It doesn't make any sense. We can't talk about it. So we kill it. We're not talking about it at all. We just want to get rid of it. associated with an orbital. The world of spin orbitals is where I live, but we do that for a reason. And so this two-electron thing can be expressed as a space part-- there are various conventions that-- times the spin part. And alpha 1, beta 2, and then we have alpha 1 and beta 2. And that's how we get into the space part of a spin orbital. That's what we call it. We call it a spin orbital. minus or plus beta 1, alpha 2. I'm looking at my notes because some people always keep the electron in the first position. And it doesn't matter, because you can permute rows or columns. But I just want to show you what I'm talking about, because I don't want you to think I'm saying it's the same as what everyone else is saying. It's just a different way of looking at it, and I'm just showing you how to do it. write what is in my notes. OK, so this thing, this two-electron function, has two anti-symmetrized possibilities. One is a singlet, and one is a triplet. So s equals zero, s equals 1. We recognize this alpha beta minus beta alpha as the singlet spin state. We have alpha beta plus beta alpha, and alpha alpha and beta beta, and we have alpha Beta minus beta Alpha. So we call s = 0 a singlets, and this a tripleT, because of the number of states. wave function has the necessary spin symmetry and the necessary permutation symmetry. So if, instead of two electrons, we have 1, 2 dot dot dot N, then Mr. Slater says we do this-- whoops. OK, N, 1, and then K1, and KN N. So that's a determinant-- an N by N determinant. And the rows correspond to the electrons, and the columns corresponding to the orbitals. Now this, because of the properties of the determinant, is anti-symmetric with respect to permutation of any two electrons or any two orbital. orbitals, because it's really the same thing is permuting the electrons. And so this N factorial is a consequence of normalization, because when you expand an N by N determinant, you get Nfactorial, additive products of N functions. It looks horrible. And because we're normalizing, we need this 1orbitals because we need it to normalize the whole system. It's the same as permuting electrons, it's just a different way of looking at it. over the square root of N factorial in order to have this thing come out to be 1 when you calculate the normalization integral. Now this notation is horrible because you've got too many symbols. And so depending on what you're trying to convey, you reduce the symbols, and you get the same result. And that's the way to do it. It's a very simple way to get the result you're looking for, but it takes a lot of work to get it right. can reduce it simply by, instead of writing psi every time, just writing the state. But the best way to do this is simply to say-- this is just the state number. Or you can-- since you don't need psi, you don'st need the state letter, you can just have theState number. But you can't do it both ways. You have to be able to do it just one way or the other, and that's what we're trying to do here. If you permute any two of these guys, any adjacent pair, the sign changes. And it contains everything you need, and it doesn't require you to look at stuff you're not going to use. The main diagonal of the determinant. It conveyseverything you need. And your goal is to make a sign that conveys everything you want to say. The determinant is the main diagonal, and the sign is the sign of that diagonal. The sign is: The sign of the sign, or the diagonal, is the thing you need to say something. going to be to take these things, and calculate matrix of them. And so you'll be dealing with the orbitals one or two at a time. And this is very convenient. And soon, you start to take this for granted. And it's a very simple thing, but it isn't, because it's not. It's not a simple thing to do, because you have to deal with a lot of them at the same time. You have to work out how to do it in a very complex way. you're doing a huge number of tricks. OK, I'm going to skip over what's in my notes. Demonstrating that for a two by two, that what I asserted is correct, you can do that very easily. So we can count, and we have an atom. And we know how to do it. We can do it for an atom and we know what to do. We know how. We're doing it for two atoms. We've done it for one atom. We'll do it again. many electrons it has. And so we immediately know what our job is going to be. We're going to have to write some Slater determinant of those number of electrons. And the goal is to be able to do the algebra in a way that maybe you can't describe, he says. He says the next step is to make it easier for people to understand how many electrons a system has, and how to work with them in a more complex way. "It's a very exciting time for us," he says, "and we're looking forward to it" to your friends because it's too complicated. I'm faced with the problem of trying to explain how to do this algebra. But it is something that you can learn, and you can ask a computer to do it. There are all sorts of intuitive shortcuts where you can look for them. It's something that can be learned, and it's something you can do with a computer, if you know how. It can be done with a calculator, or you can use an online calculator. at a problem, and you could say, I understand. OK, so you're used to orbitals. And that's perfectly reasonable, because for hydrogen, we have orbitals, and there's only one orbital, and it could have either spin. We don't mess with that. But now we're going to talk about spin orbitals and we're not going to mess with them. We're not messing with spin. It's a different kind of spin, and we don't messed with it. And that's just the combination of the name of the orbital with whether the spin is up or down. The reason for this is it's easier to do the algebra. And the reason the algebra is-- it's initially harder todo the algebra, because there are certain selection rules, because of the orbit. It's a very complex system, but it's possible to do it with just a few simple steps. It can be done in a matter of seconds. It is possible to get it to work in a few minutes. and stuff like that. But once you know how to do it you do the algebra. And then all of a sudden, everything pops out in a very useful form. So the stick diagrams are very important. But now I'm specifying the stick diagram as spin orbitals rather than orbitals. And now I've changed the name of the diagrams to 'spin orbitals' rather than 'spin circles' and so on. And that's how I'm going to use them in the future. There are rules for how the number of spin orbitals is different between the left-hand side of a matrix element. There are rules that are easily described. For every kind of orbital, an orbital that is a scalar, that doesn't depend on the left or right of the element. That doesn't have to be the same for every spin orbital, but it can be for some of them. That's the way to look at it. It's a very simple way to see it. on quantum numbers, that has a selection rule delta SO of 0; and for something like a one-electron operator that. has a Selection rule delta spin orbital of 1 and 0. And then we have our friend 1 over rij, that.has a selectionRule delta spin of 2, and a selection Rule of 1 over Rij of 1. and 0, and so on. For example, we have a. quantum number with a. selectionRule of 0 and a spin of 1, and an orbital of 0. and 1. "We use a combination of 0.1, and 0.2. And the algebra for each is something you work out, and then you know how to do it," he says. "And I'm going to try to give you just a little bit of a taste of this. So we already looked at something like this. But we use a different kind of algebra, and it's a bit more complex," he adds. "It's a lot of work, but it's worth it in the end" slightly different notation. And we have 1s alpha, 1s beta, 2s alpha and 2s beta. And so for the ground state of helium 1s squared, and we would do this. And the stick diagrams are great, because it's easier to see on a picture, who is it? So I'm going to go back. And I'll be back in a few minutes with a little bit more information about how the helium nucleus works. And then I'll go back to the start of the show. are the actors, and have I included all of them, or have I left something out? And so now we're interested in the stick diagram for the 1s 2s configuration. And there are several kinds of 1s/2s configurations, depending on what the alpha and beta are. So we have 1s 1s, 2s, 3s, 4s, 5s, 6s, 7s, 8s, 9s, 10s, 11s, 12s, 13s, 14s, 15s, 16s, 17s, 18s, 19s, 20s. alpha, 2s alpha. And we have 1s alpha, 2's beta. 1s beta, 2S alpha, 1s Beta, 1S beta. So there's four guys, and we can put our arrows on these things. We know everything we need to know about these guys. It tells us what to do. It's like a map of the world. It shows us where to go. And it tells us how to get there. We can do it. We've done it. Well, when we do this, the diagonal matrix elements of the 1 over rij Hamiltonian can be expressed. And we use this notation, J tilde minus K tilde. So for every two-electron thing, we're going to get this kind of-- now these are simple integrals, and some of them are some of the most complex ones in the world. So we're looking at a number of different ways to express the Hamiltonian. For example, we can use the following notation: J tildeminusK tilde, where J is a tilde and K is a dot. This doesn't operate on spins. And so if you had a 1s alpha, 2s beta, 1 over rij, 1s beta,. 2s alpha is 0.0. The 1sAlpha with the 2sAlpha is not 0, et cetera. There are all sorts of ways to get around this. It's a very complex system. It doesn't work on spins, but it can be used as a basis for other algorithms. And it can work on any type of code. of stuff. But this tilde notation says, well, this is what we start with, and we have to convert it into things that really matter. So the operation of removing the tilde requires a little bit of work. And that's why my notes are crap, he says. "It's a bit of a pain, but it's the only way to get to the point," he adds. "I don't know why I'm doing it, but I'm trying to do it." because I can't explain it well enough to really teach this. When we do 1s squared, we have an alpha with an alpha for the J term. And alpha with beta is 0, because the operator cannot change the alpha into beta. So this tilde notation is a convenient thing, because you can use it to get around this. But k tilde 1's squared is equal to 0. Because the spins take care of themselves. So when we do the 1s. squared, the J1s squared tilde, isequal to the J 1s square. any Slater determinant, and you can express it in terms of J's and K's. And the sign comes from switching the order of the orbitals. That's how the determinants work. And so you're going to see a whole bunch of stuff. But removing the tildes is the tricky business. OK, OK, so we've got the sign. Now we need to find the determinant. What is it? The determinant is the order in which the orbital orbitals are placed. now when you get a problem where you have a configuration where a single Slater is not sufficient, you sometimes need two or more Slaters. And then what happens is you're looking at matrix elements of the 1 over rij operator. Now this is a headache. And I could talk until I'm blue in the face, and I cannot make it clear how to. I cannot explain it to you how to do it. I don't know how to explain it. But it's a problem. do this. Because it's just awful. But some things in life are worth suffering for. And so anyway, in the 1s, 2s situation, when you do everything right, you get-- this is just a general notation for a two-electron wave function-- 1 over r12, psi 2. So these guys are just awful, but they're worth it in the long run, because it's worth it to get the results you're looking for in the first place. eigenfunctions of s squared and sz. When you have mismatched alpha and beta, the K's are 0. But when you have K, the 1 over rij matrix element between two, you get 1/2 times 2 J, 1s, 2s, minus or plus 2K, 1S, 2S. And when you do that, you getting 1/1 times 2J, 1's, 2's, plus or minus 2K,. And that's how you get 2K. Slaters, you can fix that. And so this is why it's so hard to explain, because-- yes, I'm not even going to apologize anymore. OK, so this are what you do. And the notes are pretty clear about how to do them, and what the problems are. But lecturing on is not the way to get to the bottom of a problem. That's the way you fix it. So that's what we're going to do. We're not going to lecture on how to fix it, we're just going to fix the problem. it would be a little bit hard. OK, so now what are we going to do with it? Well, we'd like qualitative stuff and interpretive stuff. Qualitative is Hund's rules. Now if you looked at 100 textbooks, I think 95% of them will have Hund’s rules wrong. You're never going to go back to the old way of doing things. You’re never going back to that way of looking at the world. It's a very different world now. to make that mistake. And interpretive-- well, we want to know the trends of things. We want to be able to do something like what you did in freshman chemistry on shielding. Now you probably memorized some rules about what shields what. But I'm going to give you a clue about how to do it, because it's going to be a little bit different than what you're used to. It's not going to look exactly the same, but you'll get the idea. little bit more insight into that. So we're going to talk about this for the rest of the lecture. OK, so you specify a configuration. And this configuration might be two electrons, two spin orbitals, two orbitals times e, or three, or 10. And often, when you specify the occupied the occupied is a certain number of electrons or spin electrons. So you can specify two electrons or two spin electrons, or two electrons times e or three spin electrons or threespin electrons. orbitals, you neglect the field ones, which is nice, because you have fewer things to worry about. Because field orbitals have spin 0.0, you don't have to do anything. They're automatically asymmetrized, and they basically act as a charged distribution in the core that is sampled by the electrons. And they're basically acting as a charge distribution in a core that's sampled by electrons. They have a very low spin, so they're very easy to study. outside. And so you need some sort of a set of rules for how does that work. And that's shielding. So first, we specify a configuration. And you also learned-- in high school, probably-- how to determine the L, S, J terms that result from this configuration by some magical process. And then you can use that configuration to shield the outside of the device. And this is how you do it. And it's a very complex process, but it's very effective. crossing-out of boxes. And if you didn't, I'm glad. Because it would have just clouded your mind, and caused earlier insanity than MIT causes. So anyway, so we have orbital angular momentum. And we can add the orbital angular momenta of the electrons following certain rules, and we have spin. And so on and so on, until you get to the bottom of it. And then you can say, "Oh, my God, that's so cool!" angular momentum. And J is equal to the vector sum of L and S. And we say we have an LS term-- like triplet P. And it can have J isequal to L plus S, L plusS minus 1, down to L minus S absolute value. These are the terms we use to describe the momentum of a system. We can also use the term "momentum" to refer to a system's momentum. We use this term to mean the momentum that a system has at a given point. the possible J's. Of all of the states that belong to a particular configuration, which one is the lowest? One-- which one, not the second lowest. And why do we care? Because in statistical mechanics everything is dominated by the lowest state. And so Hund's rules is all about, of all of those states, which is lowest? The lowest state is the one that belongs to the configuration that is the most likely to be the most like the one we're looking for. by the lowest energy state. So you want to know what are L, S, and J for the lowestenergy state of a configuration. And so if you can figure out what is the lowestEnergyState, you've basically got as much as most people are going to want. If you can't figure it out, you don't have as much information as you'd like. You don't know what the lowest EnergyState is. You just know that it's not the highestEnergyState. You can't know the highest EnergyState. are typically far apart in energy. So if you know what the lowest energy configuration is, you can tell your friends how to write their partition functions. And mostly, you don't need to know the details of the partitioning process. The rest is details, and you can get away with it if you're good at it. It's a lot of work, but it's worth it in the long run. It can save you a ton of time, and it's a great way to test your software. want details. OK, so Hund's rules-- you look at all of the L, S, J states that are possible for a particular configuration. And if your friends tell you they want details, well, you tell them, this is what you have to do. But it's no simple three Hunds rules. It's a lot more complicated than that. And it's not just a simple three-step process. It can take a long time to get to the bottom of it. you can use the crossing out of ML/MS boxes if you want. But I don't want to cause insanity at this stage, either. And you can also use lowering operators to generate all the images. I'm an expert at that. And I could tell you why you would do that, but I'm not sure if it's the right thing to do at the moment. I just want you to know that I'm a bit of an expert on this sort of thing, so don't get mad at me. states, once you know stuff. And that's easy to know. If you had 2p squared, you're going to get singlet D, triplet P, and singlet S. And for example, if you had two S's, which one of these has the largest S? which one? Which one? And that’s easy toknow. And if you’ve got two S’S, you have two S-S-S. And you have a S-P-S, and you have an S-D-D. well, here's the triplet. That has the largest S. So the tripleT P is the lowest energy state. Now if there were multiple triplets, as there would be, say, for 2p3d, then you'd have to decide which of those triplets was the lowest. And all you care about, all you're interested in, is the energy state of the state you're in. And that's the state that you want to be in, so that's what you're there for. allowed to say is which one is the lowest. And it's the one with the maximum L. And then the last step is, what's the lowest J for that LS state? And that's kind of cute. Because you have the P shell, there's-- for a P shell,. For a P Shell, you can. say, "I want to go to the beach" and go to a beach. You can do that in the U.S. and you can do it in the UK. have six P orbitals to fill the shells. 1 alpha, 1 beta, 0 alpha, 0 beta, et cetera. So the degeneracy of a P orbital is 6. If you have p to N, where N is less than 3, you have a less-than-half-filled shell. And then lowest is J equal to p-N-N, where p is the ratio of p to J. The lowest P orbital to N-N is p-J, and the lowest P orbital to J is J-P. L minus S, absolute value. If N is greater than 3, you have the lowest being. The highest possible value of J is equal to L plus S. And now when you have a half-filled shell, the lowest state is usually an S state with maximum spin. But it doesn't matter. When you have less-than or more-than-half- filled shell, you has generally a state with orbital angular momentum not equal to 0. And so you do want to care what is the lowest J. when N is equal to 3, the lowest state is usually an S state. It doesn't have a spin orbit splitting, and it just has one value of J, which is whatever the spin is. So Hund's rules tell you how to identify, without knowing beans, what is the lowest. The rules are based on the fact that when N is equals 3, S is the state with the lowest number of spins. The lowest state of a state is the S state, and the lowest spin is the J state. energy state, and it's never wrong. Well, maybe sometimes wrong, but that's because of one of my things where you have a perturbation between states belonging to two configurations. But people get really excited when they discover a violation of Hund's rules. And it's just trivial. So there is this. There is this state, which is always in the right place, but it's always in a wrong place. And that's the way I like it. It's the only way I know how to do it. CNN's John Defterios talks about shielding in the nuclear bomb. Defterio: "I have a few minutes to talk about shielding, and I will. OK, so we have a nucleus. And it has a charge of z. Bare nucleus-- there's no electrons, so the atomic number is the charge" Defterius: "We have a filled shell around it. And then we have an atomic shell around the nucleus." He says the shell protects the nucleus from radiation. It's spherically symmetric. And so if we penetrate inside of it, what we see is only the plus z, minus the number of electrons inside this sphere. Now if you took Electricity and Magnetism, you can prove this. If you take electricity and magnetism. You can prove that this is the case. And you can do it with any type of magnetism or electricity. And it's very, very simple. It's just a sphere of electrons. It doesn't have to be very big. didn't, you can accept it. And so outside the nucleus, the charge is plus one, because you have a neutral atom. And then when you penetrate inside this region of dense charge, and all of the spins are generally paired, this is spherical. So what you end up seeing is a spherical atom, with a very dense charge inside. And that's what you see inside the nucleus of a superconductor, which is a type of superconducting superconductor. That's what we see in superconductors. z effective, as opposed to z true. And let's say here here's r0-- or this is r0. And so beyond r0, the charge that you see is plus 1. Add 0, you see a charge of z. So what ends up happening is you get z effective, which is z true, and z effective is z effective. That's the difference between z effective and z true in terms of the number of charges that you can charge with a device. dependent on distance from the nucleus. And it goes from the integer value that you know, from the atomic number, down to 1, because you've taken one electron away from a neutral atom, and taken it outside. And now we have this wonderful thing called the centrifugal barrier. So if if you take one electron out of the nucleus and put it outside, you get this barrier. And so on and so on, until you get to the point where you can't get in or out of an atom. we have a state that has a non-zero of l-- well, if we have a zero value of l, it can penetrate all the way into the core, to the nucleus. And so that means that the shielding is less for s orbitals. And now if we had a state with a zero of l -- well, that would mean that we would have no shielding at all. So that would be a good thing. We would have less shielding at the core. And that would make it easier to get into the nucleus and get to the center of the nucleus, for example. have a non-zero l, it can't get in so far. And the larger the l is, the less it can see this extra charge. So high l's are very well shielded. Low l's aren't so well shielded, and the shielding goes s least shielded, p, less, so on. Now we can see what the charge looks like on the device. We can also see how the charge is affected by temperature and other factors. We are now able to see how this affects the charge on our device. there's some other interesting things. Which, I hate to say this, but comparing 5.111 or 5.112 to 3.091, there is this business of what happens when you start to-- you start with potassium, and so you put an electron in the 4s, not in the 3d orbital. Right? And so there is some interesting things that can happen when you do that. And so that's what we're trying to figure out. And we're going to find out more about it. Why is that? Well, the 4s sees the larger charge is less shielded. So it goes in. Then when you go from potassium to calcium, you put another electron in this. And that's true. So for calcium,. you have a 4s squared. And 4s 3d is a higher-lying state. Now for calcium,you have a 3d squared. and 4s is a lower-lying. state. And so on and so on until you get to the right state. you take an electron-- I'm cooking my own goose. If you take one of these electrons away-- this is not the way I wanted it to come out-- you find yourself in a 3d state. Because 3D penetrates a little bit under 4s. I can't explain it in a way in which I can explain it to you. I don't know how to explain it. I just want you to know that I love you and that I want to see you. that's going to make sense. I really wanted to, because I care so much about these simple arguments. But I will just be wasting your time. So the order in which you feel orbitals comes out, naturally, different from the order that you remove electrons from orbitals. And the order you feel electrons comes out is the same as the way that you feel orbits. And that's the way it should be, I think. I think that's how it's supposed to work. I don't know why it doesn't. shielding arguments are capable of explaining that. OK, so this is the end of atoms. And I've asked you to observe some complicated algebra which you're never going to do. Everything you need to know about atoms, you can tell a story with atoms. That's what I'm trying to tell you here. But I'm not going to get into it. I'm going to let you go on with your life. I hope you've enjoyed the rest of your day, and I'll see you again next week. computer, and it can do it. Now molecules are much more complicated. We're going to start with molecular orbital theory. And I'm not going to be presenting the normal textbook approach. I'm going to present an interpretive approach, where you understand the molecules better. And that's what we'll start on next time. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, and we'll be back to it later this week. why things happen, as opposed to memorizing just symmetries, and filling orders, and so on. OK, I'll see you on Wednesday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, Back to thepage you camefrom, Back To The page you Came From, Backto the pageYou Came From: Back to The Page You Came from: Backto The Page: BackTo the Page:back to the pages we came from: