this is cereth registered nurse re and calm and in this video i'm going to be going over blood transfusions which will include the nurses role. As always I've been to this YouTube video you can access the free quiz that will test you on this procedure so let's get started. i'm cereth Registered Nurse and i'm a registered nurse at the University of California, San Francisco. I'm also a volunteer at a local hospital in California. I've also worked at a number of other hospitals in California and New York. get started what is a blood transfusion it is where as a nurse we will transfuse a patient who is low on red blood cells with new blood cells via a venous access of some type. This is most commonly done through donatedred blood cells so a patient needs them some ones donated them to the blood bank. As a nurse, we will hang a bag of red blood cell for the patient and transfuse them to replace those low red blood Cells which answers the question why would a patient need a blood transplant. they're low on red blood cells and what can cause a person to be low onred blood cells. Number one blood loss and they've had some type of surgery or trauma they can lose a lot of blood so we have to replenish them. They can be anemic they can have anemia so bad that they need blood transfusions at some point. This can happen in conditions like renal failure cancers just to name a few because the body is not producing enough substances to produce. produce or maintain those red blood cells. Red blood cells are very vital for our survival and how our body works. Our body can't function very well without them so what a red blood cell do with the help of the Help of the Red Blood Cells. The Red Blood Cell is a type of blood vessel that helps the body produce and maintain blood vessels. It is also known as a blood vessel or a red cell. It helps to keep blood flowing through the body. It can also be used as a tool to fight infections and other infections. hemoglobin it carries oxygen it receives from the lungs throughout our body in addition it removes carbon dioxide co2 and it will take that take it to the lungs so the lungs can't exhale it. Whenever your patient is low on red blood cells they're going to have some problems with their red blood cell count. It's a sign that they're not getting enough oxygen from their lungs. It can also be a sign of an underlying condition such as an undiagnosed heart condition. side symptoms that can present especially if they're really low they'll be very pail. I've seen patients they literally look white as a sheet before the transfusion and then after the transfusions I've told all my patients man you look like you got a tan because they their skin color has changed after a transfusion. It's like they've got a new skin color because they've had a lot of transfusions. If you're low on blood pressure, get a blood transfusion as soon as you can. It can help you stay alive for up to a month. is back to where it should be so it's really interesting you transfuse blood make sure you look at that. Another thing is they can feel very fatigued they can be short of breath any activity they're just like really wore out. They can have an increased heart rate and they can have a very high blood pressure. It's very interesting to see how the body reacts to transfusing blood. It can be very different from transfusing a blood transfusion to transfusion of any other type. be tachycardic because that heart is trying to pump that blood because consents of the oxygen is low so it's like I got to get more blood everywhere else so it can overwork itself. When is a patient transfuse well this really depends depends on what's going on with the patient. It really depends on the patient and what's happening to them at the time. It's a very complex process. It can take a long time for a patient to go through a transfusion. Recent guidelines by the American Association of blood banks recommends transfusing blood when hemoglobin levels fall to 7 to 8 grams per deciliter. What is a normal hemoglobin level well depends if you're male. The patient their vital signs how are they tolerating that low blood level and how do they cope with the pain? The patient's vital signs. How are they coping with thepain? How do they feel? What do they react to the pain. What do you feel? How are you feeling? or female Mel's it's 14 to 18 grams per deciliter in females. transfusing blood is very common in the hospital setting. For NCLEX your not only need to know this for NCLEx your your Mel's need to be at least 12 grams per Deciliter. In females it's 12 to 16 grams perDeciliter and in males it's between 14 and 18 grams. For more information on transfusions go to: www.nclex.org/ transfusion. Nursing lecture exams but you need to know it for the job okay the first thing before a patient is even transfused is a lot of prep work that is super important and essential because our prep work helps prevent transfusion reactions so we want to make sure we follow the instructions we are given. The first thing we do is prep the patient before they are transfused. The prep work is very important and is essential because it is to help prevent transfusions reactions. The second thing is to prepare the patient for the transfusion. exactly what we need to and hospitals have in place protocols that whenever you become a new grad you start working you want to read over there protocol and make sure that you follow it exactly now most hospitals require that you're a registered nurse in order to transfuse the blood. Most hospitals require. that you's a registered Nurse in order for you to transfused the blood in a hospital. If you have any questions or concerns, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. Follow your Hospital protocol with that so let's say you got an order for patient to be transfused with two units of packed red blood cells. The very first thing that's going to be done the patient is going to have to be type and cross-match either you'll be transfusing red or white blood cells, so again follow your Hospital Protocol with that. You'll have to have the patient be of the same blood type as you are to transfuse the blood to the patient. Be careful with the blood band as we don't want it to get damaged. Pay special attention to everything from what you write down to how you identify the patient. Everything must be done perfectly because we don’t want the blood to damage. The blood must be drawn by your phlebotomist or your doctor will be drawing the blood. This is the part where you've got to pay special attention and be careful with your blood band. It’s important to make sure that the blood is in the correct place. do too like some type of clerical error to cause a transfusion reaction because someone messed up. This tends to be the most common reason for a transfusions reaction. Always take care whenever this has to be done next send the blood labs going to type in blood bank. If you have any questions about blood transfusions, please contact CNN iReport at tips@dailymail.co.uk or call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. will match the blood with a donor and we'll prepare the amount of blood that you're going to need now. It's also important that as the nurse you know the patient's compatibility and their Rh factors what blood they can receive and what they can't receive and I have a list of them for you to look at. You will then be able to decide what type of blood to give to the patient and how much to give. You can also donate blood to a friend or family member if you want to. whole video where I went over that in depth with you and you can access that and take a quiz that can test you on that. Just a quick review who is the universal donor who can donate to all types that's oh now who's the universal recipient. You can access the video and take the quiz to test your knowledge of who the universal donors are and what they can do for you. Click here for more information on how to get involved with iReport and iReport.com. they can take from everyone that's a B next you'll want to get informed consent tell the patient what they're going to be receiving assess their understanding of it also this is a good time to ask about their allergies and if they have received any blood transfusions in the past. If they have had a blood transfusion, ask if they've had any previous transfusions. If the patient is a B patient, they can't be taken from anyone that's not a B. They can only take from those who are B-negative. past and if they have how many because if they've received a lot of blood transfusions in the past they're at risk for febrile nan hemolytic transfusion reaction. Their body has just built up these antibodies from all those previous transfusions and they can start running a fever. If they've had a lot to do with transfusions, they're more likely to have a blood clot in their arm. They're more prone to blood clotting problems. They have a higher risk of blood clots in their leg. They also have a high blood pressure. and things like that so a lot of times physicians like to pre medicate them and you'll want to let the physician know if they do have a history of that. Sometimes they're pre-medicated with benadryl or Tylenol acetaminophen before hand orally or when about 30 minutes before you go to the hospital. And you'll also want to tell the physician if you're having trouble breathing or if you have a high blood pressure or high blood sugar or anything like that. start the transfusion and that will help prevent that also look at the health status of your patient. Are you giving a patient who is in fluid overload or congestive heart failure has renal failure and but they really need blood you need to be looking at that because they are going to need blood. If a patient is in renal failure or is having fluid overload you should be giving them a transfusion. If they are suffering from fluid overload, they should be given a blood transfusion as soon as possible. may be at risk for circulatory overload where you can put them in fluid overload because you're putting all this blood inside of their body. A lot of times physicians may order lasix some type of loop diuretic before the transfusion or in between the units or after the units. If a patient is having fluid overload, they may need to have their blood transfusion stopped. If the blood is being pumped too fast, the body may not be able to cope with the pressure. You typically want an 18-gauge or larger IV site some hospitals again it's varies on protocols they'll allow you. You want to be aware of that as well next you want to make sure your patient has IV access we have to get this blood in then and you typically want a larger IVSite. Transfusion.transfusion so you want a smaller IVSite some hospitals will allow you to do that. You typically want to use a smaller or 18-Gauge IVSite and some hospitals won't allow that. to transfuse through a twenty engage and why is that well as those red blood cells are shooting through they're going into the system. If that cannula is not large enough those redBlood cells can break open they can lysis and you're just breaking them up and they're not going to go into the body. If you have a large enough cannula you're going to be able to transfuse blood through a 20 engage cannula. To transfuse Blood through a Twenty Engagement cannula, you'll need a large cannula that's at least 20 inches in length. really going into the patient's body so you want good IV access another thing you really want to consider is you know it takes anywhere between two to four hours for a unit of blood to transfuse. If you have to hang some antibiotics on this patient or they're gonna need some IV drugs you can't use that IV access that is being used for the blood transfusion so you need a second access. It's always good to just have a good two sites while a patient's needing blood next is supplies. transfuse blood you use special tubing which is called Y tubing with an inline filter which helps filter some of those substances out of the blood before it actually goes to the patient. Keep in mind again it depends on hospital protocol a lot of protocols say only one blood transfusion is needed at a time. It can take up to 24 hours for the blood to reach the patient and it can take as long as a day to get to the hospital. It depends on the time of day and the type of transfusion. set of Y tubing per unit that you transfuse so you'll have to you're going to transfuse the patient with more than one unit multiple sets or some hospitals say it's only good for four hours. Keep that in mind when you need to change your filter your tubing. Some hospitals say that the tubing is only good to four hours so keep that in minds when you're changing your filter or transfusing a patient with multiple sets of tubing or multiple units of the same type. The tubing is good for up to three hours but it can be used for as long as four. next you'll want to grab a bag of normal saline 0.9 percent ofnormal saline this is the only only solution you ever use whenever transfusing blood you never use any met other medications or any other fluids only saline. Because dextrose and red blood cells don't get along it can cause them to clump up together so only0.9% normal saline and we will be using that saline to prime that why tubing whip and then to flush that tubing with afterwards once the blood is done transfusing. and in addition just whenever everything's wrapped up you're ready to take that tubing down you'll need to get a red biohazard bag to dispose of it properly again fall your Hospital protocols for holiday dispose of their blood products but um you never ever put it in the regular blood bag. And in case you're wondering, yes, you do need to take the tubing down and put it into a red Biohazard bag. and in addition, you're also going to need to put the blood in a redBiohazard bag when you take it down. trash now let's talk about transfusing okay done all your prep work the blood bank calls you and says hey your blood is ready. Let us know whenever you're ready for us to send it to you because they're keeping it refrigerated for you. Some key things you want so some key things that you want to make sure you get are the right temperature, the right amount of oxygen and the right type of blood. You don't want to get too much blood because it's going to turn to trash. to remember you will be giving one unit at a time patient needs two units. You're gonna give one unit now and then whenever that's done call blood bank and say send me the other unit and then they'll send it to you so one at aTime and from one unit to one unit and from to one and a half to one. You will be doing this for about an hour to an hour. You'll be doing it for about two hours to three hours. You can do this for an hour or two hours. Do this for two hours or three hours and you'll be done. the time that the person brings you your blood or you go and collect it you need to start transfusing no later than within twenty to thirty minutes. That unit needs to be done within two to four hours so why is this well so well? You need to be transfusing within 20 to 30 minutes and it needs to been done that unit must be done in under two hours. You must transfuse within 20 minutes and you must be transfused in under 20 minutes. You need the blood to be in the body within two and a half hours so that it can be used for transfusion. from the time that that blood bag leaves the refrigerator it needs to be in the patient's body within no more than four hours. There's a risk of it developing bacteria and we can give the patient septicemia so you want to transfuse it in that time frame. Also you want it to be transfused in the same time frame as the patient is admitted to the hospital so that it doesn't develop bacteria and the patient doesn't have to be admitted to hospital for too long. another thing you just want to consider one throw this out there is notify the blood bank that you're ready for the blood when you are ready because you need to get this in and as a nurse you get your blood so you have mission discharge you have a patient. Another thing is to make sure that you get to the hospital on time so that you don't have to rush to get the blood in and get the patient out of the hospital before they are ready to be discharged. You don't want to miss a chance to help a patient out. that is just not doing good that 30 minutes flies fast and you have this blood and you haven't even given it and now it's like 35 minutes later well you can't give it you're gonna have to send it back to the blood bank and blood is expensive so. That's what happened to me. I was like, 'I don't know how I'm going to get through this. I'm not going to be able to give this blood. I don't think I can do it' notify the blood bank whenever you're ready to start that transfusion now blood wormers blood warmers can be used if the patient needs large amounts of blood quickly and they're at risk for experiencing hypothermic response. You're not gonna warm the blood up by using a microwave or anything so you don't need to warm it up in the microwave. You need to use warmers if you're giving blood to a patient who needs a transfusion quickly and is at risk of hypothermia. like that you want to use a special device if need be next before you even start the transfusion you're gonna be doing this verification process so as the nurse you're going to be getting another nurse it's usually to our ends cuz ourian's are usually the ones who can transfuse. Then you're doing another verification process with another orient and you're looking at the patient's identification versus the blood banks information making sure everything is in order before you start the blood transfusion. matches up perfectly you're gonna look look at the patient's blood type versus the donors tie and the Rh factor. You're gonna make sure that they're compatible next you're going to look for the expiration day on the blood make sure it's not expired. Make sure that the blood is in good condition and that the donor has the right blood type and Rh factor to donate it to the patient. If the blood type or Rh factor is not compatible, the donor may not be able to donate. sure it doesn't have any clots are abnormal substances in the blood or it's damaged in any way and everything must match perfectly. If there's a discrepancy you'll need to notify the blood bank immediately and just from personal experience this has happened with one of my patients. I'm sorry to say that I've had to give blood to a patient who has a history of blood clots. If you have any questions or concerns, please contact me on 0203 615 4157. I'll be happy to help you out. was doing the whole verification process with another nurse. There was one letter that they had did a clerical error on. So I had to send the blood and we had to go back and get the patient's ID band looking up and there was a mistake in the letter. It was a big mistake and we were looking at the blood bag looking at a patient'sID band. We had to get the blood back and go back to the hospital and collect the patient. We were in a hurry. We couldn't wait. through the whole process again so this does happen so always make sure you verify everything also before transfusing you're going to be getting baseline vital signs which is going to include the temperature the blood pressure respirations and heart rate. You want to make sure those are within normal and that they are within the range of what is considered normal for a transfusion at the time of transfusion. It's important to check that all vital signs are within a normal range before you start the transfusion so that you don't have to repeat the process. If you have a temperature greater than a hundred degrees Fahrenheit you'll want to notify the physician and make sure they just want to still proceed with the blood transfusion. Before you actually transfuse you want to explain to your patient if they're.limits and especially that temperature if you're over 100 degrees Fahrenheit. If you're under the age of 18, you're not allowed to have blood transfusions in the U.S. or Canada. You're allowed to donate blood in the United States and Canada. alert and oriented they can talk to you what you're about to do and for them to notify and report to you if they feel any of the signs and symptoms I'm fixing to describe. It can be a transfusion reaction like sweating chills chest pain itching short of a blood transfusion. If you are concerned about a possible transfusion, call your doctor or nurse on 0800-273-TALK (8255) or go to www.samaritans.org for support. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. breath headache backache or nausea and vomiting and if this happens you'll immediately want to stop the transfusion. okay now it's actually time to start the transfusions so you're gonna have your blood ready hung and it's going to be controlled by an infusion pump which will deliver it to the patient. If you have any questions or concerns about the blood transfusion you can call the National Blood transfusion Helpline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www. transfusionhelpline.org/. the patient and you want to start the transfusion slowly about two milliliters per minute for those first 15 minutes. You want to stay with that patient at their bedside looking at them monitoring them. You're writing up slowly because we want to minimize the amount of blood that the patient's going to receive. In case they do have a possible transfusion reaction we can turn that blood off. We want toStay with them during the first 15 minute because that's when the blood is being transfused. when most transfusion reactions occur so we're gonna be watching their bottle signs throughout so you're gonna stay with them after five minutes of starting the transfusion you're going to get bottle signs. If the patient's okay they're tolerating it well this is the time that you can increase the rate and remember you want to make sure that that unit that bag of blood goes in within four hours no more than four hours then you'll get it to 30 minutes again and then hourly until done. of different reactions the patient can have. The recipient that patients immune system is interacting with the donors blood. You can have a hemolytic transfusion reaction where what's happening is that the patient's blood and the donorsBlood are not compatible. This is dangerous it can lead to death also allergic they can have  GVHD which is graft-versus-host disease and have an Astra cry and have a febrile which is non-hemolytic or non- Hemolytic. this because this tends to happen days two weeks after a blood transfusion it's rare and it's deadly if it does happen and in addition you want to monitor your patient for what's called circulatory overload and which patients do you think would be at risk for this think of your patients. This is a very serious condition and can be deadly. If you think your patient is at risk you should check their blood pressure. If your blood pressure is too high you may need to give them a transfusion. If they are too low they may also need to be admitted. any patient that's at risk for whenever you put extra fluid volume in their blood they'll have trouble with it. Patients who have heart problems like congestive heart failure their heart muscles weak and you just throw that extra fluid in it it can't do well with it so the fluid starts backing up into the lungs and into the tissues. Also patients who have renal failure you know these patients need blood but their risk for being able to tolerate all that fluid going in there so you want to keep. that in mind you do have to transfuse these patients who have that in addition we want to monitor them for septicemia now it's in a way on how we can remember all those big signs and symptoms that your patient may be having a transfusion reaction so to help. To help us remember these signs and Symptoms that your patients may behaving a transfusions reaction so that we can help them out. We want to help you out with this. We hope this helps you out in some way. R4 rash is a rash or fives efore elevated temperature. You want to look at that baseline temperature and you need to ask yourself how's it increase. You need to remember those major signs and symptoms to remember the word reaction okay r4 rash they may have a rash. They may have an elevated temperature and what you want to do is you want a baseline temperature to see if your temperature is going to go up or down. If your temperature goes up, you may need to go to the hospital. If you're measuring in Fahrenheit has it increased 1.8 degrees or if you're recording in Celsius has it increase one degree from baseline if so think transfusion reaction a 418 is your patient saying I have a backache all of a sudden or I'm having chest pain or my temperature has gone up. If so, it could be a transfusion reaction a 418. If it's a lower temperature, it may be a lower blood pressure or a lower body temperature. It could also be a higher body temperature, such as a lower back or chest pain. head is hurting that's a red flag c-4 chills t4 tachycardia especially if it's really increased from baseline I for increased respirations same thing with that increase from baseline oh for all glory so you really want to be looking at your patients urinary output during this blood transfusion and so you want to look at your patient's urine output during the transfusion. You want to see how much blood is being pumped into the body and how much is being excreted. after are they putting out low or are they just putting out no urine at all are they an Urich and then look at the color what does it look like. Are they experiencing a condition called hemoglobinuria where there's free hemoglobin in the urine it will have like this. If they have a condition like this they will have a low blood pressure and a low body mass index. They may also have a high blood pressure or high levels of iron in their blood. They might also have high blood sugar levels or high iron levels. purplish color so watch the earring closely and then in for nausea GI issues like diarrhea then when the transfusions done your patients tolerated it well you'll want to flush that remaining blood out of that line with that saline that's hanging on that Y tubing. Then dispose of your earring with the rest of the blood that's still hanging on the Y tubing then dispose of it with the remainder of the saline on the other side of the line. The earring can be used for blood transfusions as well as other procedures. tubing properly and then collect post vital signs one hour after that transfusion now let's take a closer look at those various transfusion reactions and then talk about what you're going to do as a nurse if your patient does have a transfusion reaction during a blood transfusion. okay first first let's look at the different types of transfusions that can cause a reaction. First we look at blood transfusions, and then we talk about the various types of reactions that can occur during them. hemolytic this is where the immune system is killing the donors red blood cells. antibodies in the recipients blood match that antigens on the donors blood cells so hence they've been missed tight. This can lead to di C and renal failure and even death and can cause kidney failure or even death if left untreated. For more information on hemolytic anemia click here. for more information about Hemolytic Anemia go to: http://www.hema.org.uk/hemolysis-anemia. a lot of times what's going to happen is you're gonna see a fever chills anxiety back pain chest pain hemoglobinuria where you have that purplish look to the urine. Also they can be tachycardic and have a low blood pressure. Another type is called allergic and this is where it can get worse. It can also cause a fever, chills, anxiety, back pain, chest pain and other symptoms. It's a very serious condition and can be fatal if left untreated. the recipients immune system is reacting to the proteins found in the donors blood leading to like rashes hives and itching and it can actually progress to in a flexus. The patient with this can have hives rashes respiratory issues like wheezing oral swelling things that you expect whenever you have a cold or a flu. The treatment for this is to take an anti-viral drug called  Guvroligine (G-vrolgine) and to take it in pill form. someone's having an anaphylactic reaction to something another type is febrile and this is non hemolytic so you don't have the breaking up of those red blood cells. This is where the recipients white blood cells or reacting with the donors white blood cell. It's called a non-hemolytic reaction and it's not as severe as a hemolysis reaction. It can be treated with antibiotics or other drugs. It is not fatal. It doesn't have to be life-threatening. and this causes the body to build antibodies so you can see that increased temperature like one degree Celsius or one point eight degree in Fahrenheit from the baseline. This is actually the most common transfusion reaction that you tend to see especially in patients who have received blood. And this is what we see in patients with blood transfusion problems. And we see this in patients that have had blood transfusions in the past. and this causes them to have an increased temperature. and we see it in patients whose blood has been transfused. in the past because their body has created these antibodies so that's what you want to ask them have you received a lot of transfusions before and you can see chills headache increase heart rate and fever with that. Another transfusion reaction you can have is the GVHD the GvHD the transfusion can cause a high blood pressure, high heart rate, high fever and chills. The blood pressure can go up and so can the heart rate. The heart rate can also go up. The chills and fever can increase. graft-versus-host disease and again like I said this is rare but it's deadly and it tends to occur days to weeks after the transfusion. This is where the donors T lymphocytes cause an immune response in the recipient but actually in grasping in the marrow of the recipient and attacking the recipients tissue. These T lymphocyte are usually killed by the recipients body but however maybe the patient has a suppressed immune system and they didn't attack these t lymphocytes whenever they're getting a transfusion and these hea lymphocytes from the donors start attacking that marrow. can happen is they can have a fever and this really peculiar rash all over the body. It'll be on the hands and the feet as well with GI issues diarrhea nausea inflammation of the liver and you want to talk. You want to tell your patient you know if they are suffering from a fever or a rash. If you are suffering with a fever, a rash or a stomach ache, or diarrhea or nausea, you may need to see your doctor. You may also need to go to the emergency room. you start having this rash from head the this fever diarrhea all this stuff for several weeks after you've had this blood transfusion you want to report that to your doctor. Other complications that can arise that really aren't immune related it's like septicemia where the blood is contaminated so you don't want to miss out on any of that. If you have any questions, call the National Blood transfusion Helpline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.blood transfusionhelpline.org/. as a nurse again it's really important that you start that transfusion promptly after receiving it from the blood bank or the blood is contaminated with a disease. This isn't as common because we have strict screening guidelines but there can be a risk for hepatitis B C or hepatitis B or hepatitis A or B. The blood is then transfused to a patient who has been admitted to the hospital for treatment of the disease. The patient is then transferred to a hospital where they can be monitored for the rest of their life. HIV etc also that circuit or e overload we are talking about or developing high iron levels. This happens with people who've had frequent blood transfusions. If your patient does have a blood transfusion reaction and I have seen this this does happen so keep an eye out for this. If you have any questions or concerns about your patient's care, please call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. it in the back of your mind so the first thing what you want to do is stop the transfusion. You want to note mentally what time this occurred what time you stopped it because you'll be documenting this later on. Also you're going to disconnect the blood tubing also you're Going to go to the hospital and get a blood transfusion for your child. It's important to record this so you can remember it in the future if you need to do it again. It is also important to note the time it occurred so you know when to stop it. at the access side and replace it with new tubing and have some point nine percent normal saline running to keep the vein open. Then you're going to notify the doctor and the blood bank of what's going on. During all this you are going to be staying with the blood donor during the procedure. During the procedure, the donor is going to need to stay with the donor throughout the entire procedure. For more information on how to get a donor's blood, go to www.bloodsource.org. patient at their bedside you need be watching them you need your eyes on them so this is a great time to call in other people on the floor to be helping you make these phone calls to be doing these things next. You're going to be monitoring those vital vital vital signs next you need to keep an eye on them. You need to make sure that you're doing everything you can to keep your patient's vital signs up to the highest possible level. This is a good time to ask for help from other doctors and nurses. signs every five minutes looking at them watching them looking at that respiratory status it's not compromised or they have an allergic response. What's going on now whenever you contact the physician depending on what type of reaction they suspect the patient's having or how severe it is what's going to be going on. The most common reaction is an allergic reaction or a reaction to an unknown substance. The best way to tell if a patient is having a reaction is to look at their respiratory status and see if it's compromised or if they're having an allergic reactions. on they may order some medication so it varies some things they can orders like corticosteroids which is going to suppress that immune response. fluids helping flush out that free hemoglobin that's in the body getting it out we want out of the body. anti hit anti histamines and anti-depressants to try and get rid of the bad stuff in the system. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. to decrease that immune response anti-pirate ik stu decrease that temperature vasopressors. This can help if there have an allergic response like epinephrine to open up the airways there's a lot of time those Airways clamp down and they can't breathe. Like dopamine to increase renal blood flow or to decrease the body's temperature. To decrease the immune responseAnti-pirates can also reduce the body’s temperature and reduce the risk of an allergic reaction like an anaphylaxis. diuretics also some labs are going to be ordered they want to look at those claudine levels because remember if this is hemolytic type because a lot of times they don't know what type of reaction this patient is having. Clotting factors because they're clotting factors are also important. Clots are a sign that a person is having a reaction to a drug or treatment that may be causing them to have a reaction. They can also be a sign of a more serious condition such as a heart condition. at risk for di C where all their clotting factors are just going to be depleted and they can bleed out and die. Looking at those electrolytes looking at the renal function how's our kidneys and other blood levels. In addition you'll be collecting urine urine on them looking for blood sugar levels and other biomarkers for the disease. For more information, visit www.nhs.uk/diC or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. the free hemoglobin that's came from those red blood cells I have lysis and whenever you are disconnecting your tubing over here do not throw it away don't throw any of it away. You'll be sending that one with the leftover blood and any other documentation to the blood. The blood will be sent back to the hospital to be transfused to the patient. The patient will then be able to receive the transfusion. The next step is to transfuse the blood into the patient's body. bank who's going to test it look out and see what went wrong. Of course you're going to document you want to document the time it happened. What actions you took what the patient was given if you gave them anything. What labs you drew all that and how that was done. How did you do it? What was the process like? What were the steps you took? How was it done? How did it work? What went wrong? What did you find out? What do you think? the patient is currently doing okay so that wraps up this review over blood transfusion. thank you so much for watching don't forget to take the free quiz and to subscribe to our channel for more videos. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript of the blood transfusions video. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to watch the full video. CLICK HERE to see the full Transcript of the Blood transfusion Video.