Markus Klute: In this class, we'll talk about spin. If you remember the discussion on relativistic kinematics we had last week, you noticed that I discussed the decay of a pion, say a neutral pion into an electron and-- a positron and an electron. We'll talk more about spin in the next class. Back to the page you came from. The Daily Discussion is a written version of this article. Use the Daily Discussion to help students understand today's featured news stories. And we were able to calculate the velocity of those two particles, the electron and the positron, quite easily by knowing the mass of the pion and the masses of the electrons and positron. And we can calculate our velocity. And that is served into the rest frame of the Pion. And then we can do our calculations. And so on and so on. And it's a very simple process. It's quite easily done. We can do it quite easily, and it's very simple to do. velocity. I also told you that this decay is highly suppressed because of the spins of the particles involved. The pion has spin zero, and the electron and the positron have spin 1/2, but it is not easily possible to align the electrons and positron such that the spins are aligned. It is also not possible for the pion to be aligned with the electron in such a way as to cause it to decay. It's not possible to do this in a way that would allow it to be detected. align to 0. align to 0, therefore, this decay is not usually possible. Now, let's dive a little bit into this. In quantum mechanics, the spin of a particle with a vector is quantized, and in terms of its length and its components. You calculate the length of the spin vector [?align to 1, align to 1]. So, for example, in the case of a quasar, you would have to decay the quasar's spin vector to zero, which is not possible. You find that it's square root of f times s plus 1 in units of h-bar. The components, and along any axis, have eigenvalues, and they are listed here. And we find that there is 2s plus 1 possible values, and there are two possible values for the d-axis, which is what we're looking at here. [S.S. ?] You find that you can find the eigenvalue by looking at the components, which are the components of a graph. And you can also find the value by looking for the components along anyaxis. So I'll pick here, just arbitrarily, the z axis. But the question-- it's an obvious question-- which axis is a sensible choice for this problem? So I want you to actually stop here and think about this. What are sensible options? If you want to get an eigenvalue with the z-axis, you have to start with the x-axis. That's the obvious choice. But it's not the only one. It's the one that's most likely to work. physical state of particles, which axis are the right ones to choose-- or, sensible? There's no right and wrong in this discussion. Let me motivate this. If you look at the orbital momentum of a particle, that's given by r cross p, where p is the momentum vector of the particle. That's where the question is: Which axis is the right one for you to choose? If you want to find out, you can go to http://www.sciencemag.org/news/features/2013/01/29/the-physical-state-of- particles-which-axis-are-the-right-one-for-you-to- choose. particle. So now, if you're looking at the total momentum, we have to look add the angular momentum and the spin of the particle together. So as shown in this picture here, you see that the parallel component-- the component in parallel to the slide direction-- is 0 by definition, and that's the spin component. The total momentum of a particle is the sum of the spin and angular momentum of the two components, and it's called the momentum of all the particles together. because the cross-product is defined-- the angular momentum is defined as a cross- product with the momentum. So you find that the total momentum perpendicular is the spin. So this is a nice choice of coordinate system or of axis-- namely, that is the choice of the momentum of the particle. It's a nice way to look at the universe, to see how the universe is shaped by the spin of a particle. That's a very nice way of looking at it, to be honest with you. of the particle perpendicular, and the transverse component is its angular momentum. This, then, immediately gets us to a new definition, then of helicity. You can define the helicity of a particle as the spin of the particle in the transversal direction. This can be used to calculate the angular momentum, orbital angular momentum and spin of a given particle. For example, helicity can be defined as thespin of a particle in the transversal direction. the particle dotted with the momentum of the particle, and then normalized by the momentum. So basically, for a fermion, which has a spin 1/2, you get plus 1/1 if the spin points in the momentum direction and minus 1/3 if it points the opposite direction. So now, if. if the particle is dotted with. the momentum, and the momentum is normalized by. the particle’s spin, you can see that the particle has a. spin of 1.2. you go back to our particle here, off by here, decaying into an electron and a positron, spin is at 1/2, but you find that an electron is a left-handed particle, so its helicity will point in this direction. And for the positron-- sorry-- for thepositron, it points in. For the electron, the helicity points in the opposite direction, in the direction of the electron's spin, which is at 2/2. the same connection. So the pion here is spin 0, and if you discuss this in the rest frame of the. pion, the electron and the positron fly off in opposite directions, which means that the spin doesn't in align to 0. So that's why this is highly suppressed. It's the same connection as the one in the heart of the human body. The pion has a spin of 0 and the electron has aspin of 1, so the same thing happens in both cases. not 0, because you can find-- you can put [INAUDIBLE] into the rest frame, where you're just basically looking at both particles from one side that was coming to you, and in that case, it's allowed. But the spintronic configuration is highly [INAudIBLE].. But that's not what we're doing here. We're trying to get the most out of the device, and that's what's going to happen in the future. We'll let you know when we know.