We also talked about axioms. Assumption you can say axiom assuptions, or you can says also properties that is this technology that we talking about satisfies. And I am going to talk about only few of them there. Now, we will have little recap here, we also talkedabout axiom assuption, or we can say also properties of this technology. And we will be talking about only a few of those there. We will be back in a few days. are modes. So, one we said free disposal, what does it mean that throwing away inputs is cost less, you can dispose of inputs without spending any resources fine, or in other word if certain amount of output can be produced by given amount of inputs given. We are happy to clarify that free disposal does not mean that you can throw away all your inputs at once, it just means that you don't have to dispose of them in the first place. We would love to hear from you about how you dispose of your inputs. amount of you can say combination of inputs, then the same combination of input puts can also be used to produce less amount of output. In other word if I say that you know we talk about production function when we have only 1 input and only 1 output and then we have 1 output. Then we have to think about how we can produce the same amount of input and output. We can think about this in terms of a production function. For example, we can say that we want to produce 1 output, and 1 input, but we want 1 output as well. We need only milk to produce curd. 1 kg of milk can be used to produce only 250 grams of curd, for example. If we say that.we say that 1 kg can produce can't produce more than half a kg ofCurd, then we are talking about a very small amount of milk. We need 1 kg to produce half a kilo of Curd, which is 250 grams. This means that we need 1kg of milk to make half akg of CurD. So, here what we are talking about is the free disposal that some of the input can be thrown out costlessly. Think about it, why we're talking about it because we aretalking about all the feasible combination of inputs and outputs. That is all we can do. That's what we're trying to do. We're not trying to throw anything away, we're just trying to get rid of some of it. And that's what free disposal is about. We want to make sure that we get the most out of our resources. way I am describing it in particular fashion. So, if it is feasible to produce half kg of curd from 1 kg of milk, then it is possible to produce 250 grams of curds from 1kg of milk. So the key word is feasibility technology represents the feasibilities that can be achieved. So if it's feasible to make half kg curd out of 1 kg milk, it's possible to make 250 grams out of one kg. That's the way I'm describing it. the combination of inputs and outputs, that can be achieved in this world even the current level of technology fine so that is free disposal. The second is no free lunch. And this is quite famous term that we use in economics again and again at no free breakfast or lunch. The third is that there is no such thing as a free lunch in the world of technology. The fourth is that we have to work together to achieve our goals. The fifth is that it is not possible to achieve all our goals at the same time. what does it mean here, but at least 1 input is required to produce some output, or more than you know more than 1 kind of output. So, at least1 input has to be there, you cannot produce something out of thin air. You cannot consume something like, one. You can't produce something like that. You have to have at least one input to produce an output. This means that you have to be able to do more than one thing at a time, or you will not get the result you want. example would be in the harry potter world, if we have watched harryPotter movies, then harry Potter cannot get nice freez, you know just from the thin air. If you have read Chandrakantha book in hind there, also you know people would create something. Also you know that if not harrypotter if you have reading Chandrakanthas book, then people would make something out of thin air, just like in HarryPotters world. out of nothing that is not possible in the real world. That is what we are talking about no free lunch. Third is non reversibility, what it means is that a production process cannot be reversed. So, if you obtain half kg of curd from 1 kg of milk, you can't get it all in one go. That's what we're talking about here. We're not talking about a free lunch, that's not what we mean by it. We mean that there's no way of getting it all at once. you cannot obtain 1 kg of milk from half kg of curd, in this example if quite clear, but you can say that let us say if 1 kg. of steel is use to create 1kg of steel nail, then we can melt it and we can get 1. kg of steel nails. You can also get 1 kg milk from 1 kg curd. If 1 kg steel is used to create a 1 kg nail, you can get a 1.kg steel nail from 1.1 kg steel. kg of steel, but the point here is that to get 1. kg of nail from 1 kg of steel,. you have used certain amount of labor, certain. amount of energy, you may get the steel back, but you would not get that energy consumed in the process energy spent. To get 1kg of nail. from 1.kg of Steel, you have using certain amount. of labor,. certain amount Of energy, You may get steel back. But you would never get that. energy consumed. in the process and labor hours spent in the process back. So, in that sense all the production and processes are irreversible. And if you are familiar with the thermodynamics principle, if we have reversibility in the production process, then it would violate the laws of thermodynamics. Basically it is a violation of the law of thermodynamic theory, which says that there is no such thing as a reversible process in the world of production. It is a contradiction in terms. It's like saying that the universe is made of atoms and molecules. related to entropy, if you are not familiar with this term forget about it, but you should just remember that a production process cannot be reversed fine ok. Next is convexity ok, but before we talk about conveXity we are going to talk about additivity that we talked about earlier. We will talk about this in the next section of the article. The next section is the section on the production process. The production process can be reversed, but it can't be reversed in the same way. and divisibility fine what is additivity. Let us say that for example, 1 kg nail that we are talking about, it needs labor and cap labor and snail only two things just keep it simple. So, let us say to 1kg nail, there are no other things required. And that is what we are going to talk about today. We will talk about how to measure the weight of a nail. And we will also talk about what it means to have a nail in your hand. get 1kg of nail we need 1 kg of probably this is not very good example, let me change it. Let us say to write a software code 1 software code of course, we will have to define what do we mean by 1Software code, but let us do that now. We need 1SoftwareCode to write one software code. This is a very simple example of how to write 1 SoftwareCode. We will use this example to show how we can use different software code to write different software. say that there is such a definition it requires either 2 man hour, and this is also not a good example, let me think of something else. To produce 1 kg of rice ok, you need either let us say 100 grams of fertilizer. Let us say I am writing 100. Let's say we are talking about 1kg of rice. We need either 2 men an hour or 1 man an hour to produce that amount of rice, or we need to use a fertilizer that is 100 grams. grams of fertilizer as 1 and, 50 liters of water that I am writing as 2 let us say I can say 100 grams of fertilizer is 1 and 25 liter of water is 1 fine, same 1 kg of rice can be produced by 200 grams of a using 200 gram of fertilizer. So, 2 and 25 liter of water of course, we need land, but that is fixed those are fixed, we are not talking about it only these 2 are variables. So Student: Should not, has be 2 like 1kg of rice gives 1 and 2. No not give this is 1 kg of price is output. Student: And the single digit in there. So, what I am saying here let me write it in this term this is 100 grams and this is 50 liter and, here it is 200 grams and 25 liter. And, here, it's 100 grams, 50 liter, 200 grams, 25 liter, 100 grams. And that's what we are talking about. That's the price of a kilo. That is what we're talking about here. that is what I am using 1 comma 2 and 2 comma 1, fine what additivity says that if these 2 are true, then 1 kg of rice can be produced using any linear combination of these two. Let us say let me write we have already learned how to make rice. That is what we are going to do here. We will use 1 comma 1 and 2 commas 1 to make 1 kg. That's what we're going to use for rice. We'll use the same method to make a kilo of rice. write the linear combination of 2 points in this is space where t is of course, between 0 and 1 why we are saying it let us take 1 approach here. Now, we have figured out that 1 kg of rice can be used can be produced from. We can use this to produce 1kg of rice from a single kilo of rice. This is the same amount of rice that can be made from one kg of wheat. We then use the same method to make a kg of barley. 1 comma 2 and 1 kg of rice can be produced 2 comma and 1. And we need to produce let us Say 100 kgs of rice, what can we do 1 way to do it is that we repeat this process 100 times. So, 100 multiplied by 1 comma 2. Another way is to repeat the second process100 times. Fine we will get the 100 kg's of rice. Also what we can do that we do the 50 times this process the first process and 50 times the second. 100 that we can take, we can say t times we take first process and 100 minus t timeswe take the second process, we will get the 100 kg own way. So, on average we are saying this is what it is not always true, but I am saying it is what we are doing. We are trying to make sure we get the most out of the process we can. We want to get the best we can from the process. We don't want to end up with something that is not good enough. on average, what we can do is that we can produce 1 kg of rice here, using t by 100 and 1 minus t by100, 2 comma 1. And we can define this t as we can say that instead of using t here let us use t dash, this is t dash. So, now I can define the t dash by 100 is equal to t. 1kg of rice can be produced by t 1 comma 2 plus 1minus t 2 comma1, and this is what additivity is if this. is possible, then we say that technology exhibits additivity. Another related, but it may sound different let us say, if it is technologically feasible to produce let us says y amount of output. And it is also technologically possible to produce y 1 amount ofOutput, then y plus y is also possible. If it is possible to production y and produce y plus 1, then that is technology exhibiting additivity, and that is what we mean by technology exhibitingAdditivity. If we say technology exhibitsAdditivity, then technology exhibits Additivity. And if we say it is Possible to Produce y and Produce 1 Amount of output, then this is Technology exhibiting Additivity, too. dash amount of output is technologically feasible, I have made small mistake, mistake that explain convexity rather than additivity. Let us talk about additivity first. What is additivity? Let us say that a production plan is let us talk in sense of first production set. This is example of conveXity; let us Talk about Additivity First. We are going to talk about the difference between additivity and convexness. We will talk about this in the next section of the article. if there is a production plan y what does it mean? It means that it gives certain combination of input and output that is feasible. Not just this y does not represent just amount of output. If you want to distinguish you can say y hat to represent that, say y to represent the amount of work that can be done in a given time period. If there is no production plan, it means there is not enough work to be done at that time. This is a way of saying that there is too much work to do in that period. this is a raptor or this is a combination of input and output and, there is another production plan y dash ok. So, y bar and y bar dash both are feasible, then what additivity says that y bar plus y bar hat is also feasible, is it clear. How do we get to that point? It's not clear how to get to the point where it's clear, but it's possible. It's possible that we can get to a point where we know how to do it. we can explain it if it's possible to produce it is possible to have this production plan. Let us say let us take an example y bar is nothing, but 1 2 minus 1 minus 2 comma 1 what it means, that we are using 1 unit of input 1 and 2 units of input 2 and we are getting 1 units of output. Now y bar hat is let say two comma 1, then what it mean here is that here now we areusing 2 units. of input one one unit of output 2 and it leads. to it gives us 1 unit of output. Then this is also technologically possible, that we use 3 units of both the inputs 1 and 2. And what is the logic why we are saying it? Because if it is possible to produce 1 unit. of output using, this particular combination of input and then again it is feasible to produce. 1 units of output by using this new combination, then of course we do these process once 1 by 1 and we will get 2 units of. output. process we will use 3 units of both the inputs. So, again we are talking about feasibility, we are againtalking about feasibility fine, in other word now let us come to divisibility. What isdivisibility? If y bar is feasible production plan if y bar  is a feasible production. If ybar is a futile production plan then y bar will be produced. If it is not feasible then it will not be produced at all. So we are talking about feasibility fine. We are again talking about divisibilities. plan, it means let us say this take one example, minus 1 minus 2 and 1 if this is a feasible production plan, then Lambda y bar is also a feasibleproduction plan. Let means what we can do where Lambda is of course, between 0 and 1 what it is. If it is between 1 and 2, then it is a possible production plan. For example, if it is 1 plus 2, it is possible to make a production plan of 2 plus 2. For the rest of the article, we'll be looking at how we can make production plans with Lambda. means is that we can use minus let us say lambda is equal to half, then we can used minus half. So, what we are saying is that a minus is half unit of output. We can also use minus 1 unit of input 1 to get half of output 1. This means that we are using half of the number of units of input we have. We are now at the end of the first section of this article. We will now move on to the second section of the article. production process can be miniaturized ok, a production process can't be synched fine at this level it sounds very you know it may not be possible sometime, but if we are talking about really large scale, then what we are saying that if we decrease all the inputs in the.production process, then it can be done on a large scale. It's a very complex process, but we can do it on a very large scale if we reduce the number of inputs in it. same proportion, then output will also decrease in the same proportion and this is possible this is feasible fine. It is clear ok. The easier is easier way easier although they these two are not same, but the similar 1 implies the other, but not the other way around, what is the difference? I don't know, it's just easier to say 'it's easier to do it this way' than it is to say "it's harder to do this way". I'm not sure what the difference is. we have is we can say it input combination x of course, if we are talking about input combination then we do not need to put negative sign its automatically we can saying, all are negative because all are input. If this is the input combination and it is feasible then it is possible to say it is a negative combination. If it is not feasible then we say, it is an input combination that is negative because it is negative. We can then say, all of these are negative, because they are all input. to combine them, in this way and get some output, then also it is also possible to combine lambda x 1 to lambda x 2 of course, here we are not talking about the amount of output, but here we're not concerned about the amounts of output. What we are concerned about is what we get out of the process, and that's what we want to do. We want to create a function that can be used to combine two different types of Lambdas. For example, we can use the following code to combine the two types: are concerned about it whether it is feasible to combine the inputs in such a manner or not ok. When it is possible then we say that technology exhibits divisibility. Now we combine these 2 both, if both of them both are possible then it is fine. If both of these both are not possible, then we don't need to combine them at all. This is the definition of 'divisibility' and 'production set or technology is divisability in each other fine' These properties are satisfied, then we say the technology is convex and what it means. So, let us look at it. . What it means? We have taken example where 1 unit of output can be produced using 1 units of input 1 and 2 unit of input 2. And similarly what we have discussed that this is also feasible. Then convexity says that there let us say this is y bar and y bar is a bar and this is an output bar and so on. this is y bar dash, then or in other word if it is possible then y bar is an element in the production set, I am just rewriting it and production set we denoted by capital y fine sorry, this will be these both are feasible production plan that is. This will be both the possible and the feasible production plans that are possible to make. This is the feasible and feasible version of the production plan. It is not the feasible or feasible version that is possible. It's just the feasible version. It doesn't mean it's not possible. what I am saying, that y bar and y bar dash are feasible production plan. So, then what it means further if it exhibits convexity then t ybar and 1 minus t y bardash is also feasible and, how we can do it, what is the logic, we need to know. We need to find out how to do it and how to make it happen. We want to make this a reality. We are going to do this. We will make this happen. It is a very exciting time for us. can say let us say we take that 1 unit of output can be produced choosing 1 units of output 1 and 2 units of input 2. So, 100 units we can produce by replicating this process 100 times. What we are using basically 150 units of both the input. And again 50 times we will use the second process. If we add these 2 up we will get 100 units ofOutput ok. And if we use the 100 units and the 50 times process 1 and 50 times the process 2 we get 50 units. and what is happening there, we can say 100 units of output we can obtain using t not 1 comma 2 plus 100 minus t not 2 comma 1 and this is where additivity kicks in, we are able to add these to up. Now we will use the divisibility property, we will say that on average if we are using you know 100 times like this on average, we want to produce 1 kg. Then what will happened if we divide it by 100, what we get t not by 100. 1 minus t not by 100 2 comma 1. And this will give us 1 kg or 1 unit of output. And if we define this t not. by 100 using say that t not By 100 rather than using 100, we say it is t. 1. So, basically t 1. 1 minus t Not By 100 is t, which is 1 kg. And we can use this to get 1 kg per unit ofOutput. This gives us a unit of Output of 1 kg, or 1 Unit of Output. This is the same as 1 kg/1 unit of input. comma 2 1 minus t 2 comma 1 will give us again 1 unit of output. So, what we are saying basically that ok, we start with y bar and y bar dash then if these 2 are feasible, then t y bar plus t ybar dash is also feasible. We start with the word "y" and end with "t" and "y bar" This is a way of saying that if y is a bar and t is a dash then t is also a dash. We then say that if t is t and y is y, t y is t y. feasible here, y is taking care of not only inputs but also output. The combination is all given here and this exhibits convexity. This is a simple example of how to make a complex shape. The shape can be any shape at any time. It can be either a shape or a shape-shift shape. It is possible to combine two shapes to create a shape that looks like a shape shape. For example, the shape could look like the shape of a circle or a circle.