ae houseman 998-999 uh very intellectual individual um with these two authors today um we're really kind of bridging the gap between the victorian and the modern. We're really transitioning and that's why these are the last authors that we'll focus on in this time period. Some of their philosophy some of their ideas. We'll be focusing on some of the ideas that they had in the time period that we're in. We hope you'll join us for the final episode of the series. some of the writing styles and things that motivated them you know kind of bridge bridge those gaps between the uh the evolution of writing and so on. He's a very very smart intellectual man um you know reading here about him it's not necessarily significant for the course but just kind of Bridge Bridge those gaps. He is a very, very smart man. He has a great sense of humor. He loves to write. He likes to write about his life. He writes about his family and his friends. He also loves to travel. to you know the way that a poet's mind works or writer's mind. The more we know about it the more we can understand and hopefully appreciate their work a little bit. In finer detail um you know his studies of greek and latin for the most part were. His studies of  greece and latin for the most part were. He was very interested in the history of Greece and  latin. He also was interested in  the history of the Roman world. self-taught um even after he you know it said his nervous breakdown and he went back the next year and finished his schooling but not with honors you know with a lesser degree um but he continued on his own time to go and study these classics and in studying. He went back to school and continued to study. He was able to complete his degree. He continued to do so even after his breakdown. He did not finish his schooling with honors. He finished his school with a less degree. These classics you know he got better and better and more refined and more educated and eventually that's where his job took him. Most of his poetry especially towards the beginning of his career was written towards the end of his life. He wrote about his time at different colleges and heads of departments and things like that. He also wrote about being a father and being a husband and all the things that come with that kind of thing. He's written about his life and his family and all of those things. end if you look on the right there the grief and poetry era you know especially the last of his poetry uh you know dealt with you know a lot of the pain that he struggled with growing up. "The death of his mother was pretty traumatic um," he said. "And so he dealt with that in his poetry," he added. "He dealt with it in a way that was very unique to him," the poet said of his work. "It was very personal and very personal" if you've noticed you know some of the you know most famous musicians you know a lot of their work comes from some of their pain and torment and struggle that they've had throughout their lives. You almost wonder would they be able to have obtained that enlightenment without some of that pain and struggle. If you know any of these people, please email them at: lucy.smith@mailonline.co.uk. For more information, visit www.loucysmith.com. suffering that pain so can truly anybody be rock star do you really have to be a troubled you know childhood or something i mean it's just something that people debate uh here and there but with houseman he can tap into that pain and that darkness um and that and that is what makes him so great. "Houseman" is out now on Blu-ray and DVD, available now on iTunes and Amazon.com. For more information on Houseman, visit www.houseman.co.uk. loss and help you know uh um hopefully other people and and help spread emotion through and through um to an athlete dying young on page 1000 for us. There's an article that i'm going to have you take a look at later uh it might even be active already some of you may have read it you know you hear a lot of this uh you know young students dying young you know how tragic it was and and and things of that nature um and this is to an athletes diane is the. main focus um look at what he says about that individual and how they you know can celebrate and reflect on that individual. Just follow along it's a short one to an athlete dying young by a e houseman the time you won your town the race we cheered. Main focus is on what the athlete says about himself and how people can celebrate him or her. Follow along for the rest of the show. Back to Mail Online home. Back into the page you came from. Back up to the page where you come from. you through the marketplace man and boy stood cheering by and home we brought you shoulder high today the road all runners come shoulder high we bring you home and set you at your threshold down townsmen of a stiller town smart lad to slip be times away from fields. You can buy a copy of the book on Amazon.com for £7.99. For more information on the book, visit www.amazon.co.uk/The-Book-Of-The-Running-Lad or click here. where glory does not stay and early though the laurel grows it withers quicker than the rose eyes the shady knight has shut cannot see the record cut and silence sounds no worse than cheers after earth has stopped the ears. Now you will not swell the route of lads now you won't swell the road of the lads. You will have to go your own way. You can't go with the flow. You have to follow your own path. You must go your way. that wore their honors out runners whom renown outran and the name died before the man so set before its echoes fade. That is the still defended challenge cup and round that early laureled head will flock. The name of the man who won the challenge cup will never be known as the one who won it. The winner of the cup will always be remembered as one of the greatest runners of all time. He will be remembered for his bravery and determination to win the cup in the final moments of his life. to gaze the strengthless dead and find unwithered on its curls the garland briefer than a girl's okay this one is an example of the literal element a lyric poem um as we were listening to it we kind of really sensed you know a flow a melody kind of a kind of. kind of way this one goes. It's a little bit of a poem, but it's more of a lyrical poem. It has a lot of lyrical elements to it. It also has a bit of melody in it. um you know a nice little song to some degree um there was a good flow a good meter and all of that um you know from the first stanza the time you won they're reminiscing of remember that time that we you know carried you chaired you lifted you. um there's a good rhythm to it and it's just a nice song to listen to. It's a little bit of a fun song to sing along to, you know. I love it. It was fun. I loved it. up in celebration of whatever uh a compliment accomplishment you had oh that was wonderful and then the second stance is well we're doing this now today the road all runners come we're not talking about a race okay we're carrying you now shoulder high what does that mean coffin in a casket we're coming down the road that all runner come down death everybody comes okay um and so it's kind of nice to see how well we i we remember and we can reflect on how we carried you in victory and now we're carried you you know. and and it's sad we're carrying you like everybody else um all of the other uh you know descriptions in the in the following stanzas about you know dying before the man. The last line at 24 they're the the the still defended. And uh the last line in the last stanza at 24 is that they are the still defending. and and it is sad we are carrying you, the last lines at 24 are that we are still carrying you. and uh the final line is that it is still defended by the people. and the people are still defending you. challenge cup and we're going to remember you and and that your hair and the stuff in your hair what do they call it the uh and around that early laurel head will flock to gaze the strengthless dead and find unwithered on its curls the garland briefer briefer than briefer. "The garland will be briefer and briefer" is the phrase used to describe the hair of the dead. "It will be a garland that the dead will gaze on" is a quote from Shakespeare. a girl's um so we will remember you as this champion as this victor if you look at old um uh old uh olympics pictures and such you know it was a crown of victory a you know little little head thing that they would wear besides you know the head thing. A girl's head thing was a little crown that they'd wear besides their head thing, you know, to represent them as a victor. It was a girl's. A little crown was a symbol of victory, a little symbol of triumph. medals and such um and so they would come and remember you we would come to think about this we will come and look at those as if they were curly as so much stuff on it. So it's a piece that's a part of their history and so it's something that's very special to them and they remember it very fondly and so do the people who worked with them. It's a very special piece of history and it's so special to the people that worked with it. uh you know to an athlete young you already know what it's kind of about um but really in essence the main thing is the reflection of the past and and kind of sad but written in a lyrical kind of way it's still kind of melodious and semi-enjoyable okay. "It's just a reflection of what's happened in the past," he says. "I just want to be able to look back and see what I've done in my life and try to do the best I can" i was 1 in 20 by a.e housman when i was 1 and 20. i heard a wise man say give crowns and pounds and guineas but not your your. i was 21 when I was 21 and i was one in 20. so when i'm 21 and I'm 20, i'm 1 in 1,000,000. i'm not sure if that's possible when you're one and 20, but i'm going to try. i'll post the next one as soon as i'm 20 and I can. heart away give pearls away and rubies but keep your fancy free but i was one in twenty no use to talk to me when i wasone in twenty. i heard him say again the heart out of the bosom was never given in vain just paid with size. Heart away give Pearls Away and Rubies butKeep Your fancy free. Heart out of The bosom is published by Simon & Schuster at £16.99. For more information, visit www.simonandschuster.co.uk. aplenty and sold for endless rue and i am two and twenty and oh tis truth is true okay the first few lines when i was 1 and 20 i heard a wise man say give crowns and pounds and guineas but don't give your way so don'tgive your way. i am 2 and 20 and i'm two and 20. i'm 2 and20 and i've sold plenty and sold plenty of rue. I've sold enough rue to last me a lifetime. hard way don't fall in love you can spend money on them you can give them all this stuff but what ultimately don't you want to give them at this age don't give them your heart. okay but i in the blue i was 1 and 20 and no use. i was just a kid but i was in love. I was in a relationship with a boy. He was my boyfriend. We were together for 20 years. We had a great relationship. We are still together. I love him. to talk to me i'm not hearing it i'm 21 i know what's best right you guys have all experienced that your folks you know at this age until you do something you're like no way I'm not going to do that. i knowwhat's best i know how to do it. I know what i'm doing. I'm 21. I can do what I want to do. You know what I'm doing it for. You guys know what you're doing for me. I'll do it for you. doing you're not listening to the wise man or wise woman in that case okay um and that's he even noticed this and you look at because this is really told this poem is told uh from kind of a past tense okay because you see at the very end of the poem. Do you know what I'm talking about? I'm trying to get you to look at this poem in a different way. I want you to see it in a new way. It's like a different kind of way. he goes ah but now i'm was it two and twenty the last couple lines and i am two and 20 and oh tis truth is true. So within that year from 21 to 22 what did he give away his heart he didn't listen to the wise man that that was true. He didn't listening to thewise man that wastrue. He went out and got drunk. He got drunk and got high. He was drunk and high. And he got drunk again. And then he went out with a girl. he had heard mention that okay so now he is crushed okay he's been defeated to some degree because when i was 1 and 20 i heard him say again all the heart out of the bosom was never given in vain to paid with size of plenty and sold. He had been defeated. He was crushed. He's been crushed. he had been beaten. He'd been defeated, he'd been crushed, and he was going to die. He would have died if he hadn't been sold. for endless rue sorrow remorse in the footnote there okay so giving it out okay it's you're going to be getting some pain and you're opening yourself up uh for a lot of sorrow and remorse and he gets struggled so you can see this kind of as the lover's. For endless r Rue sorrow remorse, read "Rue Sorrows" by John Green, published by Simon & Schuster, $24.99. To order a copy of the book, call the U.S. Mail Bookshop on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local branch or click here. lament which we haven't really done much of since uh since the sonnets when we talked about unrequited love and remember how it seemed like all the guys were loving after the girls but they weren't getting any attention or affection directed back at them. So we see houseman and he's like, 'I don't know what to do' and so we see him vent and he says 'I can't do anything' and he gets mad at himself. And then he's mad at his girlfriend. And so we're like 'Oh my God, I'm so mad at myself' here in when i was 1 and 20 the kid kind of learns his learns his uh his issues and still 22. that's still pretty young to learn um to learn a life lesson. That's when i learned a lot about myself. That was when I was 1 to 20. I'm 22 now. I've still got a long way to go, but that's a good thing. I still have a lot to learn. I don't think i've learned all of my lessons yet, but I'm getting there.