The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open CourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. So if you are a teacher, you can help by becoming a TA (Teaching Assistant) or a C (Creative Curator) (TA) (C) is a volunteer position that is open to the public. guys don't remember me, I'm one of your TAs. I'm TA number three, that's what I call myself. And I'll be teaching your lesson today because, well, Mike's in Russia. So, yeah. Yeah, so I know you guys had your first exam a couple of days ago. How do you do? I'm Ka-Yen. I'll tell you how I did it. How did you do it? I'll show you. "We just want to give you guys a break. So today, I'll be teaching you a little bit about nuclear energy," he says. "So this lesson won't be about the nuclear power plant," he adds. "We won't talk about it. OK, sounds good. All right, so we won'ttalk about it." "Did that go?" he asks. "Yes, it did," he replies. "All right, we'll talk about that later." "So, we're going to talk about nuclear power," the teacher says. be super in-depth. There won't be a lot of crazy intense math. You guys are going to be starting up full cycle on Friday with really cool topics like stopping power. So we just want to give you guys a break. We'll be back next week with a new set of questions. We're looking forward to hearing from you. We hope you'll join us for the next few weeks. We've got a lot more to talk about on the next set of episodes. for now, we're just kind of like-- it's a refresher. A couple guys might already know some of the concepts that I'm mentioning, because you guys are intelligent people. But I walked into MIT not knowing a single thing about nuclear energy. I was like, "What is nuclear energy?" And they said, "Well, it's basically a form of energy storage." And I'm like, 'What?' And they say, "Yeah, that's right. That's what nuclear energy is." I wish someone could have told me these things. So that's what I want to do for you today, OK? So I'm going to be talking about the functionality and the benefits and the problems associated with nuclear. But first let's start with a very brief history in a nutshell. So I'll be talking to you about the history of nuclear power in the U.S. and around the world. And then I'll talk about some of the issues that we face today with nuclear power. between 1895 to 1945, that's really cool people were developing nuclear science. So people like Madam Curie or like Fermi, et cetera. They were all designing this nuclear science, like they were developing it, which is pretty cool. Most of this development happened between 1939 and 1945. Does anyone want a copy of this book? If so, please send it to me at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk and I'll post a copy. to take a gander as to why? What? AUDIENCE: Manhattan Project? TA: Yeah, exactly. But what field of the Manhattan Project was it? AUDience: Nuclear weapons. TA: World War two was happening during those times, and they were trying to develop the atom bomb, which is why they were working on it. Yeah. So World War Two was happening in the 1940s and 1950s, and this was all part of it. It was part of the effort to get ready for it. the majority of nuclear science was developed between these like five or six years. Then 1945 to 1960. They've entered a phase of like, well, the war is over. Now what do we do with ourselves? So luckily we decided to redirect this science into using it for energy and that's what we're doing now. We're using it to power the country. It's a very, very exciting time for nuclear power. We've got a lot of exciting things ahead of us. harnessing it in a controlled fashion. So mainly the focus was actually for Naval submarines, but they also realize that we can use this for energy as well, for electricity as well. So there's a lot of really cool things that happened in between these years. So in 1951, the first nuclear reactor was built in San Diego, California. In 1953, the world's first nuclear power station was completed in San Francisco. In 1958, the U.S. became the first nation to build a nuclear power plant. The first nuclear reactor to produce electricity was the experimental breeder reactor, the EDR1. It was created by Argonne National Labs, which is in Idaho. And they actually still exist. So if you want to go work there this summer, you can go to Argonne and work in one of the reactors. It will be open until the end of the summer, but you can apply for a job right now. It's open until August 31, and it will be full-time. you totally can. And then in 1953, President Eisenhower, he created something called atoms for peace. So this is just a program that advocated using nuclear for things that were peaceful, such as electricity instead of nuclear weapons and stuff. Also 1953 was the creation of Mark 1. So Mark 1 was the name of the program that was created to promote peaceful use of nuclear power in the 1950s and '60s. It was called 'Atoms for Peace' and it was created by President Eisenhower. The first nuclear powered submarine, the USS Nautilus was launched, and is up and running. The first prototype Naval reactor was created in March 1953. And then finally in 1954, the first nuclear-powered submarine was launched. So lots of cool things happened between this time. But the real heyday of nuclear was in the 1950s and '60s when the U.S. Navy began to develop nuclear weapons. The U.N. nuclear reactor was the first of its kind. was actually between 1960 to 1975. During the span of 15 or so years, this was the real commercial energy boom. From 1975 to 2002, which is about this chunk over here, you can see a massive decline. And then today, we're kind of-- I say we're back, but basically we're entering what people like to call a nuclear renaissance. But basically there's been a whole new push for creating more nuclear reactors, and that's a good thing for the U.S. advanced reactors. Currently, China, India, and South Korea, they are the main players in this game. China itself has 32 operate reactors operating at the moment, and have 20 more commissioned, like literally right now, which is kind of insane. So yeah, do you guys have any questions? If so, please post them in the comments below or email them to jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. For confidential support, call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. "The main reason is sustainability. So right now we've entered a phase in time where people are starting to realize that we've done well," he says. "This is the perfect time to talk about why nuclear power's cool," he adds. "It's a great way to make a difference in the world," says the nuclear power expert. "I think we're in a good place right now, and I think it's a good time to start talking about it," adds the nuclear expert. damage to our environment, we've got to fix this. So global warming is a thing. And basically, we're looking for a way to produce electricity without creating such a large carbon footprint. So if you look at this chart over here, you can see how much carbon we're putting into the atmosphere, and how much we're taking out. It's a big deal, and we're trying to fix it, I promise you, it's actually a thing, and it's going to get better. Nuclear creates 75 times less carbon emission than coal does, and 35 times less than natural gas does. So that's the main reason why we're going for nuclear. But there's other kinds of energy sources, too, such as wind and solar, that can be more efficient than nuclear. And there's also the possibility of using natural gas in the future, which could be a source of cheap, reliable, clean energy in the long term. But that's a long way off, so we'll have to see. really good reasons. One is the amounts of power output. You guys actually calculated this yourself in pset 1. You know just how much power or energy comes out from one fission reaction. So just so you guys can double check that you got that statistic right in your pset, I'll put it in here again so you can double-check that you've got it right. I'll also put in the amount of power that comes out of a nuclear reaction. I'm going to put that in here too, just so we know that we're talking about the same thing. it turns out that you get 3.5 million times more energy than burning one kilogram of coal does. So you can see that you definitely need a lot less fuel in a nuclear reactor than you do in a normal coal burning reactor. And then finally, you get a lot of energy from the water that is pumped into the reactor. You can see the rest of the video in the video player below. Click here to watch the full video on CNN.com. Back to the page you came from. the last thing would be energy security. So one of the good things about nuclear is that it can serve as a good baseload source of energy. So if you're working in the energy sector you probably see this chart all the time of like time versus like energy that's nuclear. So that's a good thing to have in a country like the U.S. that has a nuclear power station. That's a very good thing for energy security, and it's also good for the economy. being consumed. And it's kind of like this fluctuating little mass that stays fairly constant, but at certain times of the day you need more energy than usual. So this is just the energy demand during the day. That's what this chart kind of crudely depicts. So nuclear power is nuclear power, and it's like a fluctuating mass, but it's not like a constant mass. It's like an energy demand that's fluctuating, but isn't like a fixed mass. able to provide a good baseload source. That means it can provide conserve energy at a really high level all the time. So this is why we kind of want to replace coal and natural gas with nuclear, because it can take this role. Other alternative forms of energy might not work as well. But nuclear can be a good alternative, and it can be used to save energy at the same time as other forms of power. That's why we want to use nuclear energy in the future. be better for the environment, it might be safer, and things like that, but it's not really able to do this. So for example, if you wanted to replace all the coal burning fire plants with solar panels, if it was not sunny that day, you're kind of out of luck, he says. "It's not possible to do that," he adds. "You're not going to be able to replace coal with solar if you're not in the right weather conditions" You can't produce energy if it's not sunny outside. Similar for wind. If it is not windy outside, you're not getting any electricity. Luckily for nuclear, it doesn't have to rely on any of these factors. You can continuously produce energy. Right? So do you guys have any questions? If so, post them in the comments below or email them to jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. about what I've mentioned? Awesome. So now we'll talk a little bit about reactor types. I'll just tell you guys about some of the main ones and how they work. So how people like to divide up the reactor types is in generations. So generation one, which, is all the all-powerful reactors, is called the nuclear power plant. Generation two, which is all of the non-nuclear power plants, is known as the reactor power station. Generation three, or the nuclear bomb, is the nuclear weapon. It's the most powerful of all the nuclear weapons. way over there, that refers to the trial reactors. These are the ones that didn't really produce all that much electricity at all. They're more proof of concept kind of things, so that would be like the Mark I that I mentioned to you guys earlier. Now we move on to the next phase of the project, which is the second stage of the nuclear power plant. The second stage is the third stage, which will be the fourth stage. This is the final stage, and we'll talk more about that later on. Most US reactors fall into the category of light water reactors. These were developed between the '70s and the '80s-ish. Then we have generation three, three plus, and four. These are the new types of reactors that people are trying to build on to create several improvements, but we'll talk about them a little bit more later. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. The U.S. nuclear industry is still in its infancy, but it's making progress. in the United States. Light water reactors, or LWRs, are mostly broken up into two subcategories: boiling water reactors and pressurized water reactors. BWRs comprise about 21% of the reactors that are located and working in the U.S. So it's a really, really simple mechanism and we can walk through that right now. So over here, this little nubbin right over there, this is the nuclear fuel cycle. So that's what they're doing. the fuel core. So the fuel core is basically just a bunch of rods of uranium, sometimes it's clad in something like zirconium, and there's also control rods to help slow down the process. So this is what the inside of a fuel core looks like, that picture over there. That picture is of a uranium fuel core, and that's what a fuelCore looks like. That's what the fuelCore is. The fuelCore. The Inside of a FuelCore. So uranium undergoes what? AUDIENCE: Fission. TA: Yes, fission. So what gets released during fission? AUDience: Heat.TA: Cool. And? Audience: Neutrons. So those three things are all flying around inside the reactor core at the moment as the uranium. undergoes fission, awesome. So these are the three things that are released during the fission process. These are the heat, the uranium and the neutrons. So the isotopes, we just kind of let them be. Like I don't-- I'm not completely sure what we do with them. The heat obviously goes to create power. We'll talk about that in just a few minutes. We might filter them out, but I think theyjust kind of hang out there. They're there to be used in some way or another, I'm sure, but we don't know what. It's kind of a mystery to me, to be honest. The neutrons come flying around. So those other neutrons can simulate other fissions, and the control rods are there to make sure that there's not too many fissions happening in the fuel core at a certain time. Anyway, going back to the heat, the heat that gets. into the fuel gets.a second. But the neutrons comes flying around, and so those other Neutron Control Rods are there. To make sure there aren't too many neutrons flying around at one time, there are control rods that are put in place. created during these nuclear fissions, that goes and heats up the water. So the water flows through the core and heats it up. It creates steam so the steam goes and spins a turbine. The turbine creates electricity. And it comes from the core of a nuclear reactor. So this is just one loop of water, basically. It's just the water that goes through the nuclear core. It doesn't go into the core, it just goes around the core. And then it goes into the reactor. back and gets recondensed. That's all that happens during a BWR. So a cool thing about the BWR is, because it's so simple, it's also incredibly-- well, not incredibly, but it is the cheapest option out there for creating nuclear power. One of the first nuclear power plants in the U.S. was built in the 1950s. It was the first of its kind in the United States. It's now the second largest nuclear power plant in the world. of the downsides is just that it might not be as energy efficient as it possibly could be. But yeah. Oh, and another downside is that because we have the nuclear, we can't use it for power. But we can use it to heat water. But that's not the same as using it to create power. We can't create power by using it for heat. We have to use it as a source of energy. But it's not as efficient as we'd like it to be. material interacting with the water and-- so this is a coolant pump. This is basically connected to a lake or an ocean or some other source of cold water, and that runs through the primary loop to cool down the water. The water is then recondense it into a liquid that can be pumped into a vehicle. The process is called a "coolant tube" and is used in cars, trucks and other vehicles. It's used to cool the water down and then pump it back into the vehicle. With BWRs there is a higher chance of leaking radioactive material into the environment. So that's one of the downsides of BWR's. Do you know more about the BWR? If so, email jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk or call 0203 615 4157. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Here's the underside of a BWR. I make it sound like it's super simple and like a walk in the park, but this is actually the amount of technology that goes into it. It's not just a set of buttons, it's a whole lot of technology. It can be used for anything from a phone to a car to a prosthetic leg. There are a lot of different ways to use it, and it can be customized to suit your needs. You can get it on Amazon.com for about $200. goes into one of these reactors. Like look at all those wires. I don't even know what they all do. But it's kind of insane. So the next kind of reactor that falls under the light water reactor category is the pressurized water reactors. So PWRs are actually more important than light water reactors, he says. He says they are the future of nuclear power, and they will be used to power the world's energy needs for decades to come, if not centuries. if you will, than BWRs. PWRs comprise about 60% of the reactors the United States. But they are functionally essentially the same, and it's just slightly more complicated. So over here we have our fuel core again, again, and we're talking about the nuclear fuel system. We are talking about nuclear fuel systems. We're not talking about anything else, we're just talking about how we use the fuel system in the U.S., which is very different from other countries. and again all it's doing is heating up water with its fission reactions. But this time this water is pressurized. So does anyone know why you would want to pressurize the water? Yeah? AUDIENCE: So it doesn't boil? TA: Yeah, exactly. So when you increase the pressure, you're also increasing the temperature. And that's what's going on here. It's heating up the water. But it's not boiling. And it's also not going to boil. the boiling point of the water, and that allows you to function at even higher temperatures than if you're working with a BWR, which gives you more energy efficiency. So yeah. It heats up this pressurized water and thisPressurized water goes into a second loop which, again, just heats up water. That turns into steam, that spins a turbine that creates electricity, gets recondensed, et cetera. And that's, Again, all that there really is. You guys will learn all about that in 2005, by the way. the higher efficiency. But also the chance of leaking nuclear material into the violent becomes mitigated. Because you have two separate loops with the nuclear fuel being more isolated from the environment. If there is a breach between the condenser loop and the secondary loop, not a big deal. Nothing is going to happen to the nuclear material. It's just not going to leak into the environment, which is a good thing for the environment and for the safety of the people who live in the area. really bad happens. You'd have to have breaches in both the loops, which is very unlikely to happen. Yeah. So do you guys have any questions about those two? Yeah? AUDIENCE: What's the standard like operating temperature of these kinds of reactors? TA: I'm not completely sure, but if you want to know, you have to go to the nuclear power plant and talk to the people who run it. Yeah, that's what I'm here to help you with. Google it you should be able to find it very easily. OK. So this next picture is, again, just to show you that like I make it sound really simple and like a walk in the park, but it's really not. There's a lot going on. So, this picture over is just a little bit of what it's like to do it. And it's not easy. It's very, very difficult. It takes a long time to do. But it's worth it. here is basically just showing that there are a lot of redundancy systems inside these reactors. Like we don't just have one single primary loop and if it fails, it fails. We actually have four at the same time, and this is just called the n minus two redundancy, something that is called n plus 2 redundancy. It's just called n minus 2 redundancy, and that's what we're trying to achieve here in the reactor. We don't have just one primary loop, we have four primary loops. like that. So the next kind is something much cooler. It's got a heavy water reactor. Actually it's just a little bit cooler. But the main heavy water reactors that everyone can kind of think of on their minds is CANDU, which is the one that's located in Canada. That's the one we're going to be talking about today. We're not going to talk about that today, though. We'll talk about the next one later on this week. We've got a lot more to say about that. So the only difference between heavy water reactors and the light water reactors as I mentioned before is that it uses heavy water instead of light water. Does anyone know what heavy water is? AUDIENCE: Deuterium oxide. TA: Yeah, exactly. So remember-- I'm sorry, this. So it's just deuterium Oxide. It's just heavy water. It doesn't have to be hot. It can be cool. It just has to be cool, and it can't be too hot. Heavy water is just a hydrogen with two atomic particles instead. Heavy water has one proton and one neutron. So the reason why they decide to use heavy water instead of light water is because heavy water has more neutrons than light water. It also has more protons and neutrons, so it is more stable. It is also more stable than normal water, which has fewer neutrons and fewer protons. It's also more hydrating, as it has more water in it. a much lower absorption cross-section than light water does. So what this means is that when neutrons are flying around in the reactor there is a chance of it hitting a fission product and a piece of fissionable material and undergoing fission. But there's also a chance that the water could also undergo fission, as well as the fission products. It's not known if this is the case at the moment, but it could happen in the future if the reactor is cooled down. that surrounds it will absorb that neutron. So if that neutron gets pulled out of the system you're not able to create any more fissions. This is actually kind of a bad thing because the whole point of nuclear reactors is to create heat and fission. So we don't want that neutron to get out of a nuclear reactor. We want it to stay in the nuclear reactor and create more heat. We don't like to lose any of the heat that's created by fission in the first place. those neutrons to be absorbed. You can see, if you look at those statistics, you can see that the absorption cross section of H2 or deuterium is like 0.00052 barns, in comparison to H1, which is 0.332 barns. So I'm bad at math, but I think it's like 600 times more than H1 or H2, and that's a lot of neutrons. That's a big difference. It's a huge difference. less, right? Maybe? Anyway, so you can see why deuterium would be a good option for this. So because it's absorbing less-- because it has a chance of absorbing less neutrons as it undergoes its processes, you're actually able to use a lower enriched uranium, which is really great because it is really good because of the low neutrons it can absorb. It's actually great because you're able to get the same amount of power from the same fuel. that lowers fuel costs. But the main downside of this is that, even though you're lowering your fuel costs, deuterium is really expensive. It's about 1,000 or so dollars per kilogram, which is kind of ridiculous because a kilogram of water is really not much at all, you know? That's the downside of using it. That's why we don't use it as much as we used to. We don't want to use it. We want to get rid of it. So even though you're counteracting the lower fuel costs with higher water cost. Also, because you're using your reactor with lower enriched uranium, you actually have to change out your fuel more often. That fuel gets spent more quickly and I'll describe that in just a second, and therefore you end up paying more for the water that you need to keep the reactor running. That's a trade-off that you have to make, but it's worth it in the long-term. just have to keep replacing it more often than you would for a normal light water reactor. Oh, I forgot to mention, but aside from that, everything else with the heavy water reactors and the PWRs, they're the same mechanisms. And finally we're going to go to the next step in the process, which is to build the first heavy water reactor, which will be called a heavy water nuclear reactor. That will be the first of a series of reactors that will be built over the coming years. move on to breeder reactors. Breeder reactors are essentially the same thing as light water reactors. They were most popular between like the '50s and the '60s-ish in the very beginning of creating nuclear reactors. So what breeder reactor are are are, again, they're essentially theSame thing asLight water reactors I'm going to talk about a little bit about the different types of reactors that can be breeder or non-breeder. I'll be back in a few days with more information. mentioned you guys before. But instead, now there's two little chunks of extra material. So do you guys know what the difference is between fissile, fertile, and fissionable material is? Cool. All right, so all right, let's start with fissiles material. Fissile material is basically just the material that is not fertile or fissionably. So fissiled material is just the Material that Is Not Fertile or Fissionable. It's not the Material That Is fertile or Fertilized. is willing to undergo fission with a thermal neutron. So basically when the thermal neutron gets absorbed by this fissionable material, it's going to undergo a fission. Makes a lot of sense, right? So do you guys happen to remember what the energy of a thermal neutrino is? You can find out more on CNN.com/Heroes by clicking through the gallery below for a look at some of the most memorable moments in the history of the human body and beyond. guys calculated this in pset 1. Huh? AUDIENCE: 1 eV? TA: Lower than that. Like super low energy. And while we're at it, how do you calculate this? Bozeman constant times T. Cool? Whew. So main examples of fissile material would be U235 and U235. And the answer is 0.025 eV, which is the same as the energy of a single atom. Whew, that's a lot. plutonium 239. There's four in total, but those are the two most important ones. OK. So this is the main fuel that is inside a nuclear reactor, but it's not all just U235. Like you guys have heard of-- oh, shoot, what's it called? Enrichment, right? Enriched uranium is basically the same thing as plutonium 239. It's the fuel that's used to make nuclear weapons and other nuclear weapons. The U.S. government says it has no plans to change its policy on enriched uranium. amount of fissile material versus the amount of other fissionable material. So that's all it is. So an example of a fissionary material is a uranium-235 bomb. It is a bomb that is able to undergo fission after the absorption of a more energetic neutron. That's what fission is. It's a process that takes place when a neutron is absorbed by a nucleus. It takes place in the nucleus of a nuclear reactor. It occurs when a nucleus absorbs a neutron that is energetic. fissionable material that's inside the other reactors at the same time is U238. So if a U238 absorbs a thermal neutron, it's not going to do much. But if it absorbs a neutron of about like, I would say, like 2 meV, then it's more willing to undergo fission. Cool? It's not cool. It's very, very good. It means we can do what we want to do with our nuclear weapons. We can make them more efficient. And finally we have fertile material. So fertile material is the basis for breeder reactors. Fertile material is just material that absorbs a neutron and then is able to become a piece of fissile material. For our purposes, the main types of fertile material we use are U238. So for our purposes,. we use U238 to make our nuclear fuel. We also use material that can absorb a neutron to make a neutron beam. We use this material to make the fuel for our nuclear reactors. and thorium 232. U238 absorbs a neutron, becomes U239, undergoes a beta decay to come neptunium and undergoes one morebeta decay to become the beautiful plutonium 239. If we start with thorium. 232 instead, becomes thorium 233, becomes protactinium, becomes uranium. 233, which is another fissile material by the way, through a series of beta decays. Cool? So that's what breeder reactors are doing. They're adding extra chunks of uranium 238 andextra chunks of thorium232 into the reactor. If one of the neutrons-- so imagine-- if you're looking at the little fuel core, there's a bunch of neutrons that are flying around and heat and other isotopes and things like that. So some of those neutrons will go and create other fissions with the material that's hanging out. So that's what we're trying to do with the fuel core in the nuclear reactor. It's a very complex process, but we're getting close to the end of it. Other neutrons might escape, and when they escape, instead of going into the water dissipating and never to be seen again or being reflected, they instead create more fissile material. So you can understand why this is a kind of an attractive idea, is that you're not in the red. You're in the blue. You are in the green. You can see the difference between the two. It's a very exciting time for us. We're looking forward to seeing what happens next. creating your own fuel. You're able to work at a higher fuel efficiency because you don't need to add in as much fissile materials as you would for a normal light water reactor. So people were really fascinated with this idea, like I said, in the 50s and 60s. Because it was a new way to make fuel. It was a very exciting time for people in the U.S. in the '50s and '60s. It's still a very interesting time today. back in the day they legitimately thought that we would run out of U235. But luckily in the 60s we discovered that we have a lot more uranium ore than we thought we did. We're probably not going to run out anytime soon. And after that discovery, people were not worried about running out of uranium ore. It was a huge discovery for the U.S. and for the rest of the world. It changed the way the world looked at the world and the way we looked at ourselves. nearly as interested in breeder reactors. The reason being is that there's just this extra material that's hanging out. This extra material could be more fissile material that creates more reactions. It's not nearly as power efficient. And it's also slightly more expensive because you're not being able to use the material in the first place. It is a very different process to making a nuclear reactor from a conventional one. It takes a long time to make a reactor from the beginning to the end. to be power efficient. And it also is better on paper than it ever is in reality. So on paper you're like, oh, this is great, because I can just create more fissile materials. I never need to add more. This is never really truly sustainable. They always have to have to be more and more powerful. And that's what we're trying to do here. We're not trying to make a bomb that's more powerful than the one we already have. We want to create a better bomb. keep adding more fissile materials, because it's not as perfect as they want it to be. Any questions about these things? Great. Cool beans. And then finally we're going to move on to generation four reactors. Generation four reactors are all the new kind of reactors that people want to build. So the primary objective for these new designs of reactors is to make them cleaner and safer and more cost effective. Keep them robust yet sustainable, and also make them more resistant to people being able to divert materials into creating nuclear weapons. can talk to other lab members or people in this department. A lot of people in Mike's group are working on molten salt reactors so you guys can go ahead and ask them about that. Or if you're interested you can read more about the molten salt reactor program. It's a very exciting time for us at the University of California, San Diego, and we're looking forward to the next generation of research in this area. We're excited to be part of the forefront of molten salt technology. about them with this hyperlink that I included over here. Hopefully he will post the slides online and you guys just click it and there's a awesome source all about these different kinds of reactors. OK? All right. Any questions? Hi. Do any of these actually exist, or is this all a hoax? Hi, do any of them actually exist or is it just a joke? Do you have any questions? If so, please send them to jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. it all just theory? TA: I'm pretty sure that they were just kind of proof of concept stage right now. Like there aren't any that are producing electricity in the United States, at least. Cool. All right. So all the things that we've mentioned before like how great the U.S. solar power system is, that's just a theory. TA: It's a great idea. It's just theory. It doesn't actually work yet. We'll have to see. Currently in the US there's only 99 operating reactors that are producing electricity. This makes up about 19% or about 20% of the total electricity output in the United States. In the rest of the world, there're only about 440 reactors spread around 30 countries and produces only 14% of global electricity. The main players are still, you would imagine, coal and natural gas. So this is actually even worse in the rest Of The World. We want to know what nuclear is and all the cool applications of it. So these proportions are pretty low. And you're wondering, like, why aren't we using more nuclear power? What exactly is holding us back? So it turns out that the main things that are holding us. back is just social, economic, and therefore like government hesitance to start using nuclear power. And so that's what we're trying to address. And that's why we're doing this study. And we're going to continue to do it for a long time to come. The main reason why we're a little bit hesitant to start using more nuclear power is because of safety issues. So nuclear-- none of us can argue that nuclear is like 100% safe. It actually does have some dangers associated with it, which is why it's so dangerous. More often. The U.S. should use nuclear power more often, says the U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. For more information on nuclear power, visit nukepower.org. important that we're doing what we'redoing. But if you guys look at this chart that I showed you guys in like the first or second slide, you'll notice that there are these events listed above. What are these words? Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, Fukushima, what are they? AUDIENCE: Nuclear. The answer is that they are all nuclear plants, and they're all in danger of going offline. That's why we're trying to prevent them from happening in the first place. After a nuclear accident you can see a pretty steep decline in the amount of nuclear reactors that are being commissioned. This is especially noticeable at Three Mile Island, which is essentially the first nuclear reactor accident that we all had to go through. And again Fukushima, once again, with the number of reactors being commissioned after the accident just declines dramatically. So I'm assuming you guys probably don't know exactly what happened during each of these accidents. We can pretty much assume that. It's probably causational. Three Mile Island, which is the first one, it happened in 1979 on March 28. So if you do know, sorry, but if you don't know, you're about to know. So Three Mile Island was in 1979. It was in New York City. It's in the middle of New York Harbor. It is in the city's downtown area. It took place in the early morning hours of March 28, 1979, on the east coast of the U.S. and the west coast of Canada. It happened in the area around the town of Three Mile Beach. reactor is a PWR located in Pennsylvania. So during this time it underwent a core meltdown. The cause of this is just the fact that there was some kind of mechanical or electrical system that prevented coolant water from being pumped into the primary system. So because there wasn't enough water, the reactor went into a state of meltdown. This is a very serious situation. We are very sorry for the loss of life and the damage that has been caused. We hope that this has provided some insight into the cause of the meltdown. water coming to cool up the core, the core began to overheat. So as the temperature of the core rises, the pressure also rises. So they notice this and they're like, oh, shoot, we got to fix that. So luckily there is like a little emergency valve that you can use to cool down the core. So that's what they were able to do. It's a good thing they had that valve, because the core was starting to heat up a lot. see in this animation gets opened up and pressure gets released. So that's all good and well, but unfortunately after the pressure's released, you should close the valve again and continue operation. But it became stuck. So this valve became stuck and they didn't realize that it become stuck because their equipment and their instrumentation wasn't able to detect that. So they continued to operate again but this valve was open, so there was actually water that was getting leaked out of this primary loop. dropping. Apparently you have to make sure that there's not too many vibrations that could damage the reactor. Or they lower the operation of the coolant pumps. So now there's water leaking out so now the pressure's dropping. So they shut off theCoolant pumps and lower the Operation of the Coolant Pumps. So the Pressure is dropping and the Water Is Leaking out. So Now the Pressure Is dropping and The Water Is leaking Out. So The Pressure Is Drop And The Water is Leaking Out. the core is getting hotter, but then they also took out the water that is usually used to cool the reactor core, so again it's also getting hotter. So this combination of events led to a core meltdown. So the core melted down. That's never a good thing, by the way, by any means. It's a very, very dangerous thing to do to a nuclear reactor, and it's very dangerous to do it to a reactor that's in the middle of a power plant. way. And yeah, so the core melted down, the reactor wasn't able to operate anymore. But luckily at Three Mile Island there was containment that prevented radioactive isotopes from leaving the system. So they actually took a brief survey. That's probably a long, long. way from finding out what happened to the core of the reactor at Threemile Island. That would be a very, very long, very, long way from discovering what happened at the core. That could take a long time. experience. But they realized that the two million people who are around Three Mile Island at the time, within like a two mile radius or like maybe a 30 mile radius. They realized that they didn't get much dose at all. They collected about a total of about $1.5 million in the first few days of the disaster. They also collected about $500,000 in the second few days after the disaster, but that's not enough to cover the cost of the damage. of 1 milligram more dose than usual. So to put that in perspective, an x-ray is six milligrams. So really nothing that happened at Three Mile Island other than they had to shut it down and do expensive repairs. But people weren't hurt. The environment wasn't damaged. It was just a precautionary measure to make sure it didn't happen in the first place. It's not a cause for concern. It doesn't mean it's not going to happen again. It wasn't that bad of a situation. I think the effect was bigger in concept than it was in actual damage. The next reactor accident, the big kahuna I like to call it, is Chernobyl. So on April 25, 1986 an RMBK was detonated at the Chernobyl nuclear plant, killing more than 1,000 people. It was the worst nuclear accident since the Three Mile Island disaster in the U.S. in the 1960s and '70s. reactor that was located in Ukraine exploded. So what they were doing at Chernobyl during the time of this explosion is that they're actually running, ironically enough, safety tests. They were running the reactor at low power to see how it behaves. At low power, I don't think they quite realized this, but the coolant pumps in the reactor were also powered by the nuclear reactor being generated. So if they're running this atLow power, their coolant pump weren't getting enough energy to properly cool the fuel core. So that was unfortunate, and they realized that this is a bad thing. So the reactor starts to go supercritical. So when they realize that the reactor was creating a lot more fissions than it should have been creating, they decide to insert the control rods. So thank goodness we have these high absorption control rods to slow things down, says Dr. David Perry, a nuclear physicist at the University of California, Los Angeles. "It's a miracle that we're still here today," he says. "We're lucky to be alive," he adds. RBMKs, they have graphite tipped control rods. So as they lower the control rods into the water, this graphite tip, which doesn't effectively absorb neutrons, it displaced a little bit too much water than was necessary. Right? For some reason, I'm not completely sure why they did this, but R BMKs have graphites tipped control Rods.right? So they have a problem with neutrons in the RBMK. So they had to use a different type of control rod, which had a different tip. that caused the first explosion at Chernobyl. Then, for some reason like a couple of minutes later, there's a second explosion. They're not completely sure why the second explosion happened. To this day we can't really pinpoint why. It went super duper critical and caused thefirst explosion. Then there was another explosion that caused the third explosion. It caused the fourth explosion, which caused the fifth and sixth explosion. The third explosion caused the sixth and seventh explosions. The fourth explosion was caused by the eighth explosion. could have been like building up helium or just a ton of other fission reactions. But there's a second explosion that actually just blew this entire core apart. So that kind of stunk, but it did stop the whole reaction. Because a super critical mass was all blown apart, it didn't stop the reaction. It just made it a little bit more difficult to get the reaction going again, which was good for the world's economy. But it did make it more difficult for people to get back to work. was no longer super critical. The whole debacle stopped. But unfortunately, there was a lot of radioactive isotopes being spread into the environment. Chernobyl didn't have the same kind of containment that Three Mile Island had, so these isotopes were just able to go. The isotopes went into the water supply and into the atmosphere. They were able to cause a number of health problems, including leukemia and lymphoma. They also caused the death of more than 1,000 people. 28 highly exposed reactor staff and emergency workers die from this radiation or from thermal burns during this time. Officials also believe that there is about 7,000 cases of thyroid cancer that occurred because of Chernobyl. They're pretty sure it was Chernobyl because these are all cases that happened in people who are less than 18 years old. So you guys.everywhere. And also the second explosion had a lot of steam with it that carried these isotopes even further than they probably should have gone. know that no one really lives near Chernobyl at the moment. It's kind of been deemed unlivable because these radioactive isotopes literally went everywhere in this environment. Like it was in the water, it was on the plants, it's not safe to live there. Luckily it's a pretty radioactive environment. Luckily there are still people who live there who are still able to work and live in the area. But it's very, very dangerous at the same time. There's still a lot of work to be done on the site. we see that there are animals coming back now now. If you look on NationalGeographic.com there's like little deer roaming around Chernobyl. But it's been about-- how long has it been, like 30, 40 years? People aren't advised to live here still. So Chernobyl was terrible. Questions? Yeah? AUDIENCE: What. What is your reaction to the news of Chernobyl? What do you think about the new report? Share your thoughts in the comments below. does it mean for a reactor to go supercritical? TA: Oh, yeah, sorry. So you guys will learn all about criticality in a little bit, but basically when I say supercritical it just means that there's way too many fission reactions happening. Yeah? AUDIENCE: You said it went supercritical because it was too hot. TA: Yeah, that's what it was. It was hot because it had too much fission going on at the same time. it wasn't being cooled enough or? TA: I think I might have skipped a detail. So the water was evaporating and then it became supercritical because there was not enough neutrons being slowed down or absorbed. My bad, I'm sorry. Good? All right. So that's what happened. That's why it was supercritical. That was the reason it was so hot. It was because it wasn't cooled enough so the water wasn't evaporating. And it was also because the neutrons weren't being absorbed. And that's why there was a supercritical reaction. next reactor accident that we were alive for, which is cool, was Fukushima Daiichi. So these reactors, I think these are pressurized water reactors. So following a major earthquake, the generators that are used to power the reactors are damaged or destroyed. So after the earthquake, these reactors have to be restarted. So that's what happened in 2011 on March 11, and Fukushima is in Japan. It's a nuclear plant in Japan, and it's in the middle of a tsunami zone. Following a major earthquake, the things that were cooling the core, they broke. So there wasn't enough water being able to go to the fuel core. This is a very similar problem, as you can see that in all these instances of the reactor incidents, it's just kind of like the fuelCore was misbehaving and we weren't able to get enough coolant water to it. So following the earthquake, these coolant pumps broke. They're like, oh, that's OK. What we can do is we have backup generators to continue running the pumps. It'll be all OK. Nothing will happen. We're all good. And then a tsunami hit. So it was a foot tsunami I think-- I think that-- 15 meter tsunami, oh good gosh. So a 15. meter tsunami. It was a 15 meters tsunami, I think it was. I don't remember the exact number, but it was at least a foot. I think the tsunami was about 15 meters. meter tsunami hit and it broke the generators and then at that point they're like, oh, no. So they had no other redundancy factors to continue pumping cool water into the fuel core. So again, there wasn't enough water in the core, it became supercritical, it began to melt. So that's what happened with the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear plant in Japan. That's what we're seeing now with the tsunami in Japan, the earthquake in Japan and the tsunami that hit the Philippines. the fuel rods began to melt, but this is actually another additional bad thing. So the water was evaporating, creating steam. The fuel rods were coated with zirconium. So what you guys might not know is that when zir Conium and steam interact with each other, that's not a good thing. That's what happened in this case. It's a very, very bad thing, and we don't want it to happen to anyone else in the future. We're very sorry about that. The reactors at Fukushima Daiichi began to explode. There was radioactive isotopes being spread out all around the country. You guys probably saw the lovely flow charts of the radioactivity flowing out from Japan and making it to California and contaminating the state. It was all coming from Japan. It's all coming out of Japan. And it's all going to California. It will all go to California, and it's going to contaminate the state of California and the rest of the U.S. your fish and stuff like that. But luckily, no one was directly hurt by burns or radioactive exposure. So aside from these safety issues, these safety issue that happen, they get elevated in the news quite a lot. So these are mainly the safety issues that happen in the world of the nuclear power plant in Japan. And that's what we're going to focus on for the rest of the week. We'll be in touch with you on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @jennifercnn. Reactor accidents are actually pretty rare. It's been about 60 or 70 years, we have 440 reactors operating around the country. There's three main accidents that have happened. But because these are the things that people get ingrained into their mind-- thank you, news stations-- people think that nuclear reactors are incredibly dangerous. And that's why we have the nuclear industry in the U.S. Today, there are 440 reactors in the United States. There are about 2,000 nuclear power plants worldwide. this social hesitance, which is why we aren't able to get enough government funding. Another issue that's associated with nuclear power is nuclear waste. So another issue is why nuclear power isn't more of a thing. Makes sense? Yeah. It makes sense. It's not a good idea. It just doesn't make sense. And that's why we don't do it. It doesn't work. It isn't a good thing. We don't need nuclear power. We need to get rid of nuclear waste, and we need to stop using it. what in the world do we do with it? So first of all, the main thing in nuclear waste is spent fuel. So like I mentioned to you guys, spent fuel rods are made out of uranium oxide. But after undergoing a bunch of fissions, these uranium particles get transformed into uranium particles. So after a lot of fissioning, the uranium particles are transformed into the uranium oxide particles that are used for nuclear fuel rods. So the rods are then used to make nuclear weapons. into other isotopes that aren't fissionable or fertile or even remotely fissile, right? So we eventually have to replace them and add in new rods, and this is a process that happens every 12 or so years. I'm not completely sure on that statistic. But the main issue's like, what are we going to do with all of these new isotopes? And the answer is, we're going to have to find a way to get them out of the bomb. do we do with all this material? So this material that comes out is pretty radioactive and it's also incredibly hot, so it can be dangerous if someone decides to come and eat it. So that's why we've got to figure out a way to expose it. The primary goal is to get it out of the country. So the primary goal of the project is to expose the material to the public and get it back to a safe place. That's what we're trying to do. way of disposing of the spent fuel is putting it into spent fuel pools. So these tanks of water are mixed with I believe it's boron, which is a neutron absorber. They basically just put it in these pools. It's just a giant tank of water that exists at the reactor. So it's just giant tanks ofWater that exist at the reactors. Its basically just a huge pool of water. It was just put into these pools of water, and it was just like a giant water tank. It wasnt very big. the spent fuel rods all the way at the bottom of the pool. So this pool's about like like 20 meters high, I think. This is actually a really good solution because the water in the pool, it cools down the reactor rods and also prevents a lot of neutrons from being released into the atmosphere. It's actually a very good solution. I think it's a really, really good idea. I don't know why they didn't think of it before. I mean, it's not like they're going to use it in the future. escaping because water is a really great neutron moderator. Apparently you can go swimming on the top of the reactor spent fuel pool and you'll be OK and not be exposed to too much radiation if you want. You guys all know this. It turns out it's actually fairly safe. It's not like you're going to be in a pool of radioactive water for the rest of your life. You're not going to have to worry about being in the water for very long if you don't want to. So yeah. So this is the main solution that people have been using for years, but they realize that this isn't super sustainable, because the amount of space that we have in these spent fuel pools is not infinite. We have way too much spent fuel to be able to use it all at once, so we have to find a way to use some of it. And that's what we're trying to do now. We're working on ways to use the rest of the fuel in a sustainable way. just continue to store it in these spent fuel pools. So like shoot, got to find another solution. So the next solution was something called dry cask storage. So dry casks storage is just a way to keep this spent fuel surrounded by an inert gas. And it's held inside a cask. And the spent fuel is held inside the cask and the inert gas is outside. And that's how the fuel is stored in the casks. It's held in a dry, inert cask, and the gas is inside. a cask, a cask just being probably like a steel drum that's bolted and welded shut, and then there's additional pieces of shielding around it like cement and lead, et cetera. So there's just like gigantic tanks basically that are sitting outside. So they put them outside the reactor. As a result, there's a lot of smoke coming out of the top of the reactor, and it's very, very dangerous. But it's not a big deal. you can see, it looks like it's sitting in a parking lot outside the reactor. And so this is an OK solution. So basically what they do is they take a spent fuel, let it sit in the pool for about a year or so, maybe two or three years. It's a good way to get rid of it, but it's not a great way to dispose of it at the same time, as some people have suggested. It could be used for other purposes, such as as a fuel source. And then they're able to take it out because at that point it's significantly less radioactive because, you know, you guys know how to calculate this, too. You guys know like the half life of different radioisotopes. You see that the radioactivity declines at a certain point. It's also more radioactive than it used to be, which is why it's so much more difficult to get rid of it. But it's also a lot less radioactive than when it was first created. cool now so they put them in these tanks, so they let these tanks hang out outside. And this is an OK solution, except for the fact that, again, we just have way too much spent fuel to be able to do this. It turns out that if you were.cool now, you could put the fuel in the tanks and it would stay cool. So they put it in this tank, and it stays cool. And it's a good solution, but it's not very practical. to just keep all the spent fuel that we create in fuel casks, it'd take about 300 acres of land, which is absolutely insane. And obviously no one wants to take up that. Brief little side note, when I was googling like images of dry cask storage and I was going to write this, I was like, "What the hell is going on?" I was trying to think of a way to store spent fuel in dry casks. I couldn't think of anything. looking for the different types, what I found particularly disturbing was that there's only two types listed: vertical storage and horizontal storage. Like there's no other solutions other than these are giant tanks. Anyway, so people realize that we need to figure out yet another way to dispose of the waste, we're going to need to find a new way of disposing of all of this waste. We need to get rid of it. It's time to start thinking about how we dispose of it, and it's time for a new solution. spent fuel, hopefully a way that doesn't get in the way of people's backyards. So the idea was something called deep geological repositories. So deep geologic repositories literally just means that they want to bury the nuclear waste very deep into the ground and never be able to retrieve it. The idea is to bury it in a deep geological repository and never get it back. It's called a 'deep geologic repository' and it's a place where nuclear waste can be buried very deep. again. "They hope to put it in the ground and never have to think about it again," he says. "The regions that they choose to bury in the Ground have to fulfill a series of conditions," he adds. "It's a permanent method of disposal," says the mayor. "I think it's a good way to dispose of the bodies," says a local official. "There's no need to bury them in the first place," says another, "because it's not going to happen again" lot of criteria. So this criterion includes not having a lot of seismic activity. Because we are keeping this nuclear waste underground in these casks for like thousands of years, if there is a huge earthquake, those casks break, radiation gets everywhere. That's obviously not a good thing so we are trying to make sure that we don't have that problem in the future. It's a long way off, but it's a step in the right direction, I think, for the future of the country. want to make sure that doesn't happen. Water can carry the radioisotopes and carry them into the environment, which is something else that we don't want to do. A lot of you want to know what's going on in the lab, so we'll let you in on what we're up to. We also have to makesure that there's not a lot of water that leaks through, because the water can carry them and take them out of the lab and into the world. Yucca Mountain is the primary push by the U.S. to find a deep geological repository somewhere in the United States so we can deal with our spent fuel. People in Nevada weren't happy about this. They're like, why are we getting tossed on nuclear waste? We don't even have nuclear reactors in Nevada. This is not a good idea. So Yucca Mountain was the one. But then things weren't as peachy keen as they hoped it would be. So now they're trying to get it back on track. fair. There was a lot of opposition. And because of the social opposition there was government opposition and many loopholes we had to jump through, and so it was just becoming a huge disaster. They also realized that it wasn't as geologically sound as they had hoped. There's a lot more to come on this issue, I'm sure, and I'm looking forward to hearing more about it in the coming months and years. It's going to be a very exciting time for us all. more groundwater running through and seeping through Yucca Mountain than they thought there would be, so it's actually not as safe as they had hoped. So there's a huge debacle. Basically the costs are rising, nothing much was happening. There's a bunch of different things preventing progression from happening. And it's not going to get better any time soon, that's for sure. It's just a huge, huge mess, and it's going to have to be dealt with in a way that makes sense. Yucca Mountain has been abandoned by the Obama Administration. There's no more government funding to Yucca Mountain. It's permanently closed. And you can also see that like 14 people went out of their way to review this lovely Google picture of the mountain. It is a beautiful site. It should be a beautiful place to look at. It was a great place to take a picture. It would have been a great site for a museum. But now it's gone. It will never be used again. This idea has currently been abandoned in the United States. We're kind of still looking for other solutions, but we really don't have it.Yucca Mountain. It's at like 3.6 stars, just like a normal motel or something like that, so that has been abandoned. But we're actually doing OK. We've got a little bit of room left, so we're going to use it for a few days. We'll see how it goes. We don't know how long it will last. figured out all that well. There is one other kind of way of dealing with nuclear waste, which is repurposing. So basically you take the spent fuel and you chemically separate out any material that could be continued to be used in other reactors. 96% of a used fuel assembly is recyclable. So you takeThe spent fuel, you take out what it is, and then you repurpose it. I personally think nuclear repurposed is the coolest option out there. useful, you throw away what's not useful, which is also still radioactive waste that has to be put in a fuel pool or something like that. But you have this precious fuel that you can put into another reactor. So this is actually something that France and other places in France and others in Europe are trying to get used to. It's a good way to reduce the amount of radioactive waste you have to deal with. But it doesn't mean that you don't still have to dispose of some radioactive waste. Europe, and Russia and Japan, they use repurposing quite a lot. For some reason the United States doesn't do it. So the reason being is that this is a really cool idea. It's like recycling. I think I think it's personally one of the most clever ideas I've ever heard of," he says. "It's like very-- it's very clever. I've never heard of it before," he adds, "but it's a very clever idea" cleverer solutions, but the issue is that it's kind of a really expensive process. So repurposing fuel takes a lot of money and it turns out that the act of repurpose fuel actually costs more than just buying a new chunk of uranium 235, which is why we don't do it. It's a very expensive process, so it's not something we do very often. We don't use it as much as we would like to, but we do use it when we need it. There is an inherent danger with nuclear waste. It's not economically sound. So all these are issues. Like, we have a lot of nuclear waste to deal with. So yeah. You guys have any questions about anything I've mentioned, about deposition ofnuclear waste? Almost done. OK. It is kind of-- there is an inherently danger withnuclear waste.it. Its not economically Sound. SoYeah. You Guys have any Questions? Almostdone. OK, it's almost done. Well get back to you. using nuclear power. But the real thing that holds us back from just having nuclear power everywhere and creating about 90% of our electricity as we would hope it would is economics. So in this world, money really matters a lot. The economics of nuclear power is actually a really good thing. But it's not as cheap as we think it is, and we need to find a way to make it more affordable for people. We need to make nuclear power more affordable and more reliable for people and businesses. complicated topic and it changes depending on who you talk to. There's a lot of factors that are involved, so you can include certain factors into your calculations like, oh, the cost of building the reactor in the first place. Fuel costs or operating costs or maintenance costs are also important. It's a very complex topic and there are a number of different ways to look at it, so it can be very different for different people. It can be a very, very difficult topic to understand. or the amount of money that comes out of damaging the environment. You can weigh all these different factors in, and everyone churns out a different number. But basically everyone you talk to, if you look at this chart, yellow is nuclear power, the gray is coal, and the blue is natural gas. That's the way it's always been, and that's how it's going to be, for the rest of our lives, as well as for the next 100 years, if we're lucky. is the natural gas. But basically, you can see that nuclear is not nearly as economic of a source of electricity generation as any other of these ones. Unless you talk to UK. UK thinks it's OK. But everyone else is saying that it's not. And that's not good for the UK. And it's bad for the rest of the world. It's not just bad for UK, it's also bad for other countries. It is bad for all of us. And we're not the only ones. not as money efficient. So where are all these costs coming from? So the primary costs actually lies with something called capital costs. So capital cost is basically the sunk cost of just building the reactor. Building reactors takes billions of dollars. It also takes tons of time. And because of this, nuclear power is not as money-efficient as other forms of energy, such as oil and gas, it can cost much more to run than other types of energy. It can also take a lot of time to build a reactor. it takes a lot of time, interest rates also jack up that price even further. So basically it's just this massive investment they have to throw in immediately, and this is where most of the issues lie. Like it's really hard to go to an investor and be like, hey, I want to buy a house. It's just a massive investment, and it takes a long time to get to that point," he said. "It's just like a huge, massive investment that you have to make," he added. can I have a billion dollars to build this nuclear reactor? It's going to take five years and it's Going to take 20 more years for you to get your profit back. No investor is going to be like, yeah, that's a good idea. That's the price of nuclear power. No one wants to invest in a nuclear power plant when it's not going to make money in five or 20 years. It's not a good investment. It doesn't make sense. It makes no sense. main reason why we can't get nuclear up and running. We have the possibility to create a lot of plants, but we just don't have the money to do so. Because it's a huge chunk of money, like I mentioned before, it takes a long time to get it going. It's a long, long way off, but it's not impossible. We're not going to give up on nuclear, we're just going to have to wait and see how long it takes to get there. a while to get your profit back. And also, if for some reason something happens, you have to stop building your reactor. You just lost a billion dollars. Like, there's no turning back, right? If you look at this chart over here, which is breaking up the cost of nuclear, you can see how much it costs to build a nuclear plant. You can see that it takes a long time to make a profit back, if you're building a nuclear power plant. energy per kilowatt hour, I believe-- gigawatt hour? Kilowatthour. You can see nuclear, coal, and natural gas. So this giant white chunk over here refers to fuel. So if you can look at nuclear power, the majority of cost actually doesn't come from nuclear fuel at all. It's just about $0.01 per kiloatt hour. If you look at operation and maintenance, again it's not that large of a chunk. It'm about the same as maintaining a coal power plant. But then if you look at the capital cost, which is the dark gray color, you can see how massive that is in comparison to building natural gas and coal firing plants. So yeah, I think that's the main thing. So because it is more expensive, we can't compete with it, he says. "We can't compare with it," he adds. "It's too expensive. It's too big. We're not able to compete with that. We can't do it." other forms of electricity. People buy the electricity that's cheapest, not necessarily the Electricity that's best for our grandchildren or something like that. Yeah, so that's why nuclear power isn't more of a thing, and that ends my pretty lengthy slide show. So do you guys have any questions about this slide show? If so, email jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk or tweet her at @jennifersmith. She'll answer any questions you have. anything I mentioned? If you guys are interested about any of these topics, like if any ofThese things piqued your interest, I recommend going to NRC.gov. They have a lot of really cool information. Let me write that down, because I talk quickly. That's basically where I got the information. That was basically where we got the info. It's a good place to start, because it's very easy to find information on these topics. I'll be back in a few days to talk about some of the other topics. majority of my information for the slide show, and it is a reliable source. It might just be skewed a little bit pro nuclear, so just keep that in mind. There's a lot of crazy sources out there on the interwebs. Take them with a grain of salt. Take this slide show as a guide to how to get the most out of your phone's camera. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com and CNN iReport. NRC.gov with less grains of salt than usual. Or if one of these things really piqued your interest, you guys can take 22.04, which is really cool class that's offered here I think this spring. But basically it's called nuclear power society. It's basically a class on nuclear power and the history of the nuclear power industry, which has been going on for a long time. But it's really cool, and if not this spring, next spring. taught by a guy named Scott Kemp. He talks about all these things and in a lot of detail and slower. So yeah, cool. So thank you guys so much for coming. I know you guys could have slept an extra hour, but instead you heard me ramble for an hour and a half. I'm sorry. I was trying to make a point, but I just couldn't do it. I just wanted to say thank you for coming and I'll see you next week. hour.hour. hour. hour of the day.hour of the week.hour on CNN.com. Hour of the morning on CNN TV. hour on CNN iReport.com and CNN.co.uk. Hour. of the afternoon on CNN television.hour and CNN iReporter.hour, hour.of the day on CNNTV.com, and hour. of. the week on CNN Radio. hour and hour on the CNN TV network.hour for the week of November 25.hour to noon on CNNRadio.com on November 26. hour for theweek of November 27.hour at the CNN.