Professor: It's going to be a great lecture today. It's about proteins. I love proteins. Don't forget the handout, yeah. OK, so I'm going to briefly wrap up the lecture we were doing on Friday because there were a couple of things that I wanted to make a note of, he says. "Don't forget to take your handout," he adds. "It's a good idea to have a handout with you when you're doing a lecture" Lipidic molecules are rich in carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen bonds. As you can see here in section 2.3 about amino acids, peptides, and proteins, you can pick them out of a lineup. And then we'll move on to sections 2.4 and 2.5 about proteins, amino acids and peptides. And finally, we'll talk about the structure and function of proteins and amino acids. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. The majority of a lot of these molecules is carbon-carbon or carbon-hydrogen hydrogen. They are molecules that are mostly hydrophobic, so there are some terminologies here. Hydrophobic can also be referred to as lipophilic. You either-- you can hate water and love fatty acid or you can love it and hate it. It's all a matter of personal preference, of course, but that's a different topic for a different time and a different day. Back to Mail Online home. fatty types of materials, so those both terms are synonymous. And some of the lipids are what are known as amphipathic, and they include hydrophobic and hydrophilic components. There are a couple of tiny terms that I didn't mention explicitly, so I just want to go ahead and do that. I'll be back in a week or so to talk about some of these other things. I'm going to be in a hotel room in the middle of the night. In this phospholipid structure, the long chain fatty acids are attached via esters to this glycerol unit. In those fatty acids, they could be used to make new drugs. We'll talk about these in a few minutes. Now, let's go to the next segment of our show, "The Science of Science," at 8 p.m. ET on CNN.com/ HLN, or go to www.thescienceofscience.com to see the full show. fully saturated. It means they have no double bonds in the structure, so that term saturated is equivalent to no carbon-carbon double bonds. Or they could be unsaturated, where there is a double bond within it. So that's one or more double bonds within the structure. And those double bonds are known as carbon carbon bonds. They are the most common type of double bond in the carbon structure. They can also be carbon carbon double bonds, which are used to make carbon nanotubes. bonds take on a particular shape because there's not freedom of rotation around double bonds the same way there is around single bonds. So those single bonds, you can twist them around and twist themaround, but the double bond geometry is fixed. And so double bonds, we refer to them as 'double bonds', have a fixed shape. The shape of a double bond is fixed, so you can't twist it around in the way you can a single bond. It has a fixed geometry, so it can't be twisted. them as either trans, where the two groups are on opposite sides, leaving the double bond, or we refer to them as cis. And we tend to use that cis and trans sort of naming system in a lot of other naming system. We call them cis-cis, where they are on the same side, or trans-trans, where there are two groups on the opposite side, leaving a double bond. They are either trans or cis- cis, and we call them either cis-trans or trans. contexts as well, but you almost always want to remember that trans is as far away as possible, cis is closer than trans. All right, so I'm just going to take you forward to the phospholipid structure. This is a very important semi-permeable membranes are made up through the non-covalent, non-Covalent membranes. It's very important to understand that the phosphoripid is a type of protein. It is a protein that can be used to create a membrane. supramolecular association of phospholipid monomer units. Here's a monomer unit up here. You see it has an amphipathic structure, with a lot of hydrophobicity but also hydrophilicity. These molecules assemble into supramole molecular structures that form the boundaries of your cells. Saying they are semi-permeable tells us a little bit about the structure of the cell. It's a semi- permeable structure that is semi-submersible. about what can go through them. If they were fully permeable, anything could come and go and they wouldn't be much use frankly. But because they're semi-permeable, only a few things can come and gone without extra help, and other things can't. It's like leaving the door open the whole time. But they're not fully open, so you can't get in and out of them all the time. That's a good thing. It means you have to be careful what you do. need active mechanisms to go through. So let's take a look at the boundary here. So when you see a membrane bilayer, they are-- they're often shown looking like this, where every one of these units is a phospholipid. There's water on both sides of the phospholIPid, because that that that's what membranes are supposed to look like. And that's why they're called membrane bilayers, because they're designed to hold water in one place and in another place. polar head group is interacting with water on both sides. So down here could be the inside of the cell. Up here may be the outside of the cells. A lot of cells, especially eukaryotic cells, have a lot of endomembranes, membranes within them. And the ones that make us up, have the same kind of membranes within and outside of them. The polar head group has the same type of membranes inside and outside the cell as it does outside of it. the cells. For example, forming the boundary to the nucleus or to the mitochondria. Yes? Audience: Why is there a [INAUDIBLE] PROFESSOR: Oh, this guy must be-- so this looks like it's probably a saturated fatty acid. So what do you think this one might be, folks? Unsaturated. And what's what's the opposite of saturated? Un saturated. And so on and so on. Yes, yes, yes. the double-bond geometry? AUDIENCE: Cis. PROFESSOR: Yeah, it is. It's like a-- it looks like a ballerina or something. OK, so we have a lot of concerns, and we'll see later about how things get in and out of cells. But most commonly, things like oxygen or water and oxygen and water are the most common things that get into cells. We'll talk more about that later in the show. Back to the page you came from. other small hydrophobic molecules can pass readily in and out through the semi-permeable barrier. Other things, things that are charged, Things that are big, need a different mechanism to get in andout. And we will see later on how proteins provide the opportunities to cargo things into cells. We will also see how proteins can be used to carry charged molecules into and out of the cell. We'll be looking at how proteins are used to cargo charged molecules in the future. or out of cells, even very large entities, and there are certain mechanisms whereby that happens through a semi-permeable membrane, OK? I want to show you the other feature of membranes. They are self-healing. What this means is if you poke them, you poke a hole in a cellular membrane, and it will heal itself. If you poke it, it will open up a new membrane. If it doesn't, it won't heal itself, and you'll have a hole. You? Basically push apart those non-covalent forces. Once you take the thing away, be it a needle or a very fine glass capillary, they seal right back up to close to close the hole in the cell wall. So that kind of tells us that they're non-Covalent Forces. So this is what we're trying to do. We're pushing them apart, and they're pushing back, so that we can get to the other side of the hole. Video shows someone doing micro-injection into eukaryotic cells. The needle points to the cell, approaches the surface. You can drop something into the cell and then the cell closes and maintains its integrity of the barrier. This is a very cool observation. People do people do this all the time, and it's really cool to see it happen. It's a really cool thing to be able to do. It really is a big step in the right direction, and I'm really excited about it. "They have to not drink too much coffee because it's quite complicated to do a lot of micro-injection, because you can really cause carnage in your cell population if you're not very dexterous," he says. "People can be very good at it. So I just want to make sure they don't do it too much," he adds. "I just want them to not do it all the time," he laughs. "It's very, very difficult. It's a lot to do." ask a couple of questions before, give you a few things to think about before we close up. The lipids. So here's a typical lipid bilayer, where I've highlighted a single lipid. And the colors, those are the head groups, and all in white and gray are the hydrophilic. All in white are the Hydrophilic Lipids, and the colors are the Head Group Lipids. The head group lipids are the ones that are the most hydrophobic. The colors are white, gray, and blue. components, and just one of the phospholipids is highlighted, and that would be this molecular structure here. So first of all, what do you think the non-covalent forces at that membrane interface may be? That is, what's going on here at the interface? What are the types of interactions that that interaction may be involved in? And so on and so on, until you get to the bottom of the story, which is what we're trying to find out. you might have there? Give you a minute to think about it, and I want to show you that I'm actually giving you a clue here, because you can see the structure, negative charge, positive charge, but also remember this is a barrier to water, so there are other things. You can see that you have a negative charge and a positive charge. You have to remember that you can also see that there is a negative and positive charge at the same time. Give it a minute. going on with the solvent that the membrane is sitting in because there's water surrounding that barrier layer. Anyone want to tell me what the answer is, and why? Yeah, did you-- are you-- yeah. Audience: Hydrogen bonding. PROFESSOR: Yeah, between what and what? AUDIENCE: Like the oxygen and [INAUDIBLE] Like theoxygen and the water and the hydrogen bonding? PROFessor:Yeah, yeah, that's right. Water is a good hydrogen bond donor and acceptor, so there will be hydrogen bonding. What about amongst all those lipid head groups, what's the other major force? Yeah? Electrostatic force. So the correct answer here is both of them. It's between the different charges. So that's what we're going to focus on here. We're not going to get into the physics of it. We'll focus on the chemistry of it, and how it relates to the human body. Don't think it's just electrostatic, it's both. It's electrostatic amongst the head groups, hydrogen bonding between all that sort of dense bunch of charge, and the water. And then the other question, what type of molecules can get across? I've already answered that question to you. Salts are going to be going to the moon, and they're going to have a lot of water in them. That's what's going to make the moon look like. need ways to get in and out of cells. Small proteins are too big to dissolve in that membrane through passive mechanisms. Neurotransmitters, such as this, this is GABA, or gamma aminobutyric acid. It's charged. We're going to have to figure out how to get proteins in and in of cells, says Dr. David Wheeler. He says we need to find a way to get these proteins into cells and back out again. We need to figure this out, he says. It just can't get through without a transporter of some kind, and it's actually proteins that end up doing the heavy lifting of the transport processes. OK, so moving along. This section will be about the building blocks of your protein macromolecules, which I want to remind you are the building block of all proteins. It's actually the protein molecules that make up your body's cells, not the other way around. It is the proteins that make your body function as a whole. you comprise 50% of all of the macromolecules, so that suggests it's a pretty important class of macromolcules. Now, the amino acid building locks-- blocks look pretty simple. They're called amino acids because they have an amine, the carboxylic acid, and there's a. There's a lot of different functions that amino acids can play in the body, so it's important to know how to use them in a variety of ways, he says. carbon that is tetrehedral between the carboxylic acid and the amine. Usually, when it's just a lonely amino acid in aqueous solution, it's in a different charged form, just consistent with what we talked about in the last class. And I put it here. So this is glycine. It's one of the 20 encoded amino acids. That means the amino acids that are made through ribosomal processes. That is, they're made through the ribosome. biosynthesis through a code that's provided by the messenger RNA, so they are encoded by messenger RNA. Later on, you'll see all of the beautiful mechanics of those processes. Now, this table looks pretty complicated, so I'm going to deconstruct it a bit. But what I first of all want to show you is that there is a way to break down the code into its constituent parts, and that is to use messenger RNA to do it. That's what we're doing here. You will always get a handout with these structures on them. We are not asking you to remember these structures. You might become familiar with some of them, but you do not have to remember them. You'll have a table that shows them. But you'll have to have a book with them on it to understand them. They're there to help you with reading comprehension and vocabulary. They are there to teach you how to use them, not to remind you of them. It's a good way to learn. on that table, I won't necessarily give you the information on what their properties are, because those are things that you should be able to spot by looking at their chemical structures, all right? So that's important. So these are all line-angled drawings, so you see the carbon. The hydrogens, that's what you're looking for. The carbon is the carbon, and the hydrogens are the Hydrogens. That's what we're looking at, right? That's the chemical structure. aren't shown in there. The charges are shown for what's called the side chain, because most of the amino acids have a side chain. The amino acids are also chiral, but you'll learn more than you ever wanted to know about chirality in 512, so I won't weigh you down with that info. It's a lot of fun to look at, but it's also a bit of a slog. It takes a while to get through the first few amino acids. with any of those properties. So there is a side chain that dictates the properties of the amino acids. The amino acids that are encoded in our proteins are all what are known as alpha amino acid. There are other amino acids, such as GABA, that I showed you earlier in the week. That's the type of amino acid that is encoded in the human body. It's a type of protein that is called an amino acid, and it's a very important part of our body. on the previous slide, is not an alpha amino acid. Actually it's a gamma amino acid, a gamma amine acid. These are called amino acids because the amine group is at the alpha position relative to the carboxyl. Don't need to know a lot more about that with respect to that. So let's take the next slide and look at the second slide. The next slide is the third slide and looks at the fourth slide, the fifth and the sixth slides. The fifth and sixth slides are the seventh and the eighth slides. a look at this set of amino acids, and what you see is amino side chains with rather different properties. All amino acids have a three-letter code or a one- letter code. I particularly enjoy using one letter codes and spelling out people's amino acids. I've amassed-- here's glycine at the very top of the list. It's the most common amino acid in the world, but it's also the least common in the human body. There's a lot of room for improvement. names in peptides and things like that. I'll let you do that in the privacy of your own room. It's kind of amusing to see if your name actually spells out a peptide. Some of us-- if I get a little stopped stuck with Barbara because there are no B. I'm not going to tell you how to spell it, but you can do it in your room. If you want to, you can look it up on the Internet or in a book. amino acid one letters with a B. The next most abundant type of amino acid have hydrophobic side chains. What that means is they have a lot of CHs, but not a lot else, right? So take a look at them. Alanine has a methyl group, for example, where I've been talking about in the last few weeks. It's the same as a methylated amino acid, but it's a different type of methyl group. It has a different structure. shown the R, that would be alanine. And they get increasingly big. They're quite large. Some of them have quite extended size chains. Other ones have side chains with rings with double bonds in them. Those are what we would designate in organic chemistry as aromatic. They show-- they are very important in the chemistry of the human body. They are very, very important to the body and to the environment. They have a very important role to play in the development of the body. still hydrophobic, but they show different properties to this other set of amino acids. Some of these amino acids may actually have polar groups in them, but their major feature is that they're hydrophobia. But in an amino acid, such as tyrosine, you could not only have hydrophilic interactions with other amino acids, but you could also have interactions with polar groups as well. It's a very complex set of interactions. It can be very, very difficult to understand. that ring system, but also hydrogen bonding with the OH on the tyrosine, so some of the amino acids can do a few different things. The next set of amino acids are those that are polar and charged, and I've shown you the most common state of all of those. Those are the ones that are most commonly found in the human body. They are also the ones most common in the animal body. The most common form of these amino acids is the one that is most likely to be found in humans. amino acids, but you already know that the amine of lysine is likely to be charged. This quanidinium group of arginine, take my word for it, it's charged. Histidine is also one of those that's annoying to draw, but the negatively-charged side chains are a bit more complicated to draw. It's a little more difficult to draw than Histidine, but it's not as bad as Histidine. It has a negative charge. with a carboxylate are both negatively charged, and that's something you would remember from the previous class hopefully. And then finally, there are amino acids with polar uncharged side chains, such as those shown here. Now, this doesn't look like a very exciting set of building blocks. How can life be different? We'll have to wait and see, but we'll be back in a few days to show you what we've found out about the new class of amino acids. run on things made of 20 relatively simple building blocks with functional groups? And it's that the building blocks are not functional themselves. It is the polymers that are made up of amino acids, and I'll always call them AAs because it's easier for me. The polymers of amino acid are known as amino acids. They are the building block of life, but they are also the source of life. They're also the cause of life; they are not the cause. The building blocks of life are called amino acids; they're the Source of Life. are heteropolymers. That means they're made up of a bunch of different monomer units. And the other important thing about these polymers is that they are of defined sequence. What is the sequence? It's the order in which the amino acids appear. So I'm writing that so I'm not breaking any rules. I'm just saying that the sequence of amino acids is defined and I'm saying that that's what I'm doing. I don't want to break any rules, I just want to say that that sequence is defined. All the functions of proteins are dictated by the order of the amino acids, so let's take a look at the sidebar here. There are a couple of things that we will always give you this table to think about. Ooh, come back. Back to Mail Online home.back to the page you came from. The list of amino acids that make up a protein is as follows: amino acids.down, order.of.the amino acid, sequence.of the amino acid and sequence. of the protein's amino acid. a couple of outliers I just want to mention quickly. So I talked to you about glycine, the simplest amino acid with no elaborate side chain. Proline is a little odd because its side chain is kind of in a cyclic structure, and towards the end of the class, I'll talk about Proline. It's the most common amino acid in the human body, but it's also the least common in the animal kingdom. It has a very low level of activity in the body. talk to you about collagen, whose structure is totally dependent on the involvement of proline in the sequence of the amino acids that make up collagen. And then the last sorts of unusual amino acid is cysteine. It has a thiol, and the one clever thing about cy Steine-- I'm just kidding, I'm not kidding -- is that it can be used to make a drug called Cysteine-3-yl-1, which is used in the treatment of cancer. going to put a bit of a peptide here. One cysteine, and then I'm going toPut a second cy Steine here. These are going to be deemed in a peptidic structure. What cysteines can do is it can exist either with the thiol side chain, SH, or it can be. It can be used to create a new type of peptide, for example, a new form of the amino acid glycine, which is a type of amino acid that is used to make peptides. at a different oxidation state where the two sulfurs are joined to each other. So for the most part, your linear arrangement of amino acids that dictates sequence is solely held by-- together by the covalent bonds and the peptide backbone that we'll talk about in a minute. But occasionally, occasionally, the two amino acids are in different oxidation states where they're not joined to one another. That's when they form a chain of bonds that can be used to create new proteins. enfolded structures, if two cysteines are close to each other and the environment is oxidizing, they will form a cross-link. But they're not what drives folding. They kind of fall into place later on, but that just sort of sets cysteine apart a little bit for its properties, all right? That's what sets it apart from other compounds, right? So that's what makes it different from other chemicals. That's why it's different from some other compounds. Amino acids are assembled in a unique linear polymer of defined order, and we designate that defined sequence the primary sequence. And proteins can be 1,000 amino acids, 1,500, 100 amino acids. They can be various lengths where they, you know, we would generally consider the smallest protein to be about 400 amino acid. When the proteins are smaller, they are not capable of adopting too much ordered structure and we mostly call them peptides. So this would be a protein, and peptides, probably two to 39 amino acid, but these breakpoints are a little bit more vague. about the hierarchical structure of proteins as put in place, and that's the primary sequence. And that primary sequence is kind of a cool thing because it's very specific. It defines-- it's got encoded into its structure, the three-dimensional fold of the protein, OK? All the information for the folded, that's what it's for. It's a very specific sequence, and it's encoded into the structure of a protein. That's what makes it so special. And it's a really cool thing to study. compact, globular structure that's functional is encoded in that primary sequence. It's a cryptic code. We may not be able to tell by looking at it what it really looks like, but all the information is there in order to program the folding into a globular Structure. So the primary sequence is there for us to use to create the structure we want. We can't see it, but we can use it to create a structure that we want to use for our purposes. sequence determines the fold, and it's the fold of the protein that mandates its function. The sequence defines the fold. The fold, the three-dimensional form, defines the function, OK? So that's very important. And I think it's absolutely amazing that with a relatively small number of amino acids, we can make such a big difference in the function of a protein. It's not the sequence of the Protein. It is the fold that mandates the protein's function, and I think that's amazing. limited set of building blocks, we can define so many different functions of all the proteins in our body that may be structural, they may be catalysts. They may be things that transfer information from the outside to the inside of cell. All of that is programmed with this rather than this rather limited set ofbuilding blocks. We can define the functions of so many proteins in the body, and they can be structural or catalysts, or they can transfer information to the cell from outside to inside of the cell. limited set of building blocks, OK? Now, let's now talk about peptides because one gets a little frustrated looking at single amino acids. They don't tell us so much about the peptidic structure, so I'm going to draw two amino acids, and then I'mGoing to tell you one important part of the structure of a peptide. The structure of the peptide is the same as that of a protein, but it has a much more complex structure. The peptide structure is very different from that of the protein. thing. So let's put R1, and I'm going to draw another amino acid. R2, because that designates that these might be different amino acids. For example, if R1 is H, there's an implied hydrogen here, that would be glycine. If R2 is. H, the implied hydrogen is glycine, which is an amino acid that is similar to glycine but not the same as H. That's what we're going to do with R1 and R2. a methyl group, there's an implied hydrogen there, that would be alanine, all right? When nature bonds all these amino acids together, it carries out a condensation reaction to form a peptide bond between these two components of the amino acid, the amine and the carboxylic acid. And now I'm a methyl group. I'm now an amino acid. Now I'm an amine. I am an amino acids. And I am now a methyl acid. going to draw you the first of the dipeptides that you'll meet. And there are so many things to tell you about these structures, it sort of drives me crazy thinking about, oh, I must remember to tell them that or I've got to remember to telling them that, because they're so interesting. And so I'm going to draw them, and then I'll show you what they look like. And I'll draw them in a little bit more detail. And then, of course, I'll tell you how to make them. the structures are cool. R1, R2. OK, so this is a dipeptide, two amino acids, and there are some characteristics I want you to remember. When we write out peptides, we always write them N to C. So in that peptide, this would be the carboxyl terminus, and this would. be the terminus of the peptide. This would be. the amino acid at the top of the molecule. This is the amino acids at the bottom of the protein. be the amino terminus. If you don't always remember to write things in this order, and you tell your friend, oh, go and get this peptide made, andYou put it down in the wrong order, they'll make the wrong peptide. So you always-- there is basically an agreement amongst people that this is the way to do it. So that's what we do. We write it down and we put it in the order that we think it should go in. The amide, or peptide bond, is unique in that there's restricted rotation about that bond. Many of these bonds show free rotations. So it's as if you've got a linear polymer, but every third bond has kind of stuck in a particular orientation, which starts to define a lot of the structure. The amide bond is unique, but it's a key part of the peptide structure. It's the reason that we always write from left to right, the sequence of peptides. of details about protein tertiary structure. It's like spaghetti with little bits that haven't been cooked. They're stiffer than the rest of the sequence. And the other really important thing about the peptide structure is that embedded within that structure, there is the amide or peptide. The amide is a type of protein that can be found in the human body. It can also be found on other animals in the animal kingdom, such as in the body of a fish. functional group where, remember, this can be a hydrogen bond acceptor, and this can. be a Hydrogen bond donor. Once you know that, the next few slides will make a lot of sense as we talk about higher-order structure of proteins. So let's just take a look at that with with the first few slides. The second few slides are about the second and third structures. The third and fourth slide is about the fourth and fifth structure. The fifth and sixth slide is the seventh and eighth structure. a slightly longer peptide. By convention, if I'm going to draw a peptide that's methionine isoleucine threonine-- you can look up that names-- those names on the chart-- that would be the MIT peptide, he says. These are the three amino acids. He's going to condense them into a tripeptide. When I'm done, I'll show you what it looks like in the lab. He says he'll show it to you in a few weeks. condense three amino acids, I spit out two molecules of water, and I put in place two amide or peptide bonds. If I go down this backbone, every third bond is going to be fixed, fairly fixed. There's not freedom of rotation around it, and every third Bond is going. The result is a backbone where every third of the bonds are fixed, and there's no room for rotation. It's a very complex backbone, and it's very difficult to get rid of. to have the capacity to be involved in hydrogen bonding interactions, as I've suggested here, all right? What else is there here? When I write the MIT peptide, I write M first, I second, T third. If I wrote TIM, it would be a completely different chemical structure with different chemical structures. It would be an entirely new chemical structure, with different atoms and molecules. It's a very different structure to TIM, which is a peptide. It has different atoms, molecules and atoms. chemical properties, so the directionality is important to understand, and there you have it. So now you can go home and practice your name in amino acids and draw them out. If you drew them out fairly sort of sharply, then you'll never get confused about what end's what and what's at the other end of the line. You can practice this at home by drawing your name on a piece of paper and drawing it in the direction of the amino acids you want to draw. where the substitutes are, but it's important to remember as you're making a dipeptide. When you're putting these R groups on, one goes up, one went down, but these are nuances of the structure that may be lit for-- or may not be lit. As you're condensing a diPEptide, when you're Putting these R Groups on, One Goes Up. One Goes Down. When You're Putting These R groups On, One Goes Up. As You're Condensing a Dipeptides. good for a later discussion. So here is now a longer linear peptide, and the suggestion of a globular structure that might be found if that peptide was folded up. And the primary sequence here defines the globularructure. And then the process whereby you go from the extended primary sequence to the extended secondary sequence. And that's how you get to the structure you're looking for in the first place. So that's the first part of the story, and then we'll go on to the second part. to the folded structure is called protein folding. It's kind of a three-dimensional puzzle where you're trying to have as many hydrogen bonds, electrostatic interactions, and so on, as you can possibly make. So when computational chemists try to fold proteins, they have to solve a massive energy diagram. It is not simple because what you're doing is you're solving amassive energy diagram, where as you fold a structure up, you're Trying to maximize all those non-covalent forces for maximum thermodynamic stability. they're basically solving a three-dimensional puzzle where they are maximizing interactions. And there are a lot of ab initio and molecular dynamics programs that are now starting to be able to fold proteins into fairly reliable structures. But they don't always get them right because they haven't gotten all the all the interactions right, he says. "They don't get all the interaction right, but they're trying to get it right," he says, "and they're getting better and better at it" clues yet. And also while they may be able to do ab initio or computational folding with small structures, the headache gets way bigger the larger the structures get. So the predictors aren't very good at predicting big structures, they're getting better at predicting small structures. And so just to just to give you an idea of what we're up to, here are a few of the things we've been working on for the past year or so. We'll keep you posted. reinforce to you, the primary sequence is established by covalent bonds, the peptide bonds, but the globular tertiary structure is based on non-covalent covalENT interactions, OK? Now, I want to ask you this. I love cartoons with science in them, but you know, 10%, 20% of the time, they make fun of science, right? So, what do you think? What would you like to see in a science-based cartoon? mistakes, and I felt this one was particularly pertinent. So a bunch of guys lugging around in a lab and says, well, we finished the genome map, now we just have to figure out how to fold it. What is wrong with that cartoon? What fold? Yeah? AUDIENCE: You want to [INAUDIBLE].. PROFESSOR: Yeah. It's double helical, duplex DNA or something. You're actually folding proteins, so the cartoon is not quite right, but it's sort of kind of cute. together, I just want you to remember from last time this set of non-covalent forces, because if you understand them and recognize them, you'll understand how they may occur in folded protein structures. All right, so here's a peptide sequence. Here's a puzzle for you. You can go back and go back to the beginning of this article and work your way to the end. You'll find the answer to the puzzle at the bottom of the page. The answer will be revealed at the end of the article. figure out what the one-letter code spells there. Just take out your table with all the amino acids. It's appended to the back of your P-set, and you'll be able to see what that very large peptide spells. All right, I don't want you working it out while you're here. I'll be back in a few minutes with the rest of the show. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page where you came from.. You've got to listen to me for the time being. OK, so the first order, we get it, there's a primary sequence. The next thing to think about is what's known as secondary structure. It's a higher order than just the primary sequence, and it's established by non-covalent bonds. And it's the same thing as the main sequence, but it's in a higher level of structure. And that's what we're going to talk about today. it's called secondary-- oof, my writing's horrid today. Secondary structure. And those are interactions that are put in place exclusively by interactions between the peptide bonds of what's known as the Peptide backbone. So for example, a hydrogen bonds, such as that, or a different hydrogen bonding interaction,such as that. Between the atoms that are in the backbone and the ones that are on the other side of the backbone. That's what we would call the peptides backbone. have lone pairs of electrons and the other atoms-- heavy atoms that hold a hydrogen that's quite acidic. What I'm showing you here is what's known as the alpha helix. First deduced by Pauling, in fact, through model building, through models of the universe. And there are a couple of major forms of secondary structure, such as the beta helix and the beta-helix, that can be seen in the structure of the solar system, for example. he said, proteins could form these ordered structures. An alpha helix is an ordered structure exclusively made up from the hydrogen-bonding interactions of the peptide backbone. The next secondary structure is also held together by hydrogen bonding, and it's interactions between stretched out strands of peptides that may not be close to each other in the primary sequence, but they align in the folded structure. And so for example, what is a protein? It's a continuous strand of peptide, but there are hydrogen bonds between COs and NHs all the way through the backbone. I've shown you here is what's known as a-- this guy is then to say this is an anti-parallel beta sheet. And across that sheet, there are continuous opportunities for hydrogen bonding interaction. If the strands run in opposite directions, it's anti- parallel. If they're in the same direction, it is parallel. If it's in the opposite direction, then it's not anti-Parallel. It's just a different way of looking at it, but it's the same thing. These two secondary structure elements make up a lot of the sort of the basics of how proteins start to fold. They're key non-covalent forces, and there are also other smaller motifs. One is called a beta turn, where the peptide sequence may go through a chain reversal, so the sequence is reversed. The other is a beta-turn, where a peptide is reversed in a chain-reversing fashion, so that the sequence can be reversed again. would look like this. I'm going to just draw it, and I'll talk to you in a moment about ribbon diagrams. These are the ordered elements of secondary structure. You don't have to be a mathematician to understand them. And this piece here would be the turn, whereas that would be. the interactions enforced by the sheet. That's the turn. And that's the interactions enforcing the sheet, and the turn is the interactions between the sheet and the other parts of the structure. to be able to figure them out. So even those simple elements still it's hard to make big enough structures to have functions. So as I mentioned in a continuation of the theme, you have to be. able to pick them out in order to understand the structure, OK? So you have. to pick out the simple elements in the first place, and then you can figure out the complex ones in the second place. So that's what we're trying to do in this book. the protein folding is hierarchical, you can start to put together elements of secondary structure to make things that are a little larger. And these really start to be proteins that might be big enough to be able to do something, but they're all exclusively held together by non-covalent forces between the amides or peptide bonds. Helix with a different kind of turn, maybe put in place by a metal ion or something, or a strand, turn, strand, or now something that's a composite of the helix and the turn. in the backbone of the protein, OK? Not very exciting just yet. One other little clue that people will-- you might see and you might be confused, people sometimes, when they're drawing sort of a quick picture of a protein, they might draw a helix, but instead of really making the helix out, they draw a backbone. That's a different way of drawing a protein. It's a little bit more complicated than that, but it's still a good start. showing it in detail, they might show it as a cylinder, so you might need to pick that out of a structure. And then I want to call your attention to that, that in all those motifs, when you join one helix to another, you may need to turn a helix into a cylinder. That's what I'm trying to show you. I'm showing you how to do it. I want you to get the idea of how it works. I hope you get it. strand to another strand you need to turn, and so on. OK, so this is like taking your very extended stored of polymer, knowing there are different kinks in it, because of the backbone bonds. But folding it up in a structure that maximizes the opportunity for another order of operations. That's what we've done here. We've taken a very long polymer and folded it up into a very short one. We're now able to do that with a much shorter polymer. It's like taking a very extended polymer and folding it into a shorter one. Tertiary structure is enabled by all these other interactions, electrostatic, hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic forces, that can be put together. All right, so we've seen primary.structure, which we'll talk about now. Secondary is just with backbone. And things start to get much more interesting when we get to tertiary structure, because tertiary. structure is much more complex than just the backbone. That's why we're going to talk about tertiary structures now. in place due to the side chains of amino acids interacting with each other or with the backbone structures. So I'm going to walk you through this, so you can sort of get a sense of how these three-dimensional puzzles work on a very small scale. So look here, that's the side chain that's holding the backbone structure in place. So that's what's going on here. That's the way it works. And that's how it's supposed to work, too. a very small motif. And what I'm going to call your attention to is when you fold up these motifs, when the secondary structure is in place, a lot of the side chains are near each other, and they can engage in long-distance contacts. And so for example, I'mgoing to go to the top of the page and look at the right hand side of the image. And I'll be looking at the left hand side. And when I'm looking at that side, I'll see the top right side of that image, and I'll go to that right side. to show you interactions between side chains. But what I want to do is take a look at this and see, can you put any of those potential interactions on the drawing that's on your handout? It's pretty pretty. It's a pretty good handout. It shows you how side chains interact with each other and with the peptide backbone, or side chains and water, or water and side chains, for example. I want you to see if you can find any potential interactions in the drawing. obvious where there's an electrostatic interaction, right? Boop. OK, between plus-- get those out of the way, those are the easy ones. And then interactions between hydrophobic groups, where they want to amass that lipophilic structure, so it's not exposed as much to water, so they cluster, so those are also easy. So, that's the first set of interactions. The second set is between plus and plus. And the third set are between plus, plus plus, and plus plus. easy. Make sure you get your hydrogen. And then you can start thinking about what are all of hydrogen bonds you could draw. Here I've shown one between side chains. Between side chains and backbone, between side Chains and water, and those may all contribute to the ultimate thermodynamic stability. Those may all be hydrogen bonds, too, and they could be used to form a chain of atoms or molecules, or even a whole chain of molecules and atoms, or a whole system of atoms and molecules. bonds right. Remember, two donors don't interact with each other into acceptors, don't-- so this might describe the folding possibilities of that small motif. Now what I want to show you-- I'm going to-- let me-- is an ab-initio simulation of a folding process. So let me just get that out of the way. Let's go to the next section, where we'll look at the folding process of a small motif, and then we'll see how it folds. a little bigger on the screen. So this is computing. GB1 is a very small protein that holds reversibly under appropriate conditions, and what I'm going to do is forward you through this video. This is a simulation. It's not looking at anything by spectroscopy or spectroscopic or anything like that. We're looking at computation. We are looking at all computation. And this is all computing. It is all computation, and it is not looking into anything that we can see. in solution or anything like that. This is multi-scale modeling. It's got a lot of details in how it's done, but the starting point is a very denatured protein, all stretched out, right? And what what I'm going to do is I'mgoing to forward you through the structure. And what is it? It's a protein that's been stretched out into a very complex shape. And it's a very, very complex protein that has been stretched into a complex structure. I'm going to do is just show you for a few seconds, you know, this thing's like trying to find its thermodynamic minimum, and it's actually failing pretty badly. And it does that for about 30-- 60 seconds of the simulations, so I made a point to myself to take a picture of it. It's actually a pretty bad example of what's going to happen when you try to find the minimum temperature of the system. It actually fails pretty badly, and I'm like, "Oh my God, this is really bad" you to about minute one, where things start to get fairly interesting. And you're saying, well, what's interesting about that? You see that nascent helix, in the background, the red and the blue, is starting to form strands that are a little bit aligned, and it's trying to find as much as it can to find a way out of this mess. It's a very, very interesting thing to watch, and I think it's going to get even more interesting as it goes on. many connections as possible to satisfy a stable structure. At a certain point in the simulation, five of the hydrophobic groups are in a little pea. That's a breakpoint in the folding process, because that gets everything glued together better. These early structures are known as molten globules. A lot of the interactions are not yet in place, but the Hydrophobic cluster is critical. But then after that, it's almost as if you're sliding, the researchers say. downhill to get all the remaining interactions in place to fold the protein, OK? So protein folding is a puzzle that can be solved computationally by maximizing thermodynamic interactions. That's going to get difficult the larger the protein. So it's sigma this, sum of this,sum of this and sum of that. That is the way to solve the protein folding puzzle. It's a very complex problem, but it can be easily solved by using computer algorithms. It can be done in a matter of seconds. protein gets, but for small proteins, those simulations really start to make sense, OK? All right, so let's just move on here. What did you think of the simulation? It's kind of cool, right? So you can find the link in the sidebar. So just pop these into your browser and go to the bottom of the page to see the simulation. It's pretty cool, and it's a lot of fun to look at, so go ahead and try it. back on now, and that's the folded structure. All right, so with many proteins, they're much more complex than that. So for example, here's cyclin A. It's involved in cell cycle, and you can see its alpha helix structure dominantly, very clearly, all those beautiful alpha helices. Next to it is cyclin B, which is involved in the cell cycle and is folded in a similar way. Next up, cyclin C, which has a more complex structure. is the green fluorescent protein, which is a cylindrical structure made up of anti-parallel beta sheets. What's really cool is when you sort of rotate it, you can see all those sheets, but then it does this little sort of curtsy to the audience, and you can look down into it. It's a really cool thing to be able to look down and see the structure of the protein, and see all the different layers of the structure, and all of the different colors and patterns. the barrel. And then in some cases, proteins may be a mixture of a secondary structure elements. Here it's a little hard to tell. This is triose phosphate isomerase, but if you look down it, you can see the helices, and there's also a group of beta strands that are held together. So in that protein, it'sa mixture of alpha helix and beta sheet. Now, I'm not going to tell you much about pulling up Protein Data Bank files right now because I want to cover the next topic. I'll show you. But wherever I show you a structure, I'm trying to show you the Protein Data Bank code. In the web site, you can see there is a free download of PyMOL, which is the program I used to create all these structures and movies, so you can download it as well. I hope it will help you understand some of the things I've been doing in the past few years. I'm looking forward to seeing what you think of it. can really look at things. And believe me, it took me about three years to learn how to use it properly. It'll probably take you about a week or maybe a couple of days. So if I can learn it, you can certainly learn it. Now, there is one final question: What is your favourite film of all time? And who is the star of the film that made you laugh the most? And what is your favorite film of the century? And which one is the best film of this century? element of protein structure that people get kind of hung up on, and it's what's called quaternary structure. So in addition to all of these, let's say I have a folded motif, and there's its structure. That would be have primary, secondary, between the strands or the helix, and tertiary structure, right? But in some cases, proteins hold up to quaternARY structure, where it's multiple of these units joined together-- hoo, I could have picked a simpler fold. associated by non-covalent forces. So there's more than one polypeptide chain. In fact, here would be four peptide chains coming together in a higher-order structure that's made up of four of those units. The prototypic example of this is the protein that carries oxygen around in your blood, which is called an oxygen transport protein (OTP) and is found in the lungs and other organs of the human body. It's a protein that is used to transport oxygen around the body. hemoglobin, and it has four primary sequences that have come together in a tetrameric quaternary structure. Hemoglobin is kind of interesting, because it's made up of two alpha and two beta subunits. If All these subunits were identical, they would be called homooligomers, all the same pieces. If they are different, they are called heterooligomer. We'll see a little bit more about this when I talk about hemoglobin in the next class. Proteins are condensation polymers of amino acids. Each protein sequence is defined by covalent bonding. Most of them that are not have quite quaternary structure are folded through secondary and tertiary interactions. More about that in the next class. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, Back to thepage you camefrom. Back into the pageYou came from the page You Came From, Back To The Page You Came from,Back to the Page you Came From that we already talked about, and folding is defined by how to maximize all those non-covalent forces to get the maximum thermodynamic stability with the maximum number of interactions. And subunits may also come together through quaternary structure. OK, so I'm going to talk to you about several proteins throughout the course of this article. I'll be talking about the proteins that are involved in protein folding, and I'll also talk about some of the non-protein related processes. In the next class, we'll talk about transporters and enzymes, and as we move on to signaling, things like receptors and membrane proteins and so on. So the protein that provides mechanical support for tissues is called a structural protein. The protein is found in cells, tissues, and organs, including the nervous system and the heart. It's a protein that is involved in the formation of cells and tissues, as well as their function as signaling molecules. It is also involved in cell division and cell death. Collagen is the most abundant protein in the human body. It plays enormous roles. It's not an enzyme, it's not a catalyst or a transporter. It is one of those structural proteins, where the structure of collagen has evolved to provide structure. It has a huge role in the development of the body's tissues and organs. It also plays a key role in our immune system, helping us to fight infections and other conditions that can lead to cancer. It can also play a key part in the formation of bone and cartilage. a mechanical stability to lots of essential components of complex organisms. And there are many different types of collagens that are found in different parts of the body. And what I'm going to show you is that a single amino acid change in the primary sequence of collagen can destabilize the structure, so it is no longer viable. And the disease type I'mgoing to talk about is called myelodysplastic syndrome, which is a form of leukaemia that affects the skin. Osteogenesis imperfecta is a set of diseases known as collagenopathies. Osteo always refers to bone because collagen plays a critical role in the structure of bone. Bone isn't just bone, it's collagen involved in it. And it's also also known as bone marrow and bone marrow failure. It's a disease that affects the bone marrow, the bone cells, and the bone tissue. It can cause bone cancer, bone fractures, and bone cancer of the cartilage and cartilage. this disease is called brittle bone syndrome. The long bones in the upper arm are all irregular because the bones are brittle, and they'll break even in utero. A lot of babies with this disease are born with brittle bones syndrome, which is a form of bone cancer. The disease can be treated with surgery, but it can also be treated by living with the condition for a long period of time, doctors say. For more information on this disease, go to brittlebonesyndrome.org. defect can't even be born through the birth canal because it would crush the bones, and many of them don't survive very long at all. Some survive with different kinds of cases, but their lives are greatly impacted, and they could just sort of hit a table and the bones would just fall out of them. Some of them survive, but some don't, and some are very, very badly affected by the defect and can't live long after birth. They can't be born with a birth defect, so they can't have children. would break, all right? There are those sort of serious situations where parents are actually accused of abuse to the child, but the child actually had brittle bone syndrome, and it was just through helping them put their clothes on or taking them upstairs, the bones got broken very readily. It was just a very, very serious situation. It's a very sad thing to see, but that's the way it is. It is what it is, and we have to live with it. We have to accept it. So osteogenesis imperfecta really describes a collection of these defects. Now the collagen tertiary structure is shown here. It's actually made up of a type of helix. The individual subunits in that tertiary in the structure are fairly long and long. It is not an alpha helix, it's a polyproline helix and it's not a helix that is alpha-like. So the individual subunit is not alpha, it is polyprolines that are alpha. extended, and I show you three strands in this polymeric structure, a yellow, a red, and a green. And these rolled together into a three helix bundle that has a fibrillous structure. And then all these structures come together to make the macromolecular structure that is collagen. It's not just a protein, it's a whole family of proteins that are involved in the body's healing process. And it's not a single molecule, it is a whole group of molecules that make up the body. one of those fibrils. There are many genetic defects of collagen, and what's so important to think about is if you have a defect in one strand that defect is genetic. It's bundles of thosefibrils in a very organized pattern where you could even see that patterning in electron microscopy. And that's what we're trying to find out about in the study of the human body. We want to know what's going on in the body of the person we're looking at. will propagate through every single strand. If this is one strand made up of three polypeptide chains, it propagates all the way through the structure. And I believe I have little time to just show you, here's the collagen structure. I'm just showing you how it's extended. Those are threepolypeptides. The collagen structure is one of the most complex structures in the world. It is made of more than 100,000 different types of proteins. The structure of the collagen molecule is the same as that of a human bone. Independent strands, and there's a set of magenta residues in the middle, which come from a defect in the sequence where a glycine has been changed to an alanine. So I'm going to show you this movie because it shows you right at the center of the structure, there are independent strands. There are a lot of different ways to look at the structure of the human genome. It's a very complex structure, and it's very diverse. It can be seen in many different ways. residues painted in pink. If you look at those cells they're all nicely organized, except where that defect is. That defect is caused by the change of a hydrogen to a methyl group on three. And what I'm going to do is show you close up of that segment. And that's where the defect is, and that's why the cells are so badly organized. It's because of that defect, and it's caused by that change of the hydrogen to the methyl group. residues that come together, and that bulges out that fibrillous structure and makes it not as compact and beautiful as it should be in the version that's got the glycine there. So if you look at it, you can even see that helix gets bulged out and it's not as good as it used to be, he says. "It's a little bit of a mess," he says, "but it's a good mess. It's a lot of fun to play with." well-aligned as the rest of the structure. And then that defect gets propagated into all the fibrils and results in the weakening of the bones. Either the collagen fails to form properly, or the collagen, when it forms, it has much less mechanical stability. So I think that's a good sign for the human body, I think it's a sign of good health in the long-term, I'm happy to see that," says Dr. Hissrich. "I'm very optimistic about the future," he adds. place to stop and I'll pick up next time with hemoglobin. Oh, one last little thing, a couple of things for you to do. There's a great link on the website to the Protein Data Bank to see how enzymes work. And if you have a little time, it would be a good time to visit the Protein data bank. If you've got a few minutes, I'd love to hear from you about how you've been using your hemoglobin in the last few days. be awesome if you could just take a quick flick through those parts of the text. These slides are posted with these reading assignments, and they're posted in color if you want to look at them again. The slides are in color so you can see them again if you need to see them in a different way. They're posted with the reading assignments for this week's class. For the rest of the class, click through the next page for the next set of reading assignments. The reading assignments are in English, Spanish, and French.