Lenin was one of the most influential figures of the 20th century. But was he a hero who toppled an oppressive tyranny or a villain who replaced it with another? It's time to put Lenin on the stand in and put him on trial for his role in the death of the Tsar. The trial will take place in front of a live audience in Moscow on September 14. The jury will then decide whether or not to convict Lenin of any crime. The verdict will be made at the end of the trial. Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov, AKA Lenin, helped overthrow the Russian tsar Nicholas II in 1917. He founded the Soviet Union, one of the worst dictatorships of the 20th century. "Now, wasn't it your fault that the band broke up?" he asked a friend. "Your honor, this is Lenin," he replied. "I'm sorry, I didn't mean to offend you." "I don't think I did," he said, "but I'm not angry with you." century." "Ohh." "The tsar was a bloody tyrant under whom the masses toiled in slavery." "This is rubbish. Serfdom had already been abolished in 1861." "And replaced by something worse. The factory bosses treated the people far worse than their former feudal landlords. And unlike the landlords, they were always in charge." "Like the tsar, they always treated the masses in a way that was worse than the feudal landlords." 'Ohh.' "This was rubbish. Russian workers toiled for eleven hours a day and were the lowest paid in all of Europe. "But Tsar Nicholas made laws to protect the workers." "He reluctantly did the bare minimum to avert revolution, and even there, he failed. Remember what happened in 1905 after his troops fired" "He did not want a revolution, he wanted to save his people from themselves" "I am not a dictator, I am a father," he said, "and I want to save my people." on peaceful petitioners?" "Yes, and the tsar ended the rebellion by introducing a constitution and an elected parliament, the Duma." "While retaining absolute power and dissolving them whenever he wanted." "Perhaps there would've been more reforms in due time if radicals, like Lenin, weren't always stirring up trouble." "Your Honor, your honor, your Honor,” he said. “Your Honor.” “I’m sorry,’ he said, ‘I can’t.’” Lenin had seen his older brother Aleksandr executed by the previous tsar for revolutionary activity. Even after the reforms, Nicholas continued the same mass repression and executions, as well as the unpopular involvement in World War I, that cost Russia so many lives and resources. "Hm, this tsar doesn't seem like the kind of guy who'd want to start a war in Russia," Lenin said. "He's not the sort of guy you'd pick to lead Russia. He's the one who's going to have to do it." sound like such a capital fellow." "Your Honor, maybe Nicholas II did doom himself with bad decisions, but Lenin deserves no credit for this. When the February 1917 uprisings finally forced the tsar to abdicate, Lenin was still exiled in Switzerland." "Hm, so who came to power?" "The Duma formed" "The Russian Duma was formed in February 1917. It was the first parliament to be directly elected by the majority of the population. The Duma is still in existence today." a provisional government, led by Alexander Kerensky, an incompetent bourgeois failure. He even launched another failed offensive in the war, where Russia had already lost so much, instead of ending it like the people wanted. "It was a constitutional social democratic government, the most progressive of its time. And it was the most successful government in history," he says. "And it was also the most incompetent bourgeois success," he adds, calling it a "failed offensive" against the Soviet Union. could have succeeded eventually if Lenin hadn't returned in April, says Kerensky. "Such slander! The July Days were a spontaneous and justified reaction against the government's failures," he says. Kerennsky showed his true colors when he blamed Lenin and arrested him, he says, and was arrested as a result of his actions. "I showed my true colors," he adds, "and I was arrested and jailed as a consequence of my actions. I was a traitor and a traitor." and outlawed his Bolshevik party, forcing him to flee into exile again. Some democracy! It's a good thing the government collapsed under their own incompetence and greed when they tried to stage a military coup then had to ask the Bolsheviks for help when it backfired. After that, all Lenin was all Lenin all the time. He was in exile again, and had to be sent back to Russia to live with his family. He died in prison in 1918, and was never seen again. had to do was return in October and take charge. The government was peacefully overthrown overnight. "But what the Bolsheviks did after gaining power wasn't very peaceful," he says. "Was it really necessary to murder the tsar's entire family, even the children?" he asks. "It would've been the end of everything the people had fought so hard to achieve. Besides, Lenin may not have given the order." "But it was very, very dangerous," he adds. What about the purges and executions of other socialist and anarchist parties, their old allies? What about the Tambov Rebellion, where peasants, resisting grain confiscation, were killed with poison gas? Or sending the army to crush the workers in Kronstadt, who were killed by poison gas. Wasn't it not only imperialists that the Bolsheviks killed? It was also their allies, the socialist and Anarchist parties. It was not only the imperialists they killed, it was their allies as well. demanding democratic self-management? Was this still fighting for the people?" "Yes! The measures were difficult, but it was a difficult time. The new government needed to secure itself while being attacked from all sides, so that the socialist order could be established" "And what good came of this socialist order?" he asks. "I don't know," he says. "It was a very difficult time for the new government. But it was necessary to establish a socialist order. It was necessary for the country's future." Even after the civil war was won, there were famines, repression and millions executed or sent to die in camps. Lenin's successor Stalin established a cult of personality and absolute power. "That wasn't the plan. Lenin never cared for personal gains, even his enemies admitted that he fully believed that he was a good man," says Lenin's grandson, Alexei Kuznetsov. "Even his enemies admit that he Fully Believed that He was a Good Man," he adds. in his cause, living modestly and working tirelessly from his student days until his too early death. "He saw how power-hungry Stalin was and tried to warn the party, but it was too late," he says. "And the decades of totalitarianism that followed after?" "You could call it that," he adds, "but it was not totalitarian." "He was a man of the people. He was not a dictator. He didn't want to be a dictator," she says. Lenin's efforts changed Russia in a few decades from a backward and undeveloped monarchy full of illiterate peasants to a modern, industrial superpower. Russia now has one of the world's best educated populations, unprecedented opportunities for women, and some of the most important scientific advancements of the century. Life may not have been as easy for Lenin as he had hoped, but it was better than it had been for many of his followers, including many of the country's most prominent politicians and businessmen. have been luxurious, but nearly everyone had a roof over their head and food on their plate, which few countries have achieved. "But these advances could still have happened, even without Lenin and the repressive regime he established," he says. "Yes, and I could've been a famous rock and roll singer," he adds, "but that's not the way it was." "I'm not a great singer, but I've had a lot of hits and I've got a lot more to say," the former Soviet leader says. how would I have sounded?" We can never be sure how things could've unfolded if different people were in power or different decisions were made, but to avoid the mistakes of the past, we must always be willing to put historical figures on trial. We must never forget that history is not an exact copy of the present, but it can be a guide to the future. It can be used to learn from the mistakes made in the past and to make better decisions in the present. It is never too late to put a historical figure on trial for their actions.