Today's topic is random variables. Random variables are an absolutely fundamental concept in probability theory. Let's start off with an example that in fact, is a game because that's a fun way to start. So we're going to play the game of "random variables" for a minute. The game is called "random variable" and it's a game of the same name. The winner is the winner of the game, and we'll play it again later on this week. Back to the page you came from. bigger number game and here's how it works. There are two teams, and Team 1 has the task of picking two different integers between 0 and 7 inclusive. They turn the two pieces of paper face down so the numbers are not visible, and the other team then sees these two Pieces of paper whose other side has different numbers written on them sitting on the table. What Team 2 then does is picks one of the pieces ofPaper. It is then up to Team 1 to pick the other piece of paper. and turns it over and looks at the number on it. And then, based on what that number is, they make a decision, stick with the number they have or switch to the other unknown number on the face down piece of paper. That'll be their final number. And that'll be the number that they use to get their next job. That's what they do. They get a job and they get a number to get a new job. It's a process. It takes a long time to get to that point. the game is that Team 2 wins if they wind up with the larger number. So they're going to look at the number on the paper that they expose and they're trying to decide whether it looks like a big number or little number. If it's big or little, Team 2 is going to win. The game starts at 8 p.m. ET on CNN.com and continues until 9 p.M. ET. For more information on the game, go to CNN.co/sport. a big number, they'll stick with it. If it looks like a little number,. they'll switch to the other one that they hope is larger. So which team do you think has an advantage here? Course, if you've read the notes, you know. But if you haven't been exposed to them, you don't know what's going on. You'll have to watch the game to get an idea of what's on the line. You can watch it live on CNN.com. this before, it's not really so obvious. And what we encourage and what we used to do when we ran this in real time in classes that we would have students in teams, split their team in half, one would be Team 1 and the other would be Teams 2, he says. "It's really not so obvious," he adds. "What we encourage ... is that we have to be able to do this in a way that makes sense to all of our students. It's not just one or two people at a time." and they'd play the game few times, see if they could figure out who had the advantage. And if you have the opportunity, this might be a good moment to stop this video and try playing the game with some friends if they're around. Otherwise, let's just proceed and see how well you can play the video game with your friends and family. If you want to try it with your own friends, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and post a video of your own. how it all works. Team 2 is going to take this idea about big and small that I mentioned and act on it in a methodical way. So they're going to pick a paper to expose, giving each paper equal probability. So this is the strategy Team 2 are going to adopt. It's going to be a very methodical approach, and it's not going to happen all at once. It will be a little bit like a game of chess, but it's a lot more fun. So that guarantees that they have a 50/50 chance of picking the big number. Whatever ingenuity Team 1 tried to do on which piece of paper was on the left, it doesn't really matter if it worked. It doesn't matter if they picked the little number or the big one. It's just a game of who gets to pick the biggest number. The winner will be announced at 8.30pm on Monday night on BBC One. For more, visit CNN.com/sport. Team 2 simply picks a piece of paper at random. There's no way that Team 1 can try to fake out Team 2 on where they put the number. OK. The next step is that Team 2 is going to decide whether the number that they can see, the exposed number, is the one that they want to see. Team 2 picks the number at random, and Team 1 chooses the number it wants to see the number to be exposed to the public. Team 1 picks the numbers at random and Team 2 selects the number the public can see. number, is small. And if so, would they switch? And otherwise they stick. So that is, they're going to define some threshold Z where being less than or equal to Z means small, and being greater than Z means large. The question is, how do they choose Z? Well, the answer is that they choose a number that is small, but not too small. The answer is: Z is a small number, and if you're less than Z, you're small. naive thing to do would be to choose Z to be in the middle of the interval from 0 to 7. Let's say, you choose Z equals 3. So there would be four numbers less than or equal to Z and four numbers greater than Z. But of course, as we all know, there are more than four numbers that are equal to or less than Z and more than or more than five numbers that do not equal each other. So the answer to the riddle is not as simple as it first appears. If Team 1 knew what your Z was, they would just make sure to pick their two numbers on the same side of your Z. And then your Z wouldn't really tell you anything. You'd switch or stick in both cases, and you'd only have a 50/50 chance of picking the right number. So what you do-- and this is where probability comes in-- is you pick Z in a way that can't be predicted or made use of by Team 1. And that's true no matter what Z you take. Z at random, to be any number from 0 to 7, not including 7 including 0. That is, your number is either 0, 1, 2, up through 6. And being less than or equal to Z means small, and being greater than Z means large. And when you see a number from Z, it means you are either 0 or 1, up to 6, or a combination of the two. For example, you could be 0 or 2, and your number could be 1 or 2. small number, you'll switch and when you see a large number,. you'll stick. But what's going to be large and what's Going to be small is going to vary each time you play the game, depending on what random number, Z, comes out to be. So let's analyze your probability and see how it compares to the rest of the world. The game is on CNN.com's "This Is Life with Lisa Ling" at 10 p.m. ET. if you're Team 2. What's the probability that you're going to win now? Well, let's suppose that Team 1 picks these two numbers. We don't know what they are, but they have to pick a low number that's less than a high number. So these twoNumbers are at least high enough to win. If you're on Team 1, what are the odds that you'll win? Let us know in the comments below or on Twitter @CNNOpinion. 1 apart, they can't have the same number on both pieces of paper. Otherwise, it's clear that you are not going to be able to pick the large one, that would be cheating. OK, so there's two different numbers. One of them has to be less than the other. So one of them must be less, and the other must be the same. That's how you pick the number you want to pick. You have to pick one of the two numbers. We don't know how much less, might be a lot less, may be only one less, but low is less than high. The most interesting case is the middle case. That is, when your Z, which was high, was lower than your Z. The middle case is when your Y, which is low, was higher than your Y. The low case is more likely than the high case. The high case is most likely to be lower than the low case. It is the most likely case of what happens with your strategy. chosen at random, happens to fall in the interval between low and high. That is, your Z is strictly less than high and greater than or equal to low. If you turn over the Z, it means you have a good idea of what to do next. And then in that case,your Z is really guiding you correctly on what toDo. If the Z is more than high, you are more likely to have a bad idea. And if you are less than low, you may have a better idea of where to go. low card, then it's going to look low because it's less than or equal to Z so you'll switch to the high card and win. If you turn over the high. card, it'll be greater than Z so it'll look high and you'll know to stick with. it. You'll know if you're going to win or lose if it looks low or high. If it looks high or low, then you're likely to win. You're probably going to lose if you don't switch. So in this case, you're guaranteed to win. And so the probability that you win, given the middle case occurs, is 1. If you were lucky enough to guess the right threshold between low and high, you'll win. Now, what about the middle cases? How often does that happen? We'll have to wait and see. We'll let you know in a few days when the results are in. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. happen? Well, the difference between low and high is at least 1, so there's guaranteed to be 1 chance in 7 that your Z is going to fall between them. And it could be more if low andHigh are further apart, but as long as they're at least one, it's likely to happen. It could be even more if Low and High are closer together, but it's more likely if they're more than one. It's possible that you could have a low Z and a high Z at the same time. apart, there's a 1/7 chance that you're going to fall in between them. Now, in case H, that's the case where Z happens to be chosen greater than or equal to the high number that Team 1 shows. In other words, Z is bigger than both numbers than Team 1. OK. Now we're on to the next set of questions. What do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments below or tweet us @CNNOpinion. Back to the page you came from. 1 shows and put on the pieces of paper. Well, in that case, Z just isn't telling you anything. So what's going to happen is that both numbers are going to look high to you. Both numbers aregoing to look low to you because they're both less than 1.1. That's what happens when you put the two numbers on the same piece of paper, and they're not equal to each other. So that's what you're going to see. It's not going to make any sense. or equal to Z. So you'll switch. And that means that you'll win, if and only if, you happen to turn the low card over first. There's a 50/50 chance of that. So again, in this case that Z makes both cards look high, or Z itself is low, Team 2, you win with probability 1/2. Well, that's great because now we can apply total probability. And what total probability is that Team 2 will win? probability tells us is that Team 2 wins is the probability that they win given case M times the probability of M plus the probability. of not the middle case. But we figured out what these were. Well, at least we know what the probabilities are for Team 2 and Team 1. We also know the probabilities for Team 1 and Team 3 and Team 4 and Team 5 and Team 6 and Team 7 and Team 8 and Team A and Team B and Team C and Team D and Team F. least inequalities on them, because there's probability 1 that you'll win 1/7 of the time. There's probability a 1/2 that you will win the rest of the times, the other 6/7. You're going to win 4/7 times, and you'll lose the other 2/3. The probability that you win playing your strategy is 1 in 1,000,000. You'll lose 1 in 10,000 if you play your strategy the wrong way. is 4/7. It's better than 50/50. You have an advantage. And whether that was a priori obvious or not, I don't know. But I think it's kind of cool. OK, you win with probability 4-7. Now, Team 2 has the advantage. The important thing to understand is it does. And the important thing is it's not a 50-50 game. It is a 4-6 game. And it's going to be a close one. not matter what team does. No matter how smart Team 1 is, Team 2 has gotten control of the situation because they picked-- which piece of paper they picked at random 50/50. Team 2 is still going to have their 1/7 chance of coming out ahead, which is enough to tip the balance in their favor. It's interesting that symmetrically, Team 1 also has a random strategy that they can use against Team 2. And they chose Z randomly, so again, it doesn't matter what numbers Team 1 shows. No matter what Team 2 does, Team 1 can put this upper bound to 4/7 on it. So essentially we can say that the value of this game, the probability that Team 2 wins is optimally for both is 4-7. So if they both play optimally, it's going to stay at 4/8. And that's true no matter what team 2 does. It guarantees that no matter how Team 2 plays, Team 2 will win with probability at most 4-8. A random variable is simply a number that's produced by a random process. In a formal definition, the threshold is the number of random events that occur at the same time. We'll go into more detail about this in a moment. But in the meantime, let's look at a simple example of a random variable. The threshold is a random number that occurs at a random time. The number is called a "random number" and it's a number produced by the random process of a process called a process of randomness. variable Z was a thing that took a value from 0 to 6 inclusive, each with probability 1/7. So it was producing a number by a random process, that chose a number at random with equal probability. If Team 2 plays properly at random picking which piece of paper to pick, it will pick the winning number. If they don't, they'll pick the wrong one. It will be the wrong number, and they'll have to pick a different one each time. It's like a game of Monopoly, but with numbers instead of dice. If Team 1 plays optimally, the number on the exposed card is going to be a random variable. Team 1 in their optimal strategy that puts an upper bound to 4/7 is in fact, going to choose the two numbers randomly. The number of the larger card is another random variable, a number produced by the random process. And likewise, the numbers of the higher and lower cards are also random variables, as is the size of the card on the other side of the table. picks its larger and smaller cards randomly, it's going to be another example of a number produced by a random process. And likewise, the number of the smaller card. So that's enough examples. This little game has a whole bunch of random variables appearing in it. And in the next article, we'll show you how to do the same thing with your own cards and pieces of paper. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, segment, we will look again officially, what is the definition of a random variable? In the next segment, we look again at the meaning of the term 'random variable' in terms of the data used in the game. We will also look at how the data can be used to predict the outcome of a game. The next segment will look at the impact of the game on the results of the games. The final segment will focus on how the results can be predicted by the game's outcome.