hey everyone it's sarah with registerednessrn.com and in this video i'm going to be covering sinus tachycardia. As always whenever you're done watching this youtube video you can access the free quiz that will test you on this content. Let's get started what is sinusTachyCardia well first first we need to talk about sinus Tachy Cardia. What is it and how does it affect your heart? Let's go to the bottom of the page to find out. The sa node is found in the upper part of the right atrium. It is also known as a sinoatrial node and it is found here. A heart rhythm that is arising from the sa node that is very fast and rapid but it's regular so first let's talk about this sa node thesa node is really the starting point. The sa node can be found in patients with a history of heart disease. It can also be seen in patients who have been diagnosed with a heart condition. of the electrical conduction system and the whole goal of the electrical Conduction system is to stimulate your heart muscle cells so they will be and pump blood throughout your body. It all starts here with the sa node which again is located in the upper part of the upper body. The goal is to get your heart to pump blood through your body so it all begins here. The sa node is located at the top of the body and is called a sa node. It stimulates the heart muscle. It is also known as the sa muscle node. right atrium we like to refer to this as the pacemaker of the heart because if it's working like it should it should cause your heart to beat at about 60 to 100 beats per minute. Its goal is to really stimulate these atria to get them to contract. If it works as it should, your heart should be beating at about 100 beats a minute. If not, it should be at 60 or 80 beats. It's called a pacemaker for the right atrium, which is the heart's pacemaker. so it leads to atrial depolarization which is going to lead to the contraction of your atria. So the signal goes down through its internal pathways and it hits the av node. The av node is known as the gatekeeper because it delays or slows down that electrical signal a little bit. So it goes down and hits the Av node and it delays the electrical signal. It goes down to the av nodes and it slows it down. So that's what happens when you have an atria contraction. little bit so those atria can fully empty then the signal is going to go down through the bundle of his. We're ready for ventricle depolarization so we can get contraction of the ventricles to occur. The signal goes down the bundle and hits the bundle branches. It's a signal that's going to send out to the rest of the body. It sends out a signal to the outside world. It signals that the body is in a state of alert. It also signals that it's ready to move. the right bundle branch the left bundle branch then the purkinje fibers and this whole process that's occurring is creating that pqrst waveform that you see on the ecg now. If this process is occurring like it should with the sa node acting as the pacemaker of the heart causing the waveform, this is what you'll see on your ecg. If it's not occurring as it should, you'll have a more complex waveform. This is what we see on our ecg right now. this heart to beat at about 60 to 100 beats per minute on the ecg you're going to see what's called normal sinus rhythm but let's say that this sa node is disease it's causing the heart to beating slowly it's not firing as rapidly as it should. We refer to this as sinus bradycardia and i have a whole lecture on that if you want to check that out but on the flip side let's says that thissa node is firing rapidly like for instance the sympathetic nervous system is really causing this to just fire electrical. signals fast because maybe you're exercising or you're really stressed out you're in a fearful event well we would refer to that as sinus tachycardia. It meets the criteria for normal sinus rhythm but it's going to have a fast rapid rate greater. It's a sign of stress or stress-related cardiac activity. It can also be a sign that something is going on in your body that's causing you to experience a fear-related event. It could be a heart arrhythmia or an irregular heartbeat. than 100 beats per minute now let's look at the criteria for sinus tachycardia. So anytime you're analyzing a rhythm you want to make sure that whatever label you're giving that rhythm that it meets the specific criteria for that particular rhythm. So we're going to look at sinus tax first thing first thing. We are going to go through the different types of sinus taxes. We're also going to talk about the different kinds of heart rhythms. We'll be looking at the different rhythms of the heart and how they relate to each other. you want to do is you want to look at those p waves make sure that they are normal. Make sure that there is only one p wave in front of every qrs complex. If your rate is really fast with sinus attack, you may need to go to the hospital. If you are suffering from a high rate of sinus attacks, you might need to visit the hospital for treatment. You may also need to be hospitalized for treatment if you have a high heart rate or high blood pressure. You can get help from the National Institutes of Health. let's say greater than 150 sometimes it's a little hard to see those p waves because the t wave and the p wave are really going to run together and that p wave can actually sort of be buried or hidden in with that t wave. That's what's referred to as a p wave. It's a wave that can be seen in the middle of a t wave or in the top of a wave. The p wave is the wave that's going to be seen at the end of the day. to as a camel hump appearance so just keep that in mind now our p wave represents atrial depolarization so with that you want to make sure that you count your p waves because it's going to give you your atrial rate. With sinus hack the atrial rates is higher than normal. To see more on this click here: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/2013/01/30/how-to-get-a-camel-h hump-look-like-your-heart-rate-increase-and-calculate-your atrial-rate.html. going to be greater than 100 beats per minute and then whenever you're looking at the p wave take your calipers and go from p wave to p wave and make sure there's the same distance between those. That means it's occurring at a regular interval and that is going to be a p wave. The p wave is a wave that occurs when the speed of the wave is at a rate of 100 beats a minute or more. It's called a "p wave" and it's a type of wave that forms in the middle of a wave. another criteria that sinus tech needs to have is a rate greater than 100 and it's regular then we're going to look at our pr interval. Pr interval is found at the beginning of the p-wave to the start of the qrs complex and we're really looking for a regular interval. We're really trying to find a way to get a regular pr interval in the sinus. We want it to have a rate of 100 and to be regular. We don't want to have an irregular pr interval, we want to be able to see it every day. looking to make sure a patient doesn't have a heart block so anything long would possibly indicate a heart blocks. You want to makesure it measures anywhere between 0.12 to 0.20 seconds then you want to look at the qrs complex there should be oneQrs complex after each p wave. Your qrs Complex represents the ventricular rate so just like with the p wave you're going to count your qrs complexes and that's going to give you the rate it should be greater than 100 beats per minute it should actually match your atrial rate. wave to r wave making sure that they are regular because they should be regular for sinus tac then check out that qt interval. The qt intervals is found at the beginning of the qrs to the end of the t wave and it'll be a little bit shortened with a short wave. The t wave is the wave that is followed by the qr wave and then the r wave and the last wave is called the sinus t wave or sinus r wave. It's a wave that starts at the top of the wave and ends at the bottom of it. sinus tac because the rate is so fast remember with sauna's bradycardia the qt interval was a little bit longer and then after each qrs complex you should have a t wave present as well. Now let's analyze this rhythm together using this criteria we just went over here. We can see that the rhythm is very similar to that of a sauna in terms of speed and rhythm. We also see that there are some differences between the two rhythms. We are able to see that these two rhythms are very similar. We then analyze the rhythm using the same criteria as we did before. we have a six second ecg strip. i want to look at those p waves and make sure that they're normal. if you look at this rhythm with me you can notice that you see these squiggly lines throughout. we have a 6 second ecG strip and the first thing what I want to do is i Want to Look at Those p waves. i Want To Look At Those P waves and Make sure That They're Normal. i. want to Look At These P waves And Make Sure That They's Normal. refer to that as artifact and the reason that could be occurring is because maybe the patient was moving whenever this rhythm was captured or maybe those ecg stickers aren't sticking to the chest very well and it creates that even with breathing. So first let's look at these p.m. rhythms and see if there are any patterns or patterns that we can see. If there are, we can refer to those patterns as artifact. If we see any patterns, we refer to them as artifact, and they could be caused by the patient's movement. waves we want to make sure that there's a p wave one p wave in front of every qrs complex. We want to made sure that they are upright and that is the case here. We also want to look at those p waves is because they tell us a lot about what's going on in the complex. It's also important that they're upright because that's what tells us what's happening in the building. We don't want them to look like they're falling apart. We want to count the p waves within that 6 second strip and multiply it by 10. 11 times 10 is 110 so we have an atrial rate of 110. We want to make sure that these p waves are occurring at a regular rate so i'm going to go from p way to p wave with each point in my strip. i just want to check that these are occurring in a regular way. i'm also going to take my calipers and make sure they are in the correct position. caliper and i'm just going to go down throughout the strip and confirm that they are regular and these are definitely regular. The next i want to look at the qrs complexes i want. to make sure that there's one qrs complex after each p wave which that is the. the next i Want to Look at the Qrs Complex After Each p wave. That is the next part of the video. Click here to watch the video in its entirety. The full video is available on YouTube. case here i also want to count the rate because the qrs complex tells me the ventricular rate. we have 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11. so 11 times 10 is 110 so we have the same ventricular rates as we do the atrial rate of 110 which is one of the criteria for sinus attack. Then i want to check the regularity of these qrs complexes just like i did with the atrian rate. i'm going to count them within the strip and multiply by 10. p wave so i'm going to go from r wave to r wave with my calipers and i'm just going to confirm that they are regular and they areregular just like with the p wave so we have a regular rate and it's a regular wave. i'm gonna go down through that strip and confirm that the regular and the regular are regular. Just like with p wave, the regular rate is the regular just like p wave. So we've got a regular Rate and It's a Regular Rate. Measurement is about two boxes so it measures about 0.08 seconds and you want 0.110. Now let's measure the qrs complex we want to make sure it's not too wide or too narrow so it should be less than 0.12 seconds so i'm going to go right here and our measurement is about 2 boxes. Now we measure the Qrs complex and we want it to be 0.11 seconds and we're going to measure it at 0.10 seconds. to confirm that measurement throughout by just going down throughout the strip and measuring that complex. Then i want to check out that pr interval and that is found at the beginning of the p wave to the begin of the qrs complex. i want. to make sure that that is. found at  the beginning of  the p waves to the beginning  of the qr complex. and i want, to make. sure that i am measuring that. to the highest possible level of accuracy. it falls within normal limits about 0.12 to 0.20 seconds so i'm going to put one caliber point at the beginning of the p wave and then the other one at the start of the qrs. Then i want to measure those boxes and whenever i look at that i i'll be able to tell how close i am to hitting the target. i'm not going to say how close it is because i don't know how close I am. i'll just say that it's within the normal range. get about three boxes so we have a pr interval of 0.12 seconds and then i'm just going to go down throughout the strip. Then i want to look at the t wave and make sure that there is a t wave in the middle of the strip as well as the top and bottom of the screen as well. i'm going to confirm that it is like that throughout the Strip as well then i'll go down and do the same thing for the bottom and top of the Strip. is one present after every qrs complex and that is presenting like how it should upright. Here in this rhythm it is presenting the way it should and then lastly we want to look at the qt interval which is found at the beginning of the qr complex to show how the rhythm is presented to the listener. This rhythm is the same as the one found after each of the four qrs complexes. The qt interval is found at the beginning of the qrs complex to show how the rhythm is presented. the end of the t wave so just take your calipers go at those positions and then count the blocks. Here we have about seven blocks so our qt interval is about 0.28 seconds and remember with sinus tachycardia that q t interval tends to shorten so taking everything into account we have a q t of 0.27 seconds. We then take the same amount of time for each of the next seven blocks. This gives us a qt of 0:27 seconds, or 0.29 seconds. account we have the rhythm sinus tachycardia with a rate of 110. The reason this rhythm is occurring is because our sa node is firing rapidly and it's causing this heart to beat at a rate. Now let's talk about the causes of sinusTachyCardia. We've already established that the reason this Rhythm occurs is because. our sa nodes are firing rapidly. It's causing the heart to be beat at 110. Now we'll talk about why this rhythm occurs. of greater than 100 beats per minute now usually the reason that the heart will start beating this fast is because it knows that the body is in dire need of oxygen. There's something causing the body to use up oxygen that theBody is trying to replenish by increasing the heart's rate. The heart will also start beating faster if there's a problem with the body's oxygen supply. The body will also try to increase the heart rate if there is a problem in the body with the oxygen supply, such as an infection. the heart rate now this can be disease related or it can be non-disease related. We want to increase our heart rate whenever we exercise because that gives us a good. oxygen demands of your body so we want to. increase our. heart rateWhenever we exercise. because that give us agood. oxygen demand of our body and that increases the oxygen. demands ofyour body. The heart rate is a good indicator of how much oxygen is being supplied to your body by your body. It can also be a sign that you are exercising. workout so in that case sound attack isn't really that bad or if we're in a fearful stressful situation let's say you're about to be robbed your sympathetic nervous system is going to kick into gear and it's going to increase your heart rate so it can help hopefully protect. If you're worried you're going to have a sound attack, have a panic attack or are worried you are going to be mugged, have an anxiety attack or have an attack of some kind. Have a panic or anxiety attack? Tell us in the comments below. you from danger and that's a good thing we want to be in sinus tack in that instance. The patient maybe is using some type of stimulant cocaine or caffeine that can increase the heart rate or we're giving them sometype of therapeutic medication atropine dopamine albuterol which can reduce the risk of a heart attack. We want to make sure we're in the right place at the right time for the patient. We don't want to put them in a position where they're in danger and we don't know it. can all increase the heart rate so whenever we take those things away remove the maldives and whatever the sinus tack will disappear and hopefully their heart rate will go back to normal. There are disease-related issues that can cause sinus tac this can be for instance let's say let's take the Maldives out of the diet. If we take that out of their diet, then the problem will go away and they will have a better heart rate. If they have a bad heart rate, then they may have sinus problems. say your patient has anemia so with anemia they have a low amount of red blood cells. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body so if we don't have a lot of those red blood cell hanging out we have low amounts of oxygen. Our body can increase the amount of oxygen our body can get by increasing red blood blood cells in the body. For more information on how to treat anemia, visit www.nhs.org.uk or call the National Anemia Foundation on 1-800-273-8255. that heart rate to try to compensate for those levels and you'll see sinus attack in addition with lung conditions. You can see Sinus attack because the body's trying to increase oxygen or in like shock if your patient has hypovolemic shock cardiogenic shock it can cause it now sometimes. Sometimes sometimes sometimes sometimes it's a sign of a heart attack. It can also be a sign that a patient is suffering from a lung condition such as a lung infection or a heart condition like a stroke. whenever a patient develops sinus attack and they have a disease it could be that their disease is worsening and it's a warning sign that hey this needs to be investigated more so anytime you have a patient and they're going in to sinus tack you want to investigate it. It could be a sign that they're getting worse. It's a good sign that you need to investigate more. If you're having a patient with sinus attacks, you should get them checked out more often. you don't want to just write it off you want to see okay what could possibly be going on with my patient why they went into this so for instance let's say that you're caring for a patient who just suffered a myocardial infarction and they go into sinus tachycardia. You want to find out what is going on and why they are having this reaction. You don't just want to write it all off, that's not the way to look at it. well this could be a warning sign that they may be going into cardiogenic shock because from the mi they may have had some massive damage to the heart muscle and it's just about to fail. So this is his last ditch effort to have sinus attack to try to try and save his life. So that's what he's trying to do. And that's why he's doing it. And so that's the reason he's having the sinus attacks. And it's a last-ditch effort to save him. And he's going to do it. compensate for what's going on but in the end it's going to fail and the patient'sGoing to have cardiogenic shock. You'd want to report that to the doctor or let's say you have a patient who is post-op from surgery especially some type of bone surgery like hip surgery. You would want to tell the doctor if you think you're going to have a problem with your patient's heart or if you're having problems with your breathing or anything like that. surgery or they're in the postpartum period where there's a high risk of blood clots after you have a baby or they are immobile and let's say you're patient develop sinus tachycardia well you'd want to be thinking okay possible pulmonary embolism and be looking for those other signs related to the pregnancy or the birth of a baby. If you're in that situation and you're having trouble breathing, you're going to want to go to the ER. to that be checking out the respiratory system are they having shortness of breath whenever they breathe in. Are they having chest pain that's getting worse or are they developing a cough so you'd also want to report that as well now to help you remember those major causes of chest pain. If they are having chest pains that are getting worse they should also be reporting that to the doctor. If you are experiencing chest pain you should be reporting it to your GP. If your chest pain is getting worse you should also report it to the GP. sinus tachycardia let's remember the word tacky hearts t is for temperature elevation and this could be if your patient has infection leading to sepsis a is for aerobics this is exercise and we already talked about why that can occur c is for cardiac disease and this can be when a patient is suffering from a heart condition. i is for  irregular heartbeat and this is when a person is having a hard time with their heart beat and can be a sign of something more serious. in patients who have congestive heart failure or who have suffered a myocardial infarction leading to cardiogenic shock h is for hyperthyroidism. sinus attack may be the only symptom for some of these patients so if no other cause is causing this it may be their thyroid y is. If you have a thyroid problem and have had a heart attack, see your doctor for treatment. For more information, visit the American Thyroid Association's website or go to www.thyroidassociation.org.  pain that is not being controlled can lead to sinus tachycardia. giving them some pain medication can sometimes decrease the heart rate and get them back to normal. h is for hemorrhage or hypovolemic shock e for emotional stress.for yelp and any time a patient has pain that isn't being controlled it can definitely lead to Sinus Tachycardsia. For more information on how to help a patient with pain, visit www.samaritans.org or call 1-800-273-8255. slash fear a for anemia r for respiratory conditions like pulmonary embolism chronic lung diseases where you have decreased oxygen t therapeutics like atropine albuterol dopamine epinephrine or even withdrawing from beta blockers so it's important you tell the patient just don't stop taking them you have to be tapered.slashFear a for Anemia. r for Respiratory conditions like pulmonary embolism and chronic lung diseases.  sinus tachycardia is not always a bad thing. stimulants such as nicotine alcohol cocaine caffeine and amphetamines can cause the condition to get worse. If you are suffering from the condition, see your doctor for advice on how to treat it. For more information on the condition go to: http://www.nhs.uk/sinus-tachy-cardia-treatment-and-management.html. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. be in sinus tag because that gives us a good workout and it helps us maintain heart health. If we have an underlying health condition it can actually stress our heart out and be harmful for us so whenever a patient is experiencing sinus tachycardia especially over a long period of time, be seen by a sinus doctor. For more information on sinus tags, visit sinustag.org.uk or call the National Sinus Registry on 1-800-273-8255. period of time and it's going really fast this puts extra stress on that heart. It increases its demands for oxygen because whenever your heart is really beating fast the heart muscle has to contract. As it's moving at this fast rate it increases its needs for oxygen. It's a very serious condition. It can be life-threatening if it's left untreated. It has been linked to heart failure and stroke. It is also known to increase the risk of stroke and heart failure in the elderly. so how your heart muscle gets oxygen is on top of it it has coronary arteries and these coronary arteries give it fresh oxygenated blood. If a patient has coronary artery disease where there's fatty plaques in those coronary arteries that's going to limit how much fresh oxygenatoated blood can be given to the heart muscle. So that's how the heart gets oxygen. If you have that, you need to go to the hospital for a procedure to remove the plaques from the coronary arteries. That's how you get the oxygen to your heart. gets to that heart muscle so that heart. muscle doesn't get the oxygen it needs it can die it becomes ischemic so. that could lead to a myocardial infarction. Patients who have an underlying problem of that we want to make sure that we keep the heart rate slower. We want to keep it at a slower pace. We don't want to see patients who have a heart condition get worse. We're trying to help them get better. We hope this helps. Sustained sinus tachycardia can actually decrease cardiac output in your patient. As a nurse, you want to make sure you're monitoring your patient's bottle signs closely and you're looking at your patient making sure they're not showing signs of decreased cardiac output. Also sustained sinusTachyCardia can increase the risk of stroke and heart failure in a patient. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. output and the reason this can occur is because that heart is beating very fast. whenever we're getting up to rates of 150 or greater the heart's not really pumping as efficiently as it should. As the blood flows through the heart those ventricles especially your left. are not being used as much as they should be because of the speed of the heart. This can lead to problems with the left ventricle, which is the one that controls the movement of the blood through the body. ventricle is really responsible for pumping that blood out of the heart so it can shoot it throughout the body and give its fresh oxygenated blood. If you're pumping so fast those ventricles don't have enough time to fill completely especially that left ventricle. What can happen is that the blood doesn't get to the heart in time and the heart doesn't have time to pump it all out. The heart is supposed to be able to pump that blood back into the body to oxygenate it. it's going to limit the amount of blood that's going. to the body so your patient can start presenting with a very low blood pressure that's the salt getting less than 90. so look at that blood pressure they can start showing signs and symptoms of heart failure with this. If you have a family history of heart disease, you may need to see your doctor more often to check your blood pressure and see if you need to go to the emergency room. If your patient has a history of diabetes, you might need to visit your GP more often. heart is just literally failing so you'll get the backup of blood blood will start backing up into the lungs. whenever you listen to their lung sounds you'll start to hear crackles where they're developing pulmonary edema. They can have shortness of breath they can also have extra heart beat and they can have extra blood vessels in their heart. They will have to have surgery to remove the excess blood vessels. They may also have to undergo heart surgery to open up their hearts. They'll have to learn how to use an artificial heart. sounds and you also want to look at their extremities how do they feel are they cool check that capillary refill is the time increase that could mean you definitely have decreased cardiac output and assess their level of consciousness. Are they starting to become lethargic or confused so it's important to check on them. If they are not breathing, they may have a low heart rate. If their heart is not beating properly, they could be having a low blood pressure. If there is a decrease in cardiac output, it could be a heart attack. If the heart is slowing down, it may be a stroke. very important whenever a patient is in sinus tachycardia that we monitor them closely and if their heart is going too fast we need to look at that possible underlying cause report it so it can be treated and we can get their heart rate down now let's look at the treatment and the nurse's role for sinusTachyCardia. The treatment as i pointed out earlier is going to deal with identifying the cause and treating that cause. Hopefully this will help decrease the rate so the healthcare provider can order some tests like an The patient can wear a halter monitor if they're at home having this and this will monitor their rhythm and then it'll go back to the cardiologist who will read the rhythm.ekg to analyze the rhythm making sure that nothing underlines going on cardiac stress tests can be done an echocardiogram. If the patient can't wear the halter, they can have a heart rate monitor to monitor their heart rate. If they can't have the heart monitor, they'll have to have a cardiac stress test to see what's going on. that and see what's possibly going on with the patient assessing blood levels like the thyroid level making sure they don't have hyperthyroidism. looking for anemia or maybe infection they have a white blood cell count that is high and looking at that medication history making sure that they're not on too many medications. If a patient's blood pressure is too high or their white blood cells are too high, they may have anemia. If they have an infection, they might have a high white cell count. If their blood sugar is too low, they could be on too much medication. on any medicines that could be increasing their heart rate and this leads to medications that can be ordered to help slow down that heart rate. beta blockers are a group of medications that are ordered by the healthcare provider. One type is called metoprol beta blockers and one type of beta blockers is called beta blockers. The beta blockers can help slow the heart rate down by reducing the blood flow to the heart. They can also help reduce the amount of oxygen the body has to circulate through the body. remember that that generic name ends in olol or calcium channel blockers is another group like verapamil or deltizim and then some other medications let's say the patient is having pain that's why they're having sinus tax and pain medication can be ordered. If they are having a fever antipyretics can also be ordered or if they are suffering from a cold or flu they can be treated with anti-viral drugs. If a patient is suffering from depression, they can get depression medication. can be ordered to bring down the fever and then the nurse's role so as a nurse we want to assess for any potential causes for why our patient is running this rhythm. If all of a sudden you start seeing sinus tack you want to analyze hey why. If you are suffering from a high fever you can be sent to the hospital for treatment. If a patient is suffering from high fever they can be taken to hospital. If they are suffering with a high temperature they can also be sent for treatment at the hospital. are they in this do they have untreated pain are they having a fever are they hemorrhaging what's going on so you want to report the rhythm change to the physician and let them know about it obtain an ekg if you get an order for that so we can help you out. If you are in pain or have a fever or are hemorrhaging, call 911. If they are in a coma, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. further investigate their heart rhythm you also want to monitor their vital signs making sure that that heart rate's not getting too high and they're experiencing decreased cardiac output. Again you want to make sure they're not having hypotension confusion syncope increased capillary refill time shortness of breath or shortness-of- breath. If they're feeling unwell, they may need to be admitted to hospital. If the patient is in a coma, they might need to stay in the hospital for a few days. cool extremities and then you want to teach the patient if you're able to avoid any activities that could further increase their sinus tag like if they're smoking or drinking caffeine or using any other stimulants. We don't want their heart rate to get up any higher okay so so you're trying to teach them to avoid these activities. You're also trying to get them to stop using stimulants like caffeine and other things that could increase the risk of developing sinusitis. So you're teaching them to not use stimulants and not to use caffeine or other things like that. that wraps up this review over sonos tachycardia. If you'd like to watch more videos on this topic you can access the link in the youtube description below. You can also click on the link below to go to the next video in the series. Back to the page you came from. Share your thoughts on this article. Send us your photos and videos of your sonos experience on our Facebook page and our Twitter account. Visit our social media accounts to share your photos, videos and more.