The attacking infantry advances steadily, their elephants already having broken the defensive line. The king tries to retreat, but enemy cavalry flanks him from the rear. Escape is impossible. But this isn’t a real war– nor is it just a game. Over the roughly one-and-a-half millennia of its existence, chess has been played more than 1,000,000 times. It has been called the most popular board game in the world. It's been played by more than 100,000 people every year. Legend says the game's origins lie a century earlier. Supposedly, when the youngest prince of the Gupta Empire was playing the game. Has been known as a tool of military strategy, a metaphor for human affairs, and a benchmark of genius. The earliest records of chess are in the 7th century, but legend tells that the game’s origins lie in the 1st century. The game is still played today in some parts of the world, including the UK and the U.S. killed in battle, his brother devised a way of representing the scene to their grieving mother. Set on the 8x8 ashtapada board used for other popular pastimes, a new game emerged with two key features: different rules for moving different types of pieces, and a single king piece whose fate is determined by the rules. The game was created by the brothers' father, who is now a well-known expert in the game. The rules for the game have not yet been released, but are expected to be released soon. determined the outcome. The game was originally known as chaturanga– a Sanskrit word for "four divisions" But with its spread to Sassanid Persia, it acquired its current name and terminology. "chess," derived from "shah," meaning king, and “checkmate” from “shah mat," or “the king is helpless.” After the 7th century, the game became popular in Europe and the U.S., where it is still played today. Islamic conquest of Persia introduced chess to Arab world. Diplomats and courtiers used chess terms to describe political power. Ruling caliphs became avid players themselves. Historian al-Mas’udi considered the game a game of power and power. The game was a rich source of poetic imagery for the Arab world in the Middle Ages. It was also a source of inspiration for the playwright Al-Mansur, whose works include The Art of War and The Game of Chess. In China, chess pieces were placed at intersections of board squares rather than inside them, as in the native strategy game. Medieval trade along the Silk Road carried the game to East and Southeast Asia, where many local variants developed. Chess is a testament to human free will compared to games of chance. It is a game of strategy, rather than chance, in which players try to outwit each other by moving pieces around the board. It has been played for thousands of years in China and other Asian countries. The reign of Mongol leader Tamerlane saw an 11x10 board with safe squares called citadels. In Japanese shogi, captured pieces could be used by the opposing player. But it was in Europe that chess began to take on its modern form. By 1000 AD, the game had become known as 'chess' and 'gouge' The game was first played in Europe in the 12th century and is still popular today. The game is now played in more than 100 countries. Chess was used as an allegory for different social classes performing their proper roles. The pieces were re-interpreted in their new context. At the same time, the Church remained suspicious of games. Moralists cautioned against devoting too much time to them. Chess was even being used as a part of courtly education. It was used to teach social classes how to act in a social setting. The game was also used as part of a school curriculum to teach children how to play chess. briefly banned in France. Yet the game proliferated, and the 15th century saw it cohering into the form we know today. The relatively weak piece of advisor was recast as the more powerful queen– perhaps inspired by the recent surge of strong female leaders. This change accelerated the game’s pace, and it became the most popular board game of all time in the 16th and 17th centuries. The game is still popular today, especially among young people.  Chess was seen as an expression of creativity, encouraging bold moves and dramatic plays. This "Romantic" style reached its peak in the 18th century. Chess theory was born with treatises analyzing common openings and endgames. The game moved from royal courts to coffeehouses during the Enlightenment era. Chess is still played today in many countries around the world. It is a popular game among young people and professionals. It has been around since the 17th century and is still popular in some countries. in the Immortal Game of 1851, where Adolf Anderssen managed a checkmate after sacrificing his queen and both rooks. But the emergence of formal competitive play in the late 19th century meant that strategic calculation would eventually trump dramatic flair. And with the rise of international competition, chess took on a new meaning. It became a game of strategy, strategy, strategic calculation and strategy. And it became a sport of strategic calculation, strategy and strategic calculation. It was a game that changed the world of chess. IBM computer called Deep Blue defeated Garry Kasparov in 1997. It was the first time a machine had defeated a sitting champion. Today, chess software is capable of consistently defeating the best human players. But just like the game they’ve mastered, these machines are products of their time and place in the history of the world. The game has a new geopolitical importance in the age of the internet. It is no longer just a game of chess, but a tool of power and influence. of human ingenuity. And perhaps that same ingenuity will guide us out of this apparent checkmate. The U.S. has a long way to go before it can win back control of the White House, says President Barack Obama. The White House says it is working with Congress to find a way out of the mess we're in. The Obama administration says it's working on a plan to fix the problem, but it's not clear what that will look like. The president says it will take time, but the U.N. is working on it.