elizabeth the first is considered one of the greatest rulers in england's history if not the greatest for women. What an amazing amazing role model she never married can you blame her. i mean look at what she grew up with around her dad and all of those moms and. all of her moms and dads. she was a role model for all of us to look up to and learn from. she had a great role model in her mother Elizabeth the first and her mother Queen Elizabeth II. stepmoms she never had any kids which that causes a problem come her end time okay where we have i don't have an heir so she eventually does set on a cousin up in scotland which is the country on the same island of england but right above it. uh. She eventually sets up a home in Scotland which is also on the island of England. Uh. She sets it up in Scotland. She has a house in Scotland and an apartment in england.Uh. She had a house on england and a apartment in scottland. james king james of scotland she names him as the heir so when elizabeth died king jAMES of sctland comes down and he is now the king of england and theKing ofscotland. It's like he united two kingdoms where do you think the term united kingdom came from? Tell us in the comments below or on Twitter @CNNOpinion. Back to the page you came from. Share your story of how you came to be a member of the Royal Family. okay so in referencing england in that area in those countries it's the united kingdom and that's because we have um uh the uh where we are here the stewards. So we went from the family of tudors to theFamily of stewards. And that's where we start with james. We go from James to James. We went from James and tudor to James and the Stewards. We then go to James, the Steward of England. We are now in James' time. and his son and and we'll talk more about that when we get to uh the next unit and so on the king james bible page 414 415. um i'm not as i told you i's not going to go through um necessarily what it was about but there was a story to be told. And so we'll be back in a few days with a look at what we've learned so far in this unit of the bible. And we'll also be looking at some of the stories from the bible that we haven't seen in a while. some more example of parallel structure here towards the beginning but the premise of this particular piece the importance the historical significance of this was it was the bible commissioned in english for the english speakers and english readers. This was the first time and without that if you didn't have the english language you wouldn't have been able to read the bible. The bible was commissioned in English for the English speakers and English readers. Without that you would have had to read it in a different language. The Bible was commissioned for English speakers for the  first time. know how to read latin or french you were stuck by solely getting your material this is what the bible says solely from your clergy solely from the church so you were kind of a mindless robot with regards to comprehending the the word of god or whatever the word is. You were stuck with this information and had no way of comprehending it. You had to rely on what you were told by your clergy and the church. You didn't have any way of understanding the bible or god's word. You couldn't understand it. bible said on your own you had to be spoon-fed it but now that something is in english and if you can read english you are able to read it over and over. get your own theories your own arguments um and make your own. you know your own decisions. You can read the Bible in any language and understand it. If you are not fluent in english you can't read the bible in any other language. You have to learn how to read in English to understand the Bible. um so you were less mindless page 414 is a really nice page that if you um if you need to come back to review the significance of this or you can't remember um it's pretty good you can see down at the bottom you know not only the most important but also the least important. It's a good page to look at if you're trying to remember something that happened in the past or if you just want to look back and see what you did in the last few minutes of your life. widely read english book but the most widely read excuse me hold on for centuries. Not only was it the most. widely read English book, it was also one of the world's most popular. English books are often considered to be the most popular in the world. The most popular English book is often considered the most commonly read. In the U.S. it is the most common English book to be found in libraries and bookstores. It is also the most searched for. and read. for in the country. wasn't just the most important or the most read but in english around the world. i read a stat forever ago the number of bibles that are in existence or that are still printed every year. um you know the highest distributed book in the world is the bible or the Bible or the Koran or the Quran or the Torah or any other book that is written in a language other than English. It is the most widely distributed book. It's the most popular book in any language. you know some stat like that i i wonder if i could find that again or see if it's updated see if that stat is still legit but um because people are like oh man no the the da vinci codes the the biggest circulated book like. Like i'm like yeah i'm sure that's true but i'm not sure if that's a legit stat or not. I don't know if i've ever heard that one before. I've never heard of that stat before but i think it's legit. the da vinci code is not the biggest circulated book in the world. i'm like i i can't speak to don quixote so um that's something i might just have to look up because that's interesting to me. oh no you know don Quixote or something i'm just like i don't know what that is. that's an interesting thing to think about. i may have to do some research on that. i might have to find out more about it.