Professor Donald Kagan: We were examining Sparta, the most important, I think, of the early poleis, certainly once you get into the seventh and sixth centuries. And I was describing the formal constitution of the Spartans, having mentioned the kings and the gerousia, the council of elders consisting of twenty-eight. I was talking about Sparta's formal constitution, and I said, 'I think I've got a good idea of what it was like to be Sparta' And he replied, 'Yes, of course you did' elected men over sixty and the two kings to create a body of thirty. Then there is the Spartan Assembly which consists of all the adult male Spartan citizens, and as in most states, it really originated from the idea of having the fighting men participate in decisions and they're over 60. The Spartan Assembly is made up of all adult male citizens, over 60 years of age, who are elected by the king and the king's son. They are over 60 and the King's son, who is over 60, can also be elected to the Assembly. the kinds of decisions that undoubtedly were the first decisions the assemblies made. And in the case of Sparta, I would guess almost the only decisions they made were questions of whether to go to war, whether to make peace,whether to make alliances and so forth. Now, it's worth noting that Sparta did not have an army, but had an army of men. And they were able to fight and kill each other, and so on. But they were not able to wage war, and they were unable to win. mentioning that that assembly--you want to distinguish that assembly from what I'll describe shortly about the Athenian Assembly. In this assembly, it is true that all adult male Spartans were participants, and let me also say that they came to the meeting dressed in their military uniform, apparently including their military uniforms. The Athenian assembly was held in the 4th century BC in the city of Sparta, in what is now known as Athens. The assembly was attended by all adult men, including some women. shields, because when a question was put to the Spartans, the way they responded was by shouting and banging on their shields. Whereupon, the presiding official would try to determine which side had the loudest noise. It's like a voice vote in one of our own meetings, only a little bit louder, says the former captain of the Spartan army, who was killed in a battle in the Battle of Thermopylae in the Middle Ages. "It's a bit like a vote," he says, "only a little more intense" Only if the presiding official couldn't tell which side had the most noise would they resort to a separation like the British Parliament. Those in favor over on that side, those opposed on the other side. And he would count and he would say.bit more colorful than the UK Parliament's separation of the seats on the floor of the House of Commons. And only, of course, if he decided that he couldn't tells which side of the aisle had the more noise. He would count. and say. It looks as though the debates in the assembly were probably infrequent, because as best we can figure it out, we would guess that most issues that came before the assembly--let me back up and say probably not very many issues came before. the assembly, would come the result.out would come a result of a vote by a majority of the members of the assembly. The result would be that the assembly would vote on a bill that would send the bill to the Senate for consideration. but those that did, if there was an agreement on the part of the gerousia and the kings, in other words, the upper groups in society, if they agreed there would be no need to go, there might be some legal need to. go to the assembly, but there would. be no legal need. But there would still be a need. to go to an assembly. If there was no agreement, there would not be a legal need for the assembly to be held. be no debate and the matter would simply go forward. However, some scholars go far too far in suggesting that there never was a debate in the assembly. There are debates reported to us in Thucydides, which make it perfectly clear that they did. But it is worth pointing out that there is no evidence that there was ever a debate at the assembly in the first place, as some scholars have suggested. The debate is reported to have taken place at the beginning of the first century BC. that so far as our information goes, the only people who spoke at those assemblies were the kings, the gerousia, or a group of people I haven't mentioned to you yet, the ephors. I'll describe their situation for you, but for the moment they are annually elected. For the moment, they are annual elected, and they are called ephor, which means king or king's son. That's the way it is now, and that's how it's going to be. officials of the state. In short, the average Spartan did not ever speak in the assembly, it appears. So it's not a democratic assembly, even though every single citizen is there, if he wants to be. So, that's part of the mixed and rather confusing aspect of the assembly. Let us know what you think about the assembly in the comments below or on our Facebook page, @SpartanOnline. We would love to hear from you. Back to the page you came from. me turn now to the ephors. These, according to Spartan tradition, were invented somewhat late in the development of the Spartan constitution. The word ephor comes from the word which means to oversee, to oversee what's going on. They were, in a certain sense, the overseers. One of their duties was to keep an eye on what was going on in the city, and to make sure it didn't get out of hand. It was a very important role. was to keep watch on the kings and to see that the kings didn't do anything improper, illegal, irreligious, or anything of that kind. Some scholars have focused on that and suggested that, at least originally, that was what their main function was. That, I think, is not right. I think by the time the Spartans appear to us in history, let us say late in the sixth century and fifth century, the main function of the Spartans was to protect the Spartans from excessive power. ephors don't do that. I mean, they still have the technical constitutional requirement to do that, but that's not what they're up too. When we see them they are usually engaged in dealing with foreign policy. So, if a neighboring state wanted to communicate something to the Spartans, either it either it or it didn't. That's the way it is. It's not the way the U.S. does it. It doesn't have to be that way, but it would be nice if it did. might be an offer of an alliance or it might be an order to do something or else war would follow, or a negotiation for peace, any of those things, first they would come to the ephors, of which there were five. The ephor would then decide what should be done and what should not be done, and what would be the result of that decision. It could be war, peace, an alliance, an order, or an offer for peace or an order for war. be done. I would say, in most cases, unless it was very, very serious, they would be able to give some sort of answer to it. But when it involved something fundamental like war and peace or alliances, then they would have to go to the assembly to do it, he said. He said: 'When it involved a fundamental issue like war or peace, then it would need to be dealt with by the assembly' He added: 'If it was a very serious issue, then of course they would give an answer. But if it was just a very minor matter, they wouldn't do it' get their approval. But my guess is that it would have been wildly reckless and therefore never done for the ephors not to go to the gerousia first. The Gerousia was, by far, the most significant council in the state, most able to have the necessary prestige and yet to be small enough truly to discuss what needed to be done. So, if the Ephors wanted to do something, it would be damn foolish not to clear it with the ger Mousia. if they wished to be reckless, they could do otherwise. Now, another thing about the ephors is that they're very different. The people who are elected to the gerousia are old men who have proven themselves. They are truly elected by a process in which their individual qualities are relevant, he says. The ephor is a group of men who meet every year to discuss the future of the country. The president of the Gerousia is chosen by a vote of the members of the group. Aristotle tells us that they in fact were just any Joe Spartan, that they were ordinary people, not distinguished in any way. This is not true necessarily and typically of the ephors. Although we don't have a clear picture of them, they have tremendous prestige in the Spartan state. And so they have enormous power and influence. But they also have a very limited role in the history of the state, and they are not particularly well-known for their achievements. They have a great deal of power and power, but they are also very ordinary people. the way in which they were chosen, it is clear that they were--it looked it was some kind of a combination of election and sortition; there's a strong element of chance involved in selecting who was going to be an ephor. So, you must think of them, not as distinguished, but as a group of people who have been chosen to be ephors. And that's what they were, and that's the way they were selected for the job. And so, they were not distinguished in any way. people who have some clout in their own person, but ordinary people who only achieve what clout they're going to have by virtue of being chosen as ephors. They're only there for a year. Now, the kings are there for life and the gerousia is there forlife, and I. am there for the rest of my life. I'm not going to stop. I've got a long way to go, but I'm going to keep going. I'll be here for a long time. suppose the assembly is there for life, but the ephors are only going to be ephor for a year and only once in their life. These are not politically powerful people. I think the idea was to sort of have a representation of the ordinary Spartan to carry on the story. I don't think it was intended to be a political statement, I think it's more of a statement of who we are as a people," he said. "We're not just a group of people, we're a people, and we're not all the same," he added. functions that I have talked about. On the other hand, they were given the responsibility of seeing that the kings were in line. They had various techniques or various policies and processes which had them make judgments as to whether the kings are doing anything wrong, and if they are doing the right thing. They were given various techniques and processes to help them make the right decisions. They could also make the wrong decisions if they were doing the wrong thing, which they could do if the king was doing it wrong. did, they could make that point. They could go to Delphi and ask the god, if they were right in thinking something was wrong, and if they came back the kings would be put on trial. The ephors would be the accusers, the trial would be held in the gerousia, he said. The trial would have been held in Delphi, and the king would have to stand trial in the Gerousia. The king would then have to answer to the gods. and don't imagine that that that didn't matter. Kings were brought to trial in this way frequently in the history of Sparta and very often they were convicted, and often exiled, and in other ways punished. So, there's nothing just theoretical about this capacity to control them and something rather important about their power. It's not just theoretical, it's very, very real and it's a very real thing. And it's something that we need to keep in mind as we move forward. about this accidental element in who becomes an ephor. All right, those are the elements of the Spartan constitution and I think it's self evident that it deserves a title of a mixed constitution. At the same time, you don't want to lose sight of something even more basic than the basic idea of being a Spartan. That is to be a good person and a good Spartan. And I think that's what we are all trying to do, I think. I think we're doing a good job of it. that. Remember that all the Spartiates that there are, whether they are ordinary citizens, all the way up through king, are a small minority of all the people who are under the control of the Spartans. People try to guess from the evidence that we have what percentage of the. Spartiates there are. But the truth is that there is a very, very small percentage of Spartiates in the whole of the world, and they are all very different from each other. That's the way it is. entire population of the Peloponnesus or of their own part of the. The number of Helots may have been something like seven Helots to every Spartan. Then you have to add to that the number of perioikoi who were also not Spartiates. The Spartans were--well, it looks as though there were something like 7 Helots for every Spartan, and there were also 7,000 Helots in the whole of Greece at the time of the Trojan War. Laconia is very much an oligarchy. The Spartans normally will like to see other states oligarchically governed. So, the Spartans gain a reputation of being. hostile to tyranny, which brings our attention to the subject of foreign policy, very important for. Laconia and its possessions, when you look at the whole of Laconian and its. possessions, it is verymuch an oligarchs. They won't like democracies and they won't. like any form of autocracy which in Greece typically took the form of tyranny. Sparta and for the Greek world, because as I think I mentioned before, the Spartans became the first state to be in command, or in control, or to be the leaders of a coalition of states. Not for a specific purpose only, but a permanent coalition ofStates which the the Spartans were able to lead for a long period of time. That was a very significant moment in the history of the Greek people, and of the world in general, for many years to come. ancient Greeks referred to as the Spartans and their allies, which modern scholars have come to call the Peloponnesian League. It's an imprecise term because some of the members of the--let me say a better term for it would be the Spartan alliance, which is what pretty much the Greeks called it. Well, how did it come to exist? Again, as in most things in Greek history, the beginnings are shrouded in legend and are not absolutely clear, he says. Spartans were expanding their influence and power in the Peloponnesus. They suffered a defeat back in the seventh century in fight with Argos. The Spartans who had been successful apparently in turning around, to some considerable degree, suffered a setback in 570 B.C. They were defeated by Argos in a battle that took place in the city of Argos, in what is known as the Battle of the Argonauts. The battle was fought between Argos and the Spartans, who were led by the king of Sparta. defeat in the region of Arcadia to the north of Laconia. It looks as though at that point, that somebody in Sparta came up with a bright idea which changed the nature of the Spartan situation, and also introduced something new into the Greek world at the same time. They defeated the town of Tegea, which is located just to thenorth of Laconsia. The Spartans had a hard time up there. The region is mountainous and poor typically, relatively speaking and it provided some of the toughest warriors in the Greek World. It's a very important state for the Spartans, not just because it's the neighbor right to the north of them, but because remember what I told you, if you want to get to Mycenae from Sparta you can't go across those mountains, you got to go up north and then to the east. If you want the best view of Sparta from the east, you have to go to the west. That's how you get the best views of the east from the south. Spartans gained control of Tegea where they claimed to have discovered the bones of the great Homeric hero, Orestes. The Spartans got into this war with Tege a and they gained control. TegeA is right there where the road turns west. So, its strategic importance is very great. It was the site of the battle of Mycenae in the 4th century BC. The battle was fought between the Spartans and the Tegeans, who were allies of Sparta. and taken it away from Tegea, the bones I mean, and buried them at Sparta. Also, there was a legend that maybe they propagated that showed up in some poetry we have, that Agamemnon had moved from his home base in Mycenae to Sparta, an attempt, in other words, to take the bones away and bury them there. There was also a legend, I think, that he had taken the bones from MyCenae and put them in Sparta as well. connect these Dorian Spartans with the legends of the great men of the Achaean world described by Homer. Finally, we are told late in the sixth century, King Cleomenes who was one of the aggressive Spartan rulers who expanded the power of Sparta, said on one occasion, "I am no no Spartan" "Sparta: The Story of the Dorian Spartan" is published by Thames & Hudson, priced £16.99. To order a copy for £12.99, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch. Dorian, I am an Achaean. What's this all about? Well, it looks like as the Spartans begin to extend this league that I will be telling you about in a minute, they want to reduce the amount of resistance that they're going to get into. Dorian's versus Achaeans still seems like a good idea to me. It's a great way to start off a new season. I'll be back in a few minutes to talk about the rest of the season. to have some meaning to the Greeks. Remember the business about what happened in Sicyon when the tyrants of SicyON made this sharp distinction in favor of Achaeans against Dorians. It suggests that that division among the Greek peoples hadn't died down yet and I think that's what's going on. I think it's a sign that the Greeks are still divided, that they're still trying to figure out what to do with each other. I don't think they're quite there yet, but they're getting there. Spartans are trying to claim union with the Achaeans not dominance over them. But nonetheless, nonetheless, the Spartans start taking on other Greek states trying to establish their domination and are very successful. They defeated the powerful and important state of Argos. And in the process they took away a powerful state. Here. in the video, you can watch the full battle between Argos and Sparta.here. In the video below, you will be able to watch the whole battle from start to finish. piece of land that is between the area of Argos and Sparta, the name of it is Cynuria and they took it away, next to their own state. That's interesting, because the Argives never forgave that and never gave up on the idea of getting it back. You find the land in the city of Sparta and in the town of Cynuria, which is in the north of the city, in the area called Cynuria. It's a very interesting place. Argives and the Spartans fighting each other at least once a century and what they're fighting about is gaining control of Cynuria. Its common people referred to Cynuria as the Alsace-Lorraine of the Peloponnesus. Everybody who doesn't have it and wants it back between these two states. Finally, the Spartans are fighting for Cynuria against the Argives, who are trying to take it back from them. The Argives are winning, but not without a fight. also take the island just off the southeastern edge of the Peloponnesus called Cythera, which gives them a good strategic base there as well, so they are expanding. Now, what happens--I'll go back to Tegea for a moment because that's the first case we hear and it's the model. When they take over the island, they're going to be able to do a lot of things there. And that's what's going to happen in the next few years. they defeat the Tegeans, instead of simply annexing their territory, subordinating the people, or subjecting the people to Spartan rule. They offer the Te geans an alliance. The character of the alliance, certainly in the full fledged history of the Spartan alliance--we can't be sure whether the. Spartan alliance was a success or a failure. We can't know for sure if the alliance was successful or not, but we know that it was not a failure, and that the people of the region benefited from it. words I'm going to speak to you now were all there in the original oath that the Spartans made their allies swear, but it was there by the end of the fifth century anyway. I think something like it, either was in the oath or was understood, and that is: ‘I will never forget you.’’ “I will not forget you’s.” “You will never fail to remember me.“ ‘You will not fail to forget me’. the state that was defeated said, agreed to accept the leadership of Sparta. The word that's involved here is hegemonia and the leader is called a hegemonic and that is something different from being your master here, your despotes. It's a little bit less, or at least you want it to be less, says the author of the book, "Sparta: A History of a State" The book is published by Simon & Schuster at a cost of £16.99. it to seem that way and to have the same friends and enemies as the Spartans had, and to follow them wherever the Spartans should lead. A short way of saying it was that they turned their foreign policy over to the Spartans and accepted their leadership in war. What do they get in exchange? One, the Spartans didn't take away their land, destroy their houses, make them slaves or anything like that. Besides that, they also provided them, promised them and provided them protection against attack from somebody else. consequences for most of the time, is the end of warfare between the states inside the Peloponnesus. As we shall see, it will be broken from time to time, but still it's generally true. So now, what does this mean? The Spartans have been defeated, but they have not been defeated. They are still alive and well, and they have a long way to go before they are defeated. But they are not defeated, they are only defeated for now. done something that is similar to what the Romans would do centuries later and really an enormous achievement if you can do it. When you conquer people, one of the problems you have, is every state you conquer is potentially a problem. You have to rule it, and that's going to be an enormous challenge for any nation that tries to do that. It's a very, very difficult thing to do, but you have to do it if you want to be successful in the long term. The Spartan way of doing it means you gain more troops for your army. When the Spartans go to their allies, and they want to go war, they tell them send your allotment of troops to the place we tell you. That allotment could well be two-thirds of their army. The general of the army overall will be a Spartan and they will be fighting for Spartan purposes, unless the Spartans have chosen to fight for their allies' purposes. But the Spartans now have increased their military strength enormously by the invention of this new thing. The debate continues to exist as to just what that alliance was really like. Were the Spartans free to do anything that they liked in foreign affairs or did they need the approval of their allies before going to war? I'm talking now about a constitutional question rather than reality question. Scholars bat it around both ways; my prejudices are that the leagues' constitution, whatever it may have been, was less important than reality. That is to say, not all states in the Spartan Alliance were equal. Some were large and numerous, and strong militarily. also wealth, and some were at some distance from Sparta. Others were small, weak, poor, and close to Sparta, and vice versa. I would say, and I think the evidence will support this as a fact, whatever the theory may have been, that the closer you were to SpartA the smaller you were, the weaker you were. How's that for a shock? The stronger, the more distant, the wealthier you were,. the more independent you were of the Spartans. what the Spartans wanted them to do. But we have many occasions in which states refused to do so and even get in the way of the Spartans. Now, I think the Spartans very often when they had to do something called a meeting of the Spartan Alliance, consulted their friends and allies. But I think we need to make sure that we don't do the same thing again and again. We need to get back to the way things were when the Spartans were in charge of their own country. allies, but it's not necessary true that they took a vote as to what the allies thought; sometimes they did. I think sometimes they didn't; it all depended on the situation. If you want your allies to come and fight with you it's better to have them to do so, he says. "If you want to have allies, you have to be able to get them to fight for you," he adds. "You can't get allies if you don't have allies." willingly than under orders, and so that will explain, in my opinion, some of the reasons for calling it a Peloponnesian League meeting, not necessarily that they were required to do so. But I've given you a mixed and rather vague picture, and I think that's the real picture. I think I have given you the mixed and vague picture and that's what I'm going to try to do here. I'm not going to give you the full picture. think you can't be very sure, either because this evidence doesn't allow us to be sure how the league was supposed to work and how it really did work. But I also think nobody could tell in advance how it was going to work, whatever the understood constitution was. After that, I don't think it was very much of a surprise. It was a very strange thing to see, but it was also a very positive thing. I think it changed the way people looked at the game. all, one of the most important things that is involved in membership in the league, is that when the Spartans say, I want you to come and fight with me for these purposes, you come and you bring your army to do it, but we have a period in Thucydides' history when they don't do it. "We have a time in ThuCydides’ history where they don’t do it," says the Greek historian. "When the Spartans tell you to fight with them, you’re going to have to bring an army with you. That’s the way it is." account of the Peloponnesian War in which important states like Corinth and Thebes, among others, simply say "no" And when the Spartans say, why aren't you doing what you're supposed to do, they come up with a very nice cock-and-bull story supported by theoretically religious motives why they can't do, he says. "When the Spartans tell you why you shouldn't do something, you say, 'Well, I don't know why I'm not doing it,'" he adds. what they're supposed to do and the Spartans have to put up with it; there's nothing they can do about it. So I think, now that I've mentioned the constitutional technicalities, I think the real thing to ask in each case is what are the realities of the situation, and what can be done about it? I think that's what we need to look at in each of these cases. I don't think there's any one answer to that, but I think it's a good place to start. by which I mean mainly, questions of power that determine what's going to happen. All right, but by the end of the sixth century there is this Spartan alliance and Sparta alone, among the Greek states, is a hegemonal power. Sparta is able to use, by Greek standards, a much vaster power than any other Greek state. It's a much more powerful power than even Sparta itself. It is a much larger power than Sparta had ever been before. military force than the Greeks have ever known, so that when the Persian Wars come upon them, there will be no hesitation and no doubt. The Greek league that will fight the Persians, will be led by the Spartans. So great was their respect in which they were held, that they were so respected by the Greeks that when they faced the Persian wars, the Spartans were the first to stand up and fight. The Spartans were known as the "Spartans" because of the respect they had for the Greeks. not only did they command the armies, even though they had no navy and no naval tradition, they were even put in charge of the fleet. Although they often had the brains to use other people who had more experience to do the actual leading. But Sparta is in this too, as they often used people with more experience than they did to get the job done. They even had a fleet, although they didn't have a navy and had no tradition of a navy. But they did have a fleet and they used it to get things done. position and I think that's important. Well, let's step back a moment and take a look at the Spartan state as we've been describing it. What is it that motivates the Spartans as a state, first of all, in its foreign policy? Because, as we shall see, there's there's a reason for it. And it's not just because of its history. It's also because of what it stands for, and what it means to be a Spartan. And that's very, very important. Greeks are by far the strongest military force among the Greeks. But they are more than usual reluctant to fight. They don't like to fight wars if they can avoid them, especially if they don't have to go any great distance to fight a war. This is a remarkable thing that even though they are the strongest, they're more thanusual reluctant to fighting. It's a very Greek thing that they're so reluctant to do it, even if they have the best military force. away from home and they don't like to fight for any long period of time if they have to be away from home. The reasons for that are really what I want to make you see. At the core of it all, according to Thucydides, it was the fear of being out in the world for long periods of time. That's what I'm trying to show you here. I'm showing you the reasons for it. I want you to see the reasons behind it. the Helots. It's not just that the Helots were so numerous compared to the Spartans, but I want to remind you again of their tremendous dissatisfaction with their situation. Their backs may have been broken, but their spirits were not. They always were hoping to have a rebellion in which they would be victorious. The Helots always hoped to be victorious in some way, and they were not satisfied with what they were doing. They were always hoping to be able to do something to change the world. they could undue this extraordinarily heavy burden that they carried, and somehow in spite of the hundreds of years in which this has been going on, they did not lose sight of their nationality, of the fact that they were Mycenaeans. "They were a people, and that they was a people," he said. "And that they could undue ... this extraordinary heavy burden" "They could undue [the burden] ... and they could do something about it," he added. "That's what they did. They did something." had to throw off Spartan control of them if they could possible could. Their feelings towards the Spartans were as you might expect. There's a story of a rebellion I think I mentioned this to you earlier, early in the fourth century in Sparta, somebody is trying to stir up a rebellion. It's a very interesting story, and I hope you'll read it and find out what it was all about. I'm looking forward to hearing what you have to say about it, so please send me a picture if you have any. the people against the Spartan government and he mentions to the people he's trying to enlist in his side the Helots, he says, who would gladly eat the Spartans raw. I think that's what you have to have in your mind, if you want to understand what the Spartans think, says the Spartan leader. "You have to be able to think about what you're doing and how you're going to do it," he says. "That's what I'm trying to do," he adds. If we take our whole army, leave town, go three days march away, how do we know we'll find anybody alive when we get back? That's always on their minds and Helot rebellions, although they don't take place every day, take place very sparsely, but they keep happening so that. that they can win back their people. That's what the Helot people are trying to do, and that's what they're trying to win back the world, too. the fear is never irrational. To that is added the permanent enmity of Argos. Argos never gives up the idea of returning to the great days of Pheidon with Argos as the dominant state in the Peloponnesus. That means that the Spartans have to be defeated for that to happen. The Spartans must defeat Argos in order for Argos to return to its former glory. That is the only way for the Spartans to win the war against the Argosians. happen and so the Argives come back to the Spartans time after time, good stretches in between, because the Spartans always beat them and do great harm so that it takes a long time for them to come back. But they're there, they don't go away; it's a problem. So, So, The Argives are a problem for the Spartans, and they're going to have to get rid of them. And they're not going to go away, they're just going to get better. the Spartans, of course, have a need of a collection of states that stand between them and their potential enemies of whom the Argives are the most important. So, you can look at the Peloponnesian league in general as the way in which the Spartans dealt with the danger they felt internally and externally. Another element that the Spartans always worry about--remember why are the Spartans so successful? Numerically they aren't many, enough to actually just defeat anybody by numbers. It is, because they are the best. this way of life that is the purely Spartan way. So, there are always, I would argue, likely to be a majority at least of Spartans who are suspicious of and hostile to any kind of change internally certainly, and externally. They're always worried about corruption seeping into the Spartan system. Corruption normally has the concept of money, wealth behind it. If money comes into the picture and people start being bought by it, they will cease to be thinking the way good Spartans should think. all, and so that means if you are a conservative Spartan, and the two words are practically the same, you're going to be worrying about that. That leads to conservatism in foreign policy. War, if you win, you are going to have booty; loot of some kind will come back. If you win a war and you are conservative, and you worry about that, that's a sign of a conservative foreign policy, and that's what I'm trying to get at. into Sparta. Some people will gain reputations because of their fighting in the battle. This will bring them excessive honor, will fill their heads with a sense of their own greatness, and again, threaten the stability of the Spartan state. So, all of that is going to explain the paradox, which is why Sparta is in such a paradoxical state. The paradox is that Sparta in its current state is in a state of crisis. It is in danger of losing its stability. of the greatest military power in the Greek world, reluctant to fight and their power is not used to acquire economic benefits. What they focus on is discipline and the state versus freedom, individuality, and even family. There you have this strange society, a closed society that does not normally exist in the world of military power, says the former Greek Prime Minister, Costas Karamanlis. He adds: "There you have a strange society ... with a very closed society, and a very secretive society that doesn't normally exist" permit people to come and visit Sparta, and even those that it permits to come to Sparta during one period of the year, they actually force all foreigners out of town and do whatever strange things they do. Now, when we're talking about the fully developed Spartan state there are no exercises of the arts, such as existed before this system was created. There are no luxuries legally in Sparta; there are few creature comforts. Again, I suspect at some fairly early time, there were violations of these things, as individuals who had the power to do so. try to enjoy these things in spite of their being barred. But the main thing is, if you had them you couldn't really show them, you couldn’t flaunt it, because that would be disastrous. Why? Because in a way, necessity becomes a virtue. We human beings--that's one of our typical ways. It's a way of life. It’s just one of the things we do. We’re not very good at it, but we try to do it. of dealing with things. That is, we need to do something, we have to and so one way we cope is to do it and say it's the greatest thing in the world to do, and doing anything else is no good. That's what the Spartans did. Their way of dealing with thing is to say it is the best thing in world and do it. And that's how they coped with their problems. They did it by saying it was the greatest things in world. And they did it. life was imposed upon them by the decision to maintain their command of the Helots, after that it all makes perfect sense. Look what they had to give up, to do it. They said, of course, we gave that up, because that's what makes us the great people we are. That's what made them great, and that's why they're still here today. They're still the same people they were when they were at the beginning of their lives. They still are. and that's the system that was the Spartan way of life. I remind you again that even though this is very extreme and other Greeks say that they're not going to live that way, they admire it tremendously, because it suits the ideology of all polis that subordinates individual family. It's a very extreme way of living, but it's the way that the Greeks have always lived, and that's what they want to continue to do. They want to live in a way that's very similar to the way they grew up. concerns to those of the community at large. As I mentioned earlier, the utopian philosophers of the fourth century, Plato being the most striking, Aristotle to a lesser degree, they admire this, although they have their wrinkles about how it's going to be. Nothing could be greater as a contrast as to the contrast between these two visions of the future and the reality on the ground. It's a very exciting time to be alive, and I'm looking forward to seeing what the future has in store. to this way of thinking than the way that the Athenians will develop when they go through their growth as a polis. So let's take a look now at Athens to see how they came along. Athens, I hope you'll remember from your maps, is located in the southeastern portion of the Greek island of Crete, which is now the island of Cyprus. Athens is now one of the most populous cities in the world, with a population of more than 300 million people, according to recent estimates. of the Greek peninsula. It sticks out there into the Aegean Sea. Its geography--it's about 1,000 square miles is Attica. The city is Athens; the region in which they live is Attiva. The people are Athenians and that's an important point I think. I think we talked about it already. I'm glad we did. I was glad to see you. I hope you're doing well. I'll see you in a few weeks. I've got a few things to do. I made too, which is everybody who is a citizen who lives in Attica is an Athenian, no matter if he lives sixty five or seventy miles away from the city. He's still an Athensian. One of the things they achieved early was the unification of that whole region and they made it one polis, although that certainly doesn't mean that there are no independent villages and towns in the polis of Athens, because they certainly are. Now, there, there are. are of course great exceptions; the central valley so to speak, of Attica has the richest soil and in the ancient world it was able to grow the very best grain, including wheat. But very much of the Athenian soil is mountainous and pretty close to barren, so that you don't have a lot of rich soil. This is not one of the most admirable places to come. On the other hand, it has certain advantages that the Athenians used well to achieve wealth and power and greatness.  Piraeus is the port of Athens. Once Athens becomes a naval state and it is both spacious, it has three nice little harbors. It is very easily defended, because these harbors can be closed off and attacks can be prevented. So, that is one of the reasons why it is so important for Athens to have a port of its own. The other reason is that it is very spacious and has three harbors, which are very easy to defend. The third is that Athens is a very attractive city to live in. Attica contained silver mines in the south of the peninsula, and that gave the state a source of income that was very, very unusual among the Greek states. Another, and this is very rare, among Greek states, Attica contained gold mines. Because these mines were ultimately owned by the state, it gave theState a Source of Income that was Very, Very unusual among Greek States. The mines were owned and operated by the Greek state, and they were very profitable for the state. The state was able to make a profit from the mines. city states, and the availability of that silver would turn out to be crucial at various moments in Athenian history. One reason why the soil wasn't so great for agriculture was that a lot of it is red clay. The clay is wonderful for making pottery and of course Athenian pottery, and I'm thinking especially about painted pottery,. stuff that is meant for the upper classes, stuff that artists will work on that will be exported. All of that is made of that great red clay, the basis for the pottery that the Athenians did. Another natural resource of great value and great blessing to those of us who can still see the remains of the Athenian experience is the marble that comes from Mount Penteli. The Greeks call it now Pendel, and Pentelikon is what the ancient Greeks called it. In the northeastern portion of the island, the marble is found in the town of Pentel, which is in the island of Lesvos, in the Peloponnese region of the Greek island of Crete. of the Attica Peninsula and it produce--you can still go see it wonderful, beautiful fine grain, white marble and that's the stuff that the Parthenon and all the other buildings, temples, on the Acropolis and around Attica was made of. That enabled the Athenians to build those temples as well as other buildings in the city of Athens. The Acropolis was built on the site of the ancient city of Acropolis in Greece, which is now known as the Greek Acropolis. few cities could, because there it was sitting in their territory, not a source of the kind of tremendous expense it would be for other states that would have to buy it and bring it in. Now, on the other hand, Athens was able as I told you-- let's start. Let's start with the fact that they were able to keep it in their own territory and not have to sell it to other states. That's a big difference. And that's a good thing. in the early days to grow wheat and other grains, but more to the point, it was very good for olive trees and for grapevines. As we will see when the Athenians begin to exploit all of their land, not just the bottom land that works for grain, but also the less desirable land and produced wine and olive oil. That was a source of agricultural wealth that would play an important part in their history. Now, their own story about their past was something like this. They, unlike the other inhabitants of southern Greece, according to their story, never experienced a Dorian invasion. Now, the Dorians did come down and sort of bang at the door of Attica, but they were driven by the Athenians and never made their way into it. So, the Athensians claimed that they were, in a certain sense, the purest of the pure. The Dorians were driven from Attica by the Greek city-state of Athens, not the other way around. The Athenians were the "purest" of the Greek people. Greeks and they went to great lengths. One of their stories claims they were, as the Greek word goes autochthonous, that is, they were sprang from their own soil. In fact, they said they were in Attica before the creation of the moon. Guess you don't have to believe that, you can read the rest of the article here. Click here to read the full article. Clickhere to read it in its entirety. CLICK HERE to see the full version of this article. but on the other hand, it's their picture; we were always here, the original indigenous people. Their tradition, and this one is surely right, is that at an early time in their history, Attica became a refuge for people escaping what they would have regarded as the Dorian invasion. There's no doubt that Attica was a place of refuge for the indigenous people, but it was also a place for them to live in fear of the invading Dorians. It was a very different time. no doubt that people from the Peloponnesus after the fall of the Bronze Age civilizations did a lot of running away and some of them ran to Attica and were greeted and settled down there permanently. Some of the most important and most aristocratic Athenians traced their ancestry not to Greece but to the island of Attica, where some of the greatest and most influential people of the time were born and lived. The Athenians are the most famous of the ancient Greek people, with the exception of Sparta, which was ruled by the Romans. the Athenians who were there before the moon was created, but to people who had come in this flight sometime after the end of the Bronze Age. It is a tradition not of producing conflict but of producing harmony. These exiles, we are told, were brought into the Athenian people. They were brought in to help the people of the city. They helped the city to become a great city. It was a place of peace and harmony, not of conflict. It has a long tradition of harmony. and lived among them as Athenians, no split, no division. There is nothing like the helot class in Athens. There are no serfs, there is no suppressed population waiting to get at their rulers, so that there's a kind of historical good fortune, which says Athens is going to survive. It's a very Athenian thing to say, but it's also true that it's a bit of a myth, too, that Athens is a city of the rich and famous. to be without internal strife. I don't mean totally but to a great degree compared to the other Greek states. Now, one important example of what happens in Athens that doesn't happen in other states is this. There's a tradition in Athens of an event called synoikismos; it's on the eve of the festival of Aphrodite. It's a celebration of the Greek goddess of love, who is said to be the most beautiful woman in the world. The festival is held every year on the anniversary of her birth. "Unification" means the bringing of households together. There is no set of local rebellions against the major city, no need to go to war. Now, there were obviously wars back there in the past," he says. "It really, if you take the word apart, it means the Bringing of Households together," he adds. "Which means unification. So you can look it up, which means unification," he continues. "There is no need for war. There was no war back there." the early days of the polis when the city of Athens became the dominant city, but we know so little of them, it's as though the memory has been entirely forgotten. The picture that is painted is one of everybody sort of happily living together, no conflict. Compare that with the fact that there was a lot of conflict between Athens and the rest of the Greek city-states. It's a very different story. It was a time of great conflict, but there was also a great deal of harmony. to Sparta where it's obvious Sparta gained control of the Peloponnesus through war and that many of the people there were very unhappy with them. But in neighboring Boeotia, the chief city of Thebes, traditionally was at war trying to subdue the other major cities. In Sparta, the people were unhappy with Sparta and with the Helots. In Boeotian, Sparta was unhappy with the Thebes and with Thebes. Thebes was unhappy that Sparta had taken control of Boeotians. of Boeotia, in order to make themselves the boss and they never were fully successful in this. So, Boeotian is torn, to some degree, by this internal conflict, which makes it harder for Thebes to achieve the kind of power in its own home territory that the Athenians are able to achieve. Thebes never achieved the power they wanted in their home territory, which is why they were never fully able to take control of the city-state. The battle of Thermopylae took place in the 4th century BC, when Thebes was still a kingdom. to achieve. Let's take a look at the earliest society of Athens as first we come to know it. One thing about this is that the story often comes to us through people like Aristotle who liked to make things neater and put them nicely together, rather than to leave them as they are. We will be looking at some of the most important moments in the history of the Greek city-state in the next few weeks. We hope you will join us for the next episode of our series. little bumps or anything like that. The society we're talking about, this earliest society, is aristocratic. Aristocratic implies means ruled by the best, and best in that time means simply best by birth. It's important to notice the difference between aristocratic and oligarchic. It means best by born. It doesn't mean best of the best. It just means best in the best way. That's what it means to be an aristocrat in the earliest society. It is not the same as being an oligarch, it's a different thing. and that means if you're going to be in the ruling group, in a dominant, aristocrat--the only way to get there is if your father was an aristocrat. Doesn't matter how rich you are, doesn't matter what a magnificent warrior you are. All that matters is birth and that. And that's the only way you can get to the top of the food chain. That's the way you get to be the most powerful person in the world. You have to be born into it. You can't get there if you aren't. is different from oligarchy which gives rule to a few but that usually means, I would say just about every case, that wealth plays a role. I don't mean that they didn't have aristocrats within an oligarchy, I'm sure that they did, it's that that was not the critical element. Now, also in the Athenian aristocracy, you can imagine that most aristocrats are rich but some of them are not, and that's the distinction that matters and we will come back to that point. as we see Athens move out of the aristocratic condition and into one that is more based on wealth, than it is merely on birth. Well, we are told that in the earliest times, Athens was divided up; the people of Athens were divided up into four tribes just as in this film. Well- we are also told that the city was divided into four different tribes, just as this film is set in the city of Athens. We are told in the film that the four tribes of Athens are known as 'the four tribes' were all the other Ionian cities and the Athenians of course were Ionians; this is a point worth making, because most Ionians lived on the coast of Asia Minor or on the Islands of the Aegean. The Athenians were pretty much--I'm exaggerating but mostly the only Ionians on the island of Greece, and they were the only Ionian city on the Ionian coast. The Ionian people were called "Ionians" or "Ioniai" in Greek. mainland. They sort of were an interesting middling group between the Dorians of the Peloponnesus and the Greeks of other types elsewhere. The Athenians sort of stood between the mainland where they existed, where they were, and the islands and across the seas. Each one of these four traditional Greek groups had a different name. The most common was the Athenian, while the most common were the Doric and the Etruscan. They were also known as the Athenians. tribes contained, according to this tradition, three subdivisions that were called phratres. An easy way to translate phr atres is brotherhood. Notice it's again about family and birth. You are in phratmes; you're in that phratre, because so is your father and you inherit it, and these phrat Res were very important. The word "brotherhood" is used to refer to the brothers and sisters who share the same bloodline and are part of the same tribe. I should have mentioned that the tribes had important religious functions that also the army consisted of four regimens, one for each tribe. So, these tribes had great reality for the Spartans. You went not only to the religious festivals of the entire state, but you went to those only for your tribe. You had to go to the festivals of your tribe, not the whole state. It was very important for them to have their own religious festivals. They had their own way of doing things. for your fellow tribesmen, which gave you a sense of belonging in that tribe, and I think that's important. The phratres were smaller versions of the same thing, and they had religious rites of their own, and in fact, the phratre appears to have been the unit that really mattered in the ancient world. For more, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Facebook and Twitter @SoulMatestories. for more information on the book, go to http://www.cnn.com/. terms of the place where you sort of established your belonging. I mean, if somebody came along to an Athenian in the seventh century and said, you say you're an Athensian, how do I know you're a Athenian? Well, after you got through saying, well you can ask my friends, you can go and ask your friends. That kind of thing. That's how you get your sense of belonging, I think, of what you're supposed to be. I think that's a very important part of it. my neighbors. Yeah what do they know? You say, well how would you do it? Well, I guess come down to a meeting of my phratres, they will have a record of my being a member of that phratre and that makes me an Athenian. So that's the importance, in the end, of being an Athensian. That's the important thing. And that's what I'm trying to do. I want to make a difference in the world. a way, one part of the importance of the phratres. Everywhere you can imagine, tribe, phratre, and so on, some aristocratic family or families would have had a leading role by tradition. Now, because it was established by birth and tradition, was an aristocratic stronghold. The Greek religion is very different from that of the Romans. It's very different to the Roman religion, which was very much based on religion. It was a very different religion to the Romans, who were very much rooted in religion. did have priests, but it didn't have a separate priestly class. During the aristocratic period, and I would say probably throughout its history, Athenian religion had the priesthoods. The chief religious places in the state were held by aristocrats, which in a primitive society in itself, gives them tremendous power. In a primitive Society, which is what Athenian society was, they had a lot of power, and they used it to their advantage. It was a very primitive society, and it had a great deal of power. prestige and a lot of clout. Probably, although I'm not sure we have hard evidence on this, probably the phratres fought side by side in the tribal regiments as well. Of course they would always be commanded by aristocratic leaders. Another way the Athenian people were divided involved names of people who had power and prestige. The names of the people who were powerful and had power were known as the 'phras' or 'phrats' The name of the Phras means a person who has power or prestige. classes of people and we'll come back to that in another context, but one class, the highest class in the aristocratic state were the eupatrids. The well-born, the well-sired and it turns out that in the early polis, no surprise, they dominated the best farmland, they had the best horses. They had the. best horses and the best men and women. They were the most powerful people in the polis. They dominated the farmland. chief jobs in religion, they were the government, because as early as we can tell that there was a regime after the legendary kings are gone. The number one governmental organization, you might call it, is the council of the Areopagus. The council gets its name from the place where it meets, and it's called the council because of the place it meets. It's a place where the council meets to discuss the future of the kingdom. It was the place that the king's son was born, and he was the first to be called king. If you look to the west side of the Acropolis, immediately there's a pretty good size hill which is the Areopagus, the hill of Ares, the war god. There the council of the areopagus met and did what it had to do, and it's clear that the members of the council were not happy with what they had been asked to do. There they met and decided what to do and how to do it, and they did it in the most efficient way possible. Areopagus in its earliest stage were noblemen. We don't know enough to know whether it was all noblemen or just the leaders of the clans or whatever, but that's where decisions were made. It's important though to realize that in these early days of the polis they probably had very had very high-ranking people. It was a very important time for the Areopagus, but it was also a very difficult time for them as they had a lot of enemies. little to decide and very little to do. Most of the real life of the state in the earliest days would have been out in the countryside where the overwhelming majority of the people lived. You must imagine that it is something like, nothing like precisely, but something like the early part of the 20th century, when the state was set up. It's a very different world now, of course, but it's still very much a part of our lives. We live in it, and it's very much part of us. feudal manners that we find in western Europe after the fall of the Roman Empire. These noblemen would typically have held a lot of land and have been well to do. They would have had all the powers I've described, and were looked up to and were listened to. they would have been listened to by their peers, who would have held them in high esteem. They were expected to behave in the same way as other noblemen of the time. They had to be well-behaved and behave in a certain way. led the military units into battle when that was necessary and we know that one of the things that they did was to serve as the source of justice in the state. If there was a quarrel between a couple of guys, they would bring it to a court. You have to have the courage to go into battle and do what you have to do. That is what they did in the war of independence. They went into battle. They had to do what they needed to do to protect the country. think of Hesiod, his complaints where his noblemen, his barons were crooked, but that doesn't mean they all were. In any case, that's where you went. They settled any disputes that you didn't settle by feud or by some other primitive technique. It was pretty clear that it was right. It's a pretty clear thing that they did, and it's pretty clear they did it right, too, because it was the right thing to do. That's what they did. to have the noblemen do it, not just because they're aristocrats but because they would know what the law was since there was no writing before the eighth century and it was very rare after that. There was nothing like a written law code until the seventh century. Before that, before that, there were no written laws at all. There were no law codes at all before the seven century. There are no laws today that are written in Latin. There is no law that is written in English. if you wanted to get justice you went to a nobleman, and if you want to go beyond that, you go to the Areopagus, which is made of noblemen. That's the picture in the earliest polis as best we can reconstruct it. Now, Aristotle tells us that beginning in the. beginning of the 4th century BC, there was a polis in Athens, and it was made up of a number of different groups, including the aristocracy and the aristocracy of the city. early seventh century, the date he gives us, of course we shouldn't put too much credence in it, it's too precise, but it's 683 B.C. He tells us we are introduced to a new thing, magistrates are chosen from. This is the date that he tells us on that occasion, we are introduce to anew thing, we're introduced to the idea of magistrates. It's a very important date in the history of the Roman Empire. It was the beginning of the reign of Emperor Augustus. In Athens, the magistrates were called archons. It means, in the most technical sense, rulers, but it means really important magistrates in the state. One of these was called the War archon, polemarch, presumably he led the army. Next came the War Archon, next was the Wararch, and so on. The archons were appointed by. the aristocracy to do various jobs in the city. They were called. archons in the Greek sense of the word. archon who was actually the most important archon, the one who gave his name to the year. The Greeks did not have a system of dating, which has a starting point, and so you can say one, two, three, four, five. Instead, like many ancient peoples, the ancient peoples used dates to mark the beginning of the year, and the end of a year, as well as the beginning and end of the month. The ancient Greeks used this method to mark their end of year. they named the year after the leading archon, the leading magistrate of the state; Mesopotamian cities did the same thing. So that archon was called the archon eponymous, the one who gives his name to the state. So, if you wanted to know when did a thing happen, somebody would somebody would say, 'The archon of the year is the year of the king' and so on. The archon would then be known as the king's archon. say it was in the archonship of so and so, and so andSo. Well, you wouldn't have that in your head, you would have to go someplace and look it up where there was a list of archons. Anyway, he was the most important. A third archon was known. But he was not in the same family as the other two. He was in a different family, but not the same one. That's the way it was. It's a long way off. as the King archon, the archon basileus. His responsibilities were mainly religious, but all the archons, whatever else they did, every one of them also did justice, that is, they had courts to which people could come to get their quarrels settled. Sometime after that, the king archon became a king himself. He was the first king of the Roman Empire, and the first monarch of all the Roman Empires. The king archons were known as the "Archons" after these three major figures that I have mentioned to you, there was established a body of men called thesmothetes, which were six men whose functions were apparently strictly judicial. They presided over courts that you could to for specified purposes. Every time you go to a court, you have to go through these six men, and they have to be judges. Every. time, you go through them, you must go through the six men. You have to get through them all, and you must get to the end of them. Only nine archons were elected from the aristocracy by the assembly of all Athenian adult males. They had a secretary which would have brought them up to ten, but only nine were true archons. That means mainly they were men of the aristocracy. One of these archons was known as the "King of the Archons" or "The King of the Nine Archons," and he was the only one of them to be known as a man of the aristocratic class. He was called the "king of the archons" and was also known as "the king of the nine archon" not aristocrats; they chose from among the aristocrats for these archons, who served for one year and not again. That's a very important concept. Nobody in Athens holds an office at this time, or as far as I can tell, at any time--well, back up, this time of the year, for more than a year at a time. It's very, very unusual, and I think it's a sign of things to come, that nobody in Athens is holding an office. than a year. The only thing in town that has continuity, that can develop power and influence over a period of time, is the council of the Areopagus. aristocratic and oligarchic regimes do. They are very nervous about individuals who acquire too much power, popularity, influence which which which they are very worried about happening to them. The council is the only thing that can give continuity to a regime that is trying to create a new type of regime. It is the last hope for the future of the country. will threaten the character of the aristocracy. Aristocracies--this may seem funny, but aristocracies love equality; equality among aristocrats, and then tremendous inequality between them and everybody else. Yalies are very nervous about anybody sticking his head up above the crowd, because the aristocracy is nervous about that, too. The aristocracy is very nervous that anybody is going to stand up above them, because they're afraid of being outshone by the rest of the people. It's a very nervous thing. question is always why not me? You have high expectations of yourself and so sometimes unless you're invaded by later religious ideas that the Greeks didn't have, you're not humble. I always seek Greeks in front of me when I see Yalies. An aristocratic republic is an aristocrat republic is a republic of aristocrats. That's what I want to see in a democracy. I want a democracy that's a democracy of the rich and the poor. I don't want a republic that's just a collection of rich and poor people. what we have, not a monarchy, but a republic. Dominated insofar as it's dominated by anybody but individual aristocrats, by the areopagus. At some point in the history of that institution it consists now of men who have been archon. The year after their archonship they automatically go into the year after they were archons. That's what we have in the UK. We have a republic, but it's a monarchy in the sense that it's not dominated by any one person. the areopagus and remain areopagites for life. Well, that gives them even more power and influence, because they consist now, exclusively after awhile, of people who have been chosen for their individual qualities to be the leading magistrates in the state. Now they will oversee the state and now they will will oversee. the state, he says. "They will have more power, more influence, more control," he adds. "It's a very, very exciting time for us" what's going on, and you can bet they will be looking very carefully over the shoulders of the aristocratic archons whenever they are in power to see that they're not screwing up. The weight and the weight of the power is going to be very, very difficult for them to bear. They will have to be careful not to get too mighty and too powerful, and to make sure that they don't get too powerful and too mighty. It will be a very difficult task for them. power of the Areopagus must have been enormous in this system. So the rich and the well-born, because they are pretty much the same in the early days of the polis, run the state in this official constitutional way. But I would also remind you that on their estates out of the state, they also run it in a very different way, and that is the way it was in the Middle Ages. It was a very, very different time. It's a pity that we don't know more about it. there in the country they run the thing just as well with the farmers and everybody else out there, kowtowing to them and seeking their favorite. That's the kind of world that we have at the start. Then it comes to Athens as it did to every other Greek state, and it's the same with the rest of the country. It's just the same as it was in the beginning, and that's the way it's going to be for a long time to come. a little bit later it looks like in Athens, all of the change and turmoil that we've seen in Argos and Corinth and other place. If we are right in talking about something like a hoplite revolution, it occurs in Athens too. Athens grows slowly, and again late, but it grows slowly and it grows late, as we have seen in the last few centuries. It is a city that grows slowly but it also grows late. It's a city of change, of change and of turmoil. begins to engage in commerce to a greater degree than before, and in ancient handcrafted manufacturing. Just as it does elsewhere, it leads to new wealth and new class distinctions, which are now based not on birth but on wealth. We hear new terms, not all of them new, and we hear them in a variety of ways, some of which are not new to the world of the Middle East and North Africa. It is a new era. We are in a new age. a couple of them new that come into the picture. We hear about Athenians divided into different classes. One of these you remember was the Eupatridae, the well-born. That's the old story and they were really only two, those who were and those who weren't. But now we hear about the 'well-born' as well as the 'poor' or 'poorly-born'. That's a new story and it's a very interesting one. people called hippeis, and it means horseman, cavalryman. Well, you can't own a horse and ride a horse unless you have a lot of money. Horses are expensive. So, there are rich people now who are these cavalrymen. They've had cavalry in the past, they've always been aristocrats, but now they're rich people who can afford them. They're called 'hippeis' and they mean 'horseman' or 'cavalryman' what we will see in the future is that men who are hippeis who are not necessarily aristocrats. At the bottom of the barrel we hear about people called thetes. They've always been around, they are the poor; they don't own land. They live at the mercy of chance; they live in a state of flux. They are not aristocrats; they are people who have been around for a very long time. They're not aristocratic; they're people who were born into a position of power. Zeugitai means yoke fellows. There are two senses of the work yoke that seem to be involved in this. You could say that, and that you do anything to stay alive. But now comes the new thing, people called zeug itai. What does it mean? It means 'yoke fellows' or 'work for other people' and 'work yoke' in two different ways. It's a new way of referring to people who do their best to keep themselves alive. This is one way that makes sense, these were men who were sufficiently well off that they could own a team of oxen, two oxen. That would make them respectably well off farmers. We are talking about people of the hoplite class. This is one of the ways that this makes sense. This was a way that this was a well-off farmers could own two oxes, who were yoked together to pull the plow. This would make these men respectably off farmers, and they were hoplite. Another theory is that they were indeed named that, because they were hoplites. They lined up in the phalanx and they were yoked together, so to speak, by their shields touching one another. It hardly matters which of the stories you prefer or whether you choose both; we're talking hoplite here. We're talking the hoplite of the ancient world. The hoplite is a word that means a person who has the ability to stand on the shoulder of another person. "The new class of independent family farmer has arrived in Athens, and as in other states is not satisfied with his position in the state," he says. "His own importance to the state becomes greater and greater. We will not be satisfied with the same people and that tells us the important fact, that this new class has arrived," he adds. "We will be able to make a difference in the lives of the people of Greece," adds the Greek PM. "This is a very important time for the country," says the prime minister. come back to this story when we talk about Solon, but think about these changes as happening, as the next change that I want to tell you about occurs. A change that didn't happen, but if it had, it would have changed the entire course of events. According to tradition, according to tradition Solon is a man of the people. Solon was born into a family of the same name, but with a different name. The family of Solon has been called the Solon family. in the year 632, an Athenian nobleman who had become famous because of his victory in an athletic contest and who had married the daughter of a very wealthy and powerful tyrant in Megara, right next door to Attica. So, this guy was a young big shot of extraordinary character. He became famous for his athletic prowess and for his love of Megara. He died in 632 and was succeeded by his son, who was also a nobleman and married a Megara tyrant. named, Cylon, attempted a coup d'état trying to establish a tyranny in Athens, just as his father-in-law had established one in Megara. Well, as the story goes, he tried his best to gain control of the city. What did you do in Athens in the 1930s? Tell us in the comments below. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. Back from the pageyou came from, back to the comments section. early days, if you wanted to take control of the city, is you take an armed force up onto the Acropolis. Well, he couldn't, he was resisted by enough of his troops. He couldn't make it stick. He didn't want to make it his fortress. He wanted it to be his fortress, and he wanted to be in charge of it. But he was not in control of it at the time. He had to let go of it, and let others take it. opponents that he was defeated. The leader of the resistance was the family known as the Alcmaeonidae. They went up there, locked up Cylon and his supporters in the Acropolis, in a temple. You couldn't go into the temple. We will hear a lot about them in this course. But they went up and locked up the Cylon, and he died in a fiery rage. It was a terrible, terrible death, but it was the beginning of the end for Cylon. for the purpose of killing somebody, that would be sacrilegious and so they were at a standstill. Still if you're inside that temple and trying to avoid being killed, you still need food and drink, and most important drink. So, how could they manage it? Well, they took a cord, and they took it to the top of the temple and cut it off. And they were able to get to the base of the tower and get the key to the temple. tied it to the temple, held onto the cord, and went down to the well and got their water claiming that they were just as sacrosanct as they had been before, and for a while it worked. But the Alcmaeonidae said, baloney. They cut the cord and killed the Cylonians. It was the beginning of the end for the Cylons, and the end of the world for the Incas. The Incas were the first of the Seven Wonders of the World. That put an end to the Cylonian conspiracy but it brought something to Alcmaeonidae as well, a curse. They were declared accursed and driven from the city. Well, that's for the time being, later on we will hear they're back again and they're very important. But the curse continues. And they're going to be very important to the future of the world. And that's a good thing for the people of this world. It's a very bad thing for them. to be attached to the family, and as we get to the last end of the last third of the fifth century and the Peloponnesian War is about to break out, the enemies of Pericles will pull out the curse of the Alcmaeonidae to use against him, because his mother was his mother. To be attached. to thefamily, and to be associated with the family. to be used against him. to use as a weapon in the war, because he was the son of his mother's family. was of Alcmaeonids family. For the moment, what we're talking about here I think though, is here's the first sign that we see of trouble in paradise. Nice, calm, happy synoecisized Athens has got trouble right here in River City. I mean in Athens. Why? I think we must imagine, we can't just imagine it, we have to imagine it. We have to see it for ourselves. We must see it as a sign of things to come. that there are the kinds of discontents that we have been talking about which find the leader in the form of a man who is an outstanding figure for some reason, who is willing to try to establish a tyranny, and use armed force to try and achieve their goals. That is the kind of leader we are talking about. The leader is an out-of-the-ordinary figure who is a man of outstanding figure, and who is ready to use force to achieve his goals. This is the sort of leader that we are referring to. That it fails, I think, is an indication that the same forces haven't reached the power in Athens that they had reached in Megara, Corinth, Sicyon, and places like that. But it's a warning about troubles ahead and I'll turn to those troubles in the next hour. I think it's an indication of what's to come in the coming days and weeks, if not months, in Greece. I'll talk to you about that in a few minutes.