William Wordsworth along with the next person we talked about Samuel Samuel Taylor Coleridge probably the two of the most influential of this particular era you know William Blake from earlier is very important as well. These names that I've been telling you are people that are very important to our history and to our culture. We're going to look at some of them in the next few days. We'll be looking at the works of William Wordsworth, William Coleridges and William Blake as well as some of the other greats. that show up on Jeopardy from time to time especially if there's a Romantic era or British literature type thing. "It's usually a good stab in the dark if you don't know to kind of throw out one of these names very interesting individual you know we read backgrounds of," he says. "We read backgrounds. of very interesting individuals you know," he adds. "I think it's a very fun game to play. It's a great way to get into the spirit of the game" a lot of our writers because a lot of their the things that happen in their life influence what they write about. There's a deeper understanding if you recall back when we talked about Thomas Wyatt with ambolyn and his history and then he wrote that poem whoso list. The things that happened in their lives influence what we write about or what we think about them. We want to make sure that people have a better understanding of who we are and what we stand for. We hope that you will join us for our next episode. to Hunts you know I will not go after her any more and she had the necklace around her neck for Caesars. I am you know we understood that it was more than just an allusion to Caesar and his pets because we knew a little bit about him here. To Hunts, you knowI will not going after herAny more and I am not going to go after any more. to Hunts youknow I willNot go after Her. Anymore and I will Not Go After HerAnymore. is something else about another person that we have a lot of that in same information about and that's William Wordsworth. Just reading about some of this past you know upbringing and how that influences writing and the piece that we'll read today it's heavily influenced by his past. You can read the entire piece on CNN.com/soulmatestories. Click here to read the rest of the interview with John Sutter on "The Soulmaters" on CNN iReport. know they say that he was a true literary pioneer he defied the conventions of his time by insisting that poetry should be should express deep feelings about everyday experiences. That's important because if you can recall back to the introduction of this unit and the big ideas and that's important as well as the people who were involved in the creation of the unit. It's important to remember that because that's where we are now and we're going to be for the rest of our lives. So that's a good place to start. such you know it's about that emotional feelings and that powerful feelings and he was one that really was pushing pushing and pushing for those to be in his writings. That's why he stands out that's why you've such a visionary of the time and the building background on his writings, he says. "That's whyYou've such an visionary of. the time," he adds. "It's about those emotional feelings ... you know, that powerful feeling and that's what he was pushing for" wordsworth to help out growing up his past to talk having two tragedies the loss of his parents which would be a tragedy for anybody but also for Wordsworth. The next page gives a little bit more insight into that same premise so that's something to remember about this era and about Wordsworth to. help outgrowing up hisPast to talk about his past. the next page provides a little more insight as to why Wordsworth was so introspective and introspective in the first place. The second page is more of the same as the first. the division of his family after the death of his parents his brothers and himself were kept you know closer to school but his sister was taking away from him and that was a big problem from he whether it was a protection type thing or a bond with his sister. It was a very difficult time for him. He was very close to his sister and it was very hard for him to be away from her. He had a very close bond with her. It's a very special bond. It is very special. sister I've never lost a parent um I don't know if anyone has but I would imagine that's a big gap in your life and you may be bond a little bit more with your siblings. Maybe she being the only female he has a sense of protection for and he's the only male in the family. He's not sure if he'll ever have a mother or a father. He doesn't know how he'll cope with the loss of his mother or father. But he knows that he'll always have his sister. so being separated you can imagine the struggle that one might have in dealing with it with the loss and so he you know he longed to be with her and such and it wasn't until it said the mid-20 so for you know half of his life up till he's like 12 13 14 when the dad died. Oh another decade or so until he could be with she again you know regularly and make that choice about how they live their life and so up until that point you see that the. you know his passion he developed for poetry for simple country living and for the natural world was to influence him for the rest of his life. So throughout his upbringing even though he was away from his sister at the school he developed this passion for poetry and this was his life's work. He was a poet, a writer, a playwright, a novelist, a journalist, a broadcaster, a television presenter, a producer, a director, a screenwriter and a producer. He had a passion for writing poetry. observation of nature and such and we will see that played out in the piece today. It's kind of interesting just a little paragraph it has about rebellion in France remember the very first pages of our introduction to this unit was dealing with revolutions it had Industrial Revolution but it was also about the French Revolution. It was about revolution in France and revolution in England and the rest of the world. And it was about revolutions in France, England and other parts of Europe and the world at the time. also the American Revolution French there's one down in you know the Caribbean that type of thing and the Napoleonic Wars so there were all these things going on and you know out of principle out of the ideals that he lives by him and understands and worships to some of the ideas that he believes in. "He lives by them and understands them," says the author. "Out of the principles that he living by him, he understands and worshipes to some kind of ideas that they believe in" degree not like spiritually but worships these ideas he goes and and helps um you know he falls in love with a woman but he becomes broken so he has to take off and go back home and so for years it talks about there that he's feeling a sense of community. "I'm a little bit of a weirdo," he says. "You know, I'm like, 'I don't know what to do with my life." "I've got a lot of things I want to do," he adds. "But I don't think I can do them." of abandonment and loss for leaving the woman that he loved back in France that I can't stay and you keep the cause going any longer. "I have to run back home because I'm broke so he has some of that guilt and some of the that that pressure and that abandonment," she says. "You keep thecause going any more because I have torun back home" "I'm broke because I am broke," she adds. "And so he's like, 'I can't go back to France. I'm going back home' " you can see how he teetered that last line there he cheated on you know a nervous breakdown and a collapse so a very emotional guy very emotional individual very passionate um the literary acclaim you know hey working along with his buddy Coolridge who you don't know yet but he's a good guy. He's a great guy and I'm glad we got to work with him. I'm looking forward to working with him again. I've missed him a lot. I'll see you in a few weeks. The Rime of the Ancient Mariner is a story about a collaboration between a man and a woman. The story is based on a famous partnership between two of the world's most famous artists. The Rime is written in the form of a short story written by the author of the book. The book is called The Rimes of the Mariner and is published by Simon & Schuster at £16.99. For more on this story and others, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories. Coleridge that was as we'll read here and for the intro for that you know Wordsworth worked with him on that it was going to be a dual credit both of them were going to get credit for it. But Wordsworth had to drop out of that and Coleridge had to take the credit for his part in the story. It was a great story and I'm glad we got to read it. It's a great piece of work and I hope you'll read it too. "Some of the most famous elements of the piece still are in there and they're still a focal point," he says. "We still see his kind of finger prints on that masterpiece áwillá will take care of in the next few years" "We're going to see some of the ideas that he brought to the table," he adds. "It's going to be a very exciting time for all of us. It's a very special time for us. We're looking forward to it" couple days but just a very famous individual very uh you know emotional a pioneer a visionary at that time. So you know understanding all this stuff about him will help us in our in our you know undertaking via tintern abbey here in a little bit okay you say? We'll be back in a few days. We'll let you know what we've been up to. We're in the middle of a big project. We've got a lot of stuff to tell you. We want to make sure you're up to it. see the literary term enjambment for Wordsworth is key that's a term you probably haven't heard of before this class it's very easy it's more about identifying by looking and you'll see it throughout his piece today. You know it's when the the punctuation gets wrapped around to another. It's very difficult to read but it's important to know what the author is trying to say. You can see it in his writing when he's trying to make a point. line and it doesn't end nice and crystal clear the continuation of a sentence in a poem from one line to the next. We're kind of you know grammatically just kind of wraps around a couple lines okay as we go through it you'll hear that it's kind of kind of like a line of a poem. It's not like a poem ends in a clear line. It doesn't have to be crystal clear. It just has to end in a line. We don't want it to be clear. We just want to make a point. different than the typical every line it's kind of its own little thing and so when it's read in a different way it's it might see a little Jill at times button jamming is something very easy to visually identify a once you understand oh that's in JAMA it's a little bit different. "Jill" is a term used to refer to a woman who has been diagnosed with breast cancer. The term is used to describe women who have been through breast cancer treatment or have had a stroke. The 786 lines were composed a few miles above Tintern Abbey. The lines are composed of a series of 786 notes. The 786 is a form of free jazz known as free jazz improvisation. It is a type of free improvisation that is very popular in jazz circles. It's a way of expressing yourself in a way that you haven't done before. It might give you a little bit of reservation here and there but it shouldn't okay what I want to talk about first is a 786 line. on Abbey you know a religious building you know if you there's a PowerPoint on our PDF on Moodle that as as you have some time go through it will kind of go through here in a little bit. You'll see illustrations sprinkled throughout of Tintern Abbey a lot like a lot of religious buildings. It's a great way to get a sense of the history of the Abbey. It was built in the 12th century and is one of the oldest buildings in the world. It is located on the banks of the River Thames. Tintern abbey still stands okay it is not a practicing monastery any longer it was closed down during the time of Henry the eighth if you recall he had that big. The Canterbury Tales where you could go and visit the Canterbury Cathedral like you seriously could go there now tintern ab Abbey still stands. It is not known if the abbey is still in use as an abbey or not. It's not clear if it is still used as a monastery or if it has been converted into a hotel. religion issue with his you know with Anne Boleyn and so he shut down monasteries and we're you know because my Church of England is this and not Catholics and you know all of these different things. But you can see more information about it on the PowerPoint slide but you can also see more about it in the video below. Click here to watch the full interview with Richard Quest on "The Daily Show" on Sunday, September 14, at 8 p.m. ET. then there are you know several pictures that you can look at that are really kind of neat um sprinkled throughout now in England you know a lot of times it looks kind of hazy and foggy and you know overcast but we'll see a couple pretty pictures here in England. Then there are some pretty pictures that we'll be showing you in the next few days as we go through the rest of the week. We'll be looking at some of the most beautiful places in the country. a little bit you know there's one look at you know a grass I think there's no roof on it but imagine what it'd have been like to you know to walk through this when it was a practicing monastery and such what was the like with that big roof. It's a little bit of a surprise to look at it and see what it was like to be a monk there. It was a bit of an adventure for me to find out what was going on in there. I think it's a very interesting place. on there with the stained glass windows all still in there. I mean we don't have much of this here in Fort Wayne you know there might be a couple bigger churches sprinkled throughout that are kind of still Gothic influence but you know things like this it's pretty pretty. "It's prettypretty," said a local resident. "I mean there's a little bit of a Gothic influence to it, but it's not like it's a big Gothic influence. It's just kind of a little more subtle," he said. amazing the light coming in the sides they're real nice on the outside it doesn't quite look as a grand as the inside did. Maybe it's the cows really close together but they are fenced off so it's not they're gonna go roaming around and you know making a home. It's not like they're going to go roaming and make a home out of it. It doesn't look as grand as it does on the inside but it's still a great place to stay. within the Abbey but it's still some place that you can go in and view and see. I don't know maybe people can still get married there maybe they can have ceremonies I have absolutely no idea but someplace that's so historically relevant and famous Wordsworth's Tintern Abbey very very important to the history of the country. "I don't think people will be able to get married in the Abbey. I have no idea," he said. "It's just not going to be the same." famous and you can go in and to the area that was the motivation for this particular piece it's kind of neat so I like if you can going to one of the globes and watch a Shakespeare play I mean that's that's time travel guys I really like this. I like that you can do that and go to the place where the motivation was for the piece was. It's really neat. I love it. I really, really like it. It was really fun to make. picture here um you know where they are above you know looking down at it the title for this piece is lines composed a few miles above tintern abbey so we could say you know line if we wrote something lines composed in the sky above yoyo above dupont library. Picture hereUm you know. You know where the lines are above. The title for the piece is Lines composed a many miles above Tintern Abbey. The piece is called "Lyrics from the Sky" and is written in the form of a poem. You know this could be probably you know this picture is probably not miles away but this might be some.you know something like that where we are in the vicinity. He's not saying I'm sitting there staring at Tintern Abbey right now but you know, it's a good idea to be aware of where you're standing and what you're doing. It's a great way to get a sense of how far away you are from the action in front of you. You know, you're in the ballpark area. You're in a good place. place close and since we know that he was very fond of nature and he you will see that spoken several times in this piece you know this might be some sort of view notice the river winding through he referenced his cottage and the smoke coming out of their smoke coming from their cottage. He was also fond of the outdoors and he was known for his love of nature. He would often speak of his love for nature and would often refer to his cottage as a place where he would sit and look out over the water. chimneys you know this might be a view that he had or something very similar and so there's that moment of wow this you could technically time travel to some degree here. Just some pictures and stuff that I think it's kind of neat to to to see," he says. "I think it might be something that he might have done or something like that. I don't know what it would be, but it might have been a bit like that," he adds. "It might have just been a little bit of that kind of thing" look at from time to time so let's go ahead and read it on a 786 follow along with it if the rhythm gets choppy and you start to get lost refocus this is only about eight minutes so it's not a long one but focus on what he is. We'll be back next week with a look back at some of the most memorable moments from the 2014 World Cup in Brazil. Click here to read the full transcript of this week's match between Brazil and the USA. saying about nature from time to time and it's it's understandable guy this is probably one of the most difficult readings that we have throughout the semester. "I don't think it's impossible but you're going to have to you're gonna have to work a little bit ok so just kind of kind of go with it," he says. "It's understandable," he adds, "and it's kind of understandable guy. This is it." "I'm just going to go along with it. I don't know if I can do it, but I'm going to try to do it" of grab onto those moments those moments of nature and such but also as this is kind of like a monologue where he's going on all of a sudden we find out at the end that he's not alone that he'm actually talking to somebody and based on his history that's not a good thing for him to do based on what he's done in the past. "I like to kind of grab onto that moment," he says. "of grab hold of those moments ... I like to grab hold on to those moments" can we guess who that might be and why this moment is interesting ok lines composed a few miles above tintern abbey. Hopefully you found that I know is probably a little bit of a struggle to get through you found some of those those elements of nature and we're all just trying to find out what's going on in the world. We're all trying to figure out what it means to be a human being and what it's like to live in a world that is very different to our own. going to go through those but who is the individual that surprisingly is he speaking with his sister okay and it's not just oh it's a brother-sister thing fine but we know about his feelings for his sister based on their absence for a decade a decade plus and so and so. "I don't know if I'm going to be able to get out of this one," he said. "It's been a long time. I don't think I've ever been able to do that" for those last words those last you know couple stanzas there hopefully that helped bring you back to you know the the passion that he was talking about the emotions yet he he feels about sharing this particular moment with this individual and when he goes on to say you. For the full interview, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories. For more information, visit www.soulmantheartsoul.com and www.jenniferrock.com. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org. know you know some places if I die think back to this time. Think back to the love that I have for you but think of the love I have. for nature and all of these these feelings and these memories you know and we will be able to get back together. I love you so much and I will always love you. If I die I want you to know that I will be waiting for you for you when I die. You will always be in my heart and I'll always be with you. you know be together again kind of what you know in thought and such so the beginning if you look back on the first two pages I'm just going to point out a couple key things um you know hopefully you understand enjambment and you can see that now you can now you understand that now. You can see now that you know what I'm trying to say. You know hopefully now you know that I'm not trying to tell you what to do. I just want you to understand what I want to say to you. know the wrapping from one line to the next and such you know how it isn't uh you know there isn't some punctuation form and little phrases here and there. Five years have passed since he's been there okay five years have been there and it's really interesting because it's like he's not been there for five years. It's like, "Oh my God, what has happened to him?" he says. "It's been five years since I've seen him and I haven't seen him in five years" he talks a lot I mean just describing you know leaning against the tree and looking out amongst the field on looking at the orchard with the you know it talks about the all of the which at this season with the unripe fruits are clad in one green hue. He talks about how to get the most out of the orchards and the best way to do it is to plant the right type of tree. He also talks about getting the best out of his orchard and how to grow the right kind of fruit. so looking at the Apple which is not all red it's just all the same you know shade of green here and there and so he's just acknowledging all the different things that he notices okay leaning back and looking at smoke coming out of chimneys. So looking at. the smoke coming from chimneys coming out out of. the chimneys and so on and so forth. And so he was just acknowledging. all of the different thing that he noticed okay leaning. back andLooking at the smoke. Coming out of the chimney coming out from the. the forest out of the woods and wondering who that could be you know some people would some Hermits and some cave. I'm just enjoying this situation this scenery. I know if any of you have ever gone on a vacation at some place where it's just visually beautiful you have been to one of those places. You've been to a place like that. I've been there. I'll be there for a long time. I just want to stay in the woods for a while. just maybe mountains maybe a lake you know just something that's just very calming okay very calming and he almost has kind of a teleportation back to some degree of when he was a child okay he goes into great details about when I found through around the river like like. Just something that is just very relaxing okay very relaxing and very calming. Just maybe mountains or a lake. You know justsomething that'sjust very calmingOkay very calming, that's what I was looking for. That's where I found it. a like a row like a deer and I would play and when I was little I was having a great time but when you're a kid playing outside you really appreciate how beautiful it is everything are you just like play play play run run run okay and so and so. When I was growing up I would just play with my friends. I was like, 'I just want to run around and play' and so I would do that. I would run around in a row. I'd run in a line. Like a deer. he talks about how all these memories come back to him about how he enjoyed nature how he you know as a kid really embraced it but he was too young to really understand nature. Now being older being wiser I can appreciate this a little bit more for what it was okay and I love nature now and I loved nature then but they're a little different he says that the memory of the woods and colleges offered tranquil restoration to his mind and even affected him when he was not aware of the memory. was away thinking back to this it helped calm him and help restore him if he mentioned that when I was off in a city whether I was alone or far away or with some people you know. I would think back to. this place I would Think back to when I. was away. When I was. away thinking of this place helped calm me and helped restore me. When. I was away thinking about this place it helped. calm me. If. you were away and. were alone you would think of this. place you were in. this this setting this these visuals that now I am seeing again and it brought me a lot of peace. It brought me  comfort. ok do you remember a certain trip that you took at some point in your life maybe five to ten years ago and. Maybe five to 10 years ago you took a trip that brought you peace and comfort. If you do, please send us a photo of it to jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk and we'll feature it in next week's column. you distinctly remember a visual image have you ever gone back to that same place and like oh yeah this is the place one of my earliest memories was I was like two or three and I went to Disneyland on California. I remembered nothing throughout my life except I rememberedNothing throughout his life except he was at Disneyland. He was at the age of 2 or 3 and he was in a car with his dad and his dad took him to Disneyland. I was in the car with my dad and my dad took me to Disneyland, and I was just like, "Oh my God, this is where I was." remember look you know right and the entrance usually there's a big train that goes across and you have to walk underneath it you know well not like under a train but like a tunnel. I distinctly remember a train cut was coming in to meet this one coming. It was like a train was coming to meet another one coming in the opposite direction. I remember it like it was yesterday. I can't believe it's been so long since I've seen it. It's been a long time. across this way and I just remember that I don't remember sights and sounds and smells but I remember visually what it looked like. So I took some journalism students to a convention there four or five years ago and I remember standing there in the front of Disneyland. "I just remember ... that I was in the middle of a lot of different things," he says. "It was a very, very exciting time for me. It was a great place to be in the U.S." in California and watch the train go across and was like this is the same spot I stood when I was three you know and so it's kind of a nice little Wow think about how I've changed in my life think aboutHow I've grown up things that I've. done in my own life. It's like a little bit of a reminder of how far I've come and how much I've learned in the past few years. I've had to grow up a lot in the last few years and I've been through a lot. experienced you know stresses and things and you can think back to this this for me I didn't look back to Disneyland and think hey that was awesome but you look back at certain things in life and that brings you some calm. Those are you looking forward to spring? Share your thoughts with CNN iReport. Share your photos of spring in the comments below or send us a video of your own using the hashtag #SpringInSpring. Visit CNN.com/Spring in the new weekly Newsquiz. break or summer are you going to some place you've gone to before you probably know what to what to expect what that's going to be like soaking in the Sun go and ski in whatever and so you have that to look forward to and that gives you some hope. "It's a lot of fun. It's a great way to spend time with your family and friends," he says. "You get to spend some time with them and you get to do some of the things that you love to do." calm and then when you go there it's enjoyable I like line 61 right around in there it says that the pictures of the mind revives again while here I stand not only with the sense of present pleasure but with pleasing thoughts that in the moment in this moment. It's enjoyable to go there and then go back to the present moment again. That's what I like about it. I like to go back and look at it again and again. It is enjoyable to look back at it. there is life and food for future years and so you go back to experience that memory and you're there. Maybe it's identical to what you thought maybe it's a little different but it's almost like you're now you're hitting the record button. Not only are you standing here, you're standing here. You're there in that moment. You've been there. It's like you've gone back to that moment and you've been standing there for a long time. That's what it's like. enjoying what's happening but you're recording all of this so that wow I'm enjoying this so much right now. You're recording it so that in the future you can go someplace and hit play and you have this newer fresher appreciation for this particular place. And it's all recorded so that you have it all at the same time. It's all in one place. It doesn't just have to be about you. It can be about other people and other things. And that's what this is about. steeped you know in nature and such okay he mentions the river you know meandering through the the trees and through the fourth that's why looking at that picture before we started you know that river is the same river that he was looking upon and quoting and talking about. That's the river he was talking about in that picture. He was looking at and quoting the river that was the same one he was referring to in the picture. That river is that river. That is the river. here that's why to go to that place and visually see that nature that appreciation maybe you could hunt down. I don't know if that orchard is still there. I want to be kind of cool if through the little you know the little hints here an orchard there's some. There's some orchard here that's some of the inspiration for this book. I just want to make it a little bit more fun for people to get a taste of what it's like to live in New York City. cottages of smoke the near the river and if you could pinpoint maybe a couple acres where you think it might be that might be kind of neat. I wonder if somebody's ever done that but we see these elements of nature we see remember we talked about in the first part of the show. We see the elements ofnature we see in the second half of the program. We'll be back next week with a look at the next episode of "Behind the Scenes" at 9 p.m. ET. introduction the child and the common man the innocence of children and such this isn't a story about or poem about children but yet through his childhood memories we are able to make that connection to those passion emotion feelings about nature and and his sister and such and so. This is a story of a child and a poem about a child. It is not about children and it isn't about children. It's about a man and his memories of his childhood and his love of nature and his family and nature. we get to see little elements sprinkle in four motivations you know just lines sprinkled throughout you know therefore am I still a lover of the meadows and the woods and the mounts so he just he keeps going on and I think that if you were to read this would be a great read for you. I think it would be great for people to read. It's a great story. I hope you will enjoy it. I'm looking forward to reading it and hearing what you think of it. through a second time these would pop out a little more and you might be able to keep your your focus a little bit. But really being eight minutes it should have been too difficult but yet maybe the enjambment maybe the the rhythm of it messed you up. It's eight minutes long. It should be too difficult. But yet it's not too difficult, it's just a little hard to keep focus. It was eight minutes. It’s just a small part of your life. a little maybe some of the footnotes you know that's why a second exposure as always is always beneficial yeah we don't know that there's anybody with him okay anybody with them until he says my dear dear sister they're at the bottom of 790 and such let me see. "A second exposure" is "always beneficial" says the actor. "It's always beneficial" to have a "second exposure" to something like this, he says. "I think it's a good thing to have that kind of exposure" here you know even if he did not feel this way about the nature or understand all the things he would still be in good spirits for this day. I wouldstill be happy for what's going on today even if I didn't have those previous four pages you know. You know. Even if he didn't feel this. about the. nature or understanding all theThings he wouldStill be inGood Spirits for this Day. I Would still be happy. for what’s going on. today. the previous hundred lines of thoughts about nature because why because I'm with you dear sister and then I'm like oh okay sister connection oh well he really is an emotional individual at this particular time. "Think about all of that record button that he was going to be," she says. "I'm like, oh well, he really was an emotionalindividual at this time" "I was like, 'Oh my God, I'm so happy to be here with you," she adds. "It's so good to be with you." hitting it wasn't now we know it's not just because he wants to record all the beautiful panoramic surround it's recording my time with my sister as well okay. "So to see that they can appreciate that you know a few lines in your nature never did betray the. You know I'm glad they can see that," he said. "I'm glad that they're able to appreciate that. I'm happy that they know that I'm not just a guy who hits the ball." heart that loved her nature's power over the mind that seeks her out is such that it renders that mind impaired impervious to evil tongues rash judgments and the sneers of selfish men. This nature instills instead a cheerful faith that the world is full of blessings and so this nature. is such a powerful force that it can change the course of the world. It can make the world a better place for all who live in it. It is so powerful that even the most impaired mind can be transformed by the power of its will. you know he even asks nature the wind blow upon my sister the moon shine down on her let her see this nature and let her appreciate nature and nature will take care of her and you know she will have these moments to think of as well and then she will be taken care of by nature. You know he. even asksnature the windblow upon her the moon Shine Down on her. Let her. see thisnature and let. her appreciate it. and she will. be well cared for. like I said we first started this particular piece talking about it you know that memory if I am dead if I'm gone think back to this time sister if you can't hear my any longer just remember what my feelings are for you but my feelings were for this. I'm sorry I can't talk any longer but I want you to know that I love you and that I will always be here for you. I'll always be your sister and I'll never leave your side. I love and miss you. place and nature and everything else around here so that you can come back here and and really my voice and my spirit will continue. "You'll be experiencing all of these things and thinking in the same mind frame that I was thinking okay now that's a lot for you," he says. "My spirit and my voice will continue," he adds. "I'm not going to stop. I'm just going to keep on going." "I want you to be able to come back and experience all of the things that I've been able to do here," the singer says. "It's a lot more difficult than reading those pulpme to expect you to get out of this because this is one I probably say the top three or four most difficult pieces," he says. "It's not that it's crazy hard but it's just it's a much more difficult to read than it looks," he adds. "I don't know what you're going to do with your life after you get through this," he admits. "This is one of the most difficult things I've ever done"