The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open CourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. Today we want to hear from the professor who taught us how to use the MIT Open courseware system. We want to know what you know about the Open Courseware system and how you can use it. to wrap up our discussion on two-photon processes. In almost all cases when you address atoms, you do two photon courses because a photon is scattered. You may think it's absorbed and emitted, but in reality, it is a two photon process and not two single photon processes. If you have any doubts about some subtleties about how is light absorbed and emit, the correct answer is always obtained from the two-Photon picture. We have two optical fields at frequency omega 1 and omega 2. That means both photons are used or stacked up to go up in energy. We derived this result, and this was the end of lecture last week. And what we obtained in perturbation theory for the excited state, it's exactly the same structure you have seen before. But the only difference is we have now four terms because we have combinations of omega 1 and omega 2. That's the way we got this result. We have now 4 terms because of omega 2 and omega 1 combinations. And that's how we got the structure we have seen so far. and omega 2, or we can take two photons out of the same laser beam. Just sort of a question, just to sort of indicate to you how many terms you would expect when you do the most basic light atom interaction. Just one photon, a plus a dega. How do you do it? How do we do it with two photons? How does it work? How are we going to do it in the future? What do you think we should do? How would you like to go about it? many terms do you get if you write down the Hamiltonian? No approximation without. How many do we get? Four. You have a plus dega for the electric field, sigma plus plus sigma minus for the atom. And then you have four combinations, two are co-rotating, two. Two are co,rotating and two are non-co-rotated. Two, two, two and two. That's what we get. We get four terms. We have a Hamiltonian. are counter-rotating. What we are doing here is second order perturbation theory with two optical fields. If you would not do any rotating wave approximation, how many terms would we get? Audience: Eight. I think it's multiplicative because we have four processes involving one-- oops. Now I'm now I'm going to have to ask you to repeat the question again, because I don't know how to do it the first time. I'm not sure if you can do it. getting confused. I wanted to say 16, 4 times 4. But now I would say in the first step, which is to the intermediate level, we have four at frequency one, 4 at frequency, which makes eight. But then I think in the second step you get eight more. So I think we have eight more to go, and then we have 16 more. And then we get 16 more, and so on. And so we get to 16. And that's what we're going to do. if we don't make an approximation, we get 64 terms. But they're just all combinations, all combinations of frequencies. Anyway, therefore, I hope you appreciate that I did the rotating wave approximation. I said I'm only interested in the near-resonant terms. And then when we say we want to go, we go to the other side of the room. We go to a different room and go to another part of the building. We then go back to the beginning of the story. up in energy in two steps. We absorb two photos. We don't have any emission of photons. These are all the counter-rotating terms. You have only the absorption of photons, and then we have four possibilities. Yes, I mean, you have a term where two photons are emitted from the Earth. And then you have another term where you have two photons that are absorbed. And so on and so on. It's a very complex system, but it works. ground state. This is sort of now doubly counter-rotatable. We're not going there. It's not adding anything new to it. In this chapter on two photons, I'm completely focused on the resonant terms. But since four terms is still too many, I want to go back to the ground state. I'm going to go to ground state again. I don't want to stop at ground state, I just want to move on to the next stage of the process. just tell you what is special about two photons. I focus now on a situation, and that's the most common situation in the laboratory, where there is a near-resonant intermediate state and that is sort of now filtering out one of the terms. If this intermediate state is resonant with two photons, it's a very special state. It's a state where the two photons interact in a way that is unique to them. That's what makes them so special. I'm going to show you what it is. omega 1, then we only want to consider now the process where the first step to the intermediate step is driven by the field e1. So therefore, we have only one term, which dominates out, which is e2. This is the process we want to look at in the next section of this article. We will then look at the process in a different way, using a different set of terms. We hope that this will give us a better understanding of what the process is all about. of those four, or dominates out of those 64, which we would have gotten without any approximation. It's one term-- the near-resonant term-- which dominates. So that's what we want to discuss now. And it's the same we've always done in the U.S. and around the world. So this is the term we're going to consider. And we'll talk about it more in the coming days and weeks, if not months, as we go forward. lowest order perturbation, second orderperturbation theory, in two steps. But if you're asking, what is the transition probability? The transition probability, we have to get the probability to be in the excited state. And then we have the usual situation that this term can be used in the theory. It's now in two Steps 1 and 2, and we can see that we have a transition probability of 1 in 1,000,000. And we can also see that the probability of being excited is 1 in 100,000 in this case. We can then use this to work out what the transition probabilities are. be written as the sine squared divided by this, and it turns into a delta function times t. And when we divide the probability, the amplitude squared by t, we get a rate. And this is Fermi's Golden Rule. It is exactly the same you have seen probably more than more than one time in the last few decades. It's the same as the one you've seen in the movie "The Godfather" and it's the one we've all seen at least a few times. 100 times. So therefore, we have now a transition rate, which is Fermi's Golden Rule. This is the delta function. I called it the function f because I want to discuss the spectral profile a minute. But then-- and this is the only difference to Ferm i's Golden rule with a 100 times transition rate with a 90% transition rate. That's the transition rate f. And then we have a delta function f, which we call the transition function f. signal photon-- the relevant matrix element is, because we have two steps, is the product of two matrix elements squared for step one and for step two. Because we have an intermediate step, we have to divide by the energy mismatch by the detuning in the intermediate state. But the relevant Matrix element is. The relevant Matrix Element is, the product. of two Matrix elements squared. for stepOne and stepTwo. And because we. have an energy mismatch, we must divide by. the energy mismatch by thedetuning in. the intermediateState. remember, in the one photon picture, Fermi's Golden Rule is the matrix elements squared times the spectral function. So in this matrix element squared in frequency units, neglecting factors of 2, was the Rabi frequency. So therefore, very naturally, we want to define this as a two-photon Rabifrequency whereas in the picture, it's a single photon. We want to call it a 'one photon Rabi Frequency' so that we can work out how many photons there are in the image. each matrix element here divided by h bar was the single photon Rabi frequency. So therefore, what we obtained for the two photon processes, we have a two-photon Rabi Frequency. This is the product of the single photons Rabi frequencies for each step, divided by the energy detuning from the energy of the process. We call this the 'two-photons' frequency. It is the same as the 'single photons' frequency of each step in the two processes. The 'two photon' frequency is the result of the 'one photon' and 'one step' frequencies. immediate state. So therefore, our result looks almost indistinguishable from the result built on single photons. We've just cleverly defined our quantities. The rate to go from a to b is Rabi frequency squared, but it is the two photon Rabi Frequency. And the delta function is the deltafunction. And so on. And on. and so on, and on and on, until we get to the point where we know what we want to know. And then we can get the answer we want. for the resonance-- the energy difference between state a and b-- but now not just minus omega 1. It is minus the sum of omega 1 plus omega 2 because we have stacked up the two photons in the two photon process. So let me just write that down. It was minus thesum of omega 2 plus omega 1 because we had stacked up two photons. So it was minus omega 2 and omega 1 and omega 2. And that's what we call a resonance. It's the difference between two states of the same energy. looks like the one photon excitation but with suitably defined Rabi frequencies. So in other words, if you were interested just in the physics of two levels-- Rabi oscillation, you name it-- you can just say the same thing happens. The only difference is that instead of having a coupling, you have a coupling of the two Rabi frequency levels, which is the same as the one-photon-excitation-to-one-phon excitation. directly by a matrix element, we are now coupled by this two photon Rabi frequency. And all your equation, you know, everything-- you can consider line shape, spontaneous emission, saturation-- all the phenomena we have discussed for single photon are analogous. You just have to use the density of state to get the result you are looking for. It's a very exciting time for the field of quantum computing. It will be a big step forward in the development of quantum computers. calculated for the two photons and you have to use the two photon Rabi frequency. OK. So I started out by telling you about two photon processes, two photon absorption. But what is maybe even more important in the way how it is used in experiments are Raman processes. So what is the Raman process and how does it work? And how do we use it in our experiments? And what are the results? And why do we want to know the results of this experiment? let me just show what I mean. If you have a state a and b, this can be two different vibrational states of a molecule. Or if you think about a break process, it could be the same internal state of the molecule. It could be two hyperfine states of an atom. It can be the two internal states of the atom. Or it can be a different state of an atoms' nucleus. It is the same state of atoms' nuclei. It's the same as the state of electrons in the nucleus of a nucleus. the atom-- the same hyperfine state-- but with two different momenta. Then it is a Raman process only in the external degree of freedom, in the motion away function. The only change is you change the momentum. We need our intermediate state, which is often an electronically excited state. We don't need to change the state of the atom itself. We just need to shift the momentum in a way that makes the atom more or less excited. It's a very simple process. are detuned. One photon going up and one photon going down. Historically, people distinguish between the. situation where the final state is lower or higher in energy. One is called the Stokes process. The other one is called anti-Stokes. But as long as you use laser, it doesn't matter, so long as it's not too high or too low, it's the same as it was in the past. It's just a change in the way the light is produced. beams to stimulate it, you don't even care which state is higher or lower in energy. But if you work in molecules with a thermal ensemble, then you have certain states thermally populated and others not. And then it makes a difference whether you start from the ground state a state a ground state or ground state. It's not just about energy, it's also about whether the molecules are in a state that is thermally hot or cold. It is about whether they are in the same state or not. or from an excited state b. OK. So actually, everything for the Raman process is completely analogous-- is completely covered, actually-- by what I wrote down for you in perturbation theory. It's just if you had kept all the 64 states-- to go up with one photon and down with another. That would be the same as the process in the quantum world. That's what I was trying to show you, that it's the same process in both the quantum and non-quantum worlds. one photon one was one of them, but we discarded it because we were only interested in going up. So in other words, what was previously one of the counter-rotating terms, where omega had a plus sign and omega two had a minus sign, now it becomes a resonant term. One photon one is a term that means 'one photon' or 'one- photon' and is used to refer to a single photon of light that can be seen in the universe. because we have arranged our two levels a and b in such a way that the near-resonant process is that one. So in other words, I mention it to you and it's just getting too messy to write it down, when we have e to the i omega t and t to the omega e and t and e to omega f and f and e and f to omega g and f. So, when I mention something to you, it's because I'm thinking about it and I don't want to forget it. e to the minus i omega t, I mentioned once to you is the sign plus or minus means whether we absorb a photon or whether we emit a photon. If you use a fully quantized picture with a and a degas, the a for the quantized description becomes an omega t. The a for a and the degas become an i and a omega t in a quantized image. The omega t is the ratio of the omega t to the square root of the number i. e to the i omega t. In the semi-classical description of the a dega has a minus sign. For this Raman process we want to select e to the minus omega i. So therefore, if you look at all the combinations between plus i. omega t, minus i omega. t, for thisRaman process, we are looking at e to omega i t. We are looking for the ratio of omega i to omega t in the Raman equation. For example, the ratio is 1:1:1, where omega t is the ratio between omega t and omega i T. and e to the plus omega too. And that means we are focusing on this process. Therefore, everything for the Raman process is analogous to the two-photon absorption process. The only thing we have to do is to change the sign on the second frequency because the second. frequency is the same as the two.photon. absorption process, which is similar to the one we are using in our experiment. We are using the second sign because it's the same frequency as the second photon. photon is emitted in a stimulated way and not absorbed. And therefore, our detuning is the detuning from the Raman resonance. The rate in Fermi's Golden Rule is the matrix element squared times the spectral density indicated by the delta function. That's the rate of detuning. The detuning of a light source is the rate at which the light is absorbed or excited. That rate is called the rate to which the photon is emitted or excitation is measured. delta function is now at the frequency, which is given by the two-photon detuning. Any questions? Yes. Professor: Well, we are usually talking about two-Photon absorption, but this time we are going to talk about the delta function. The delta function is the product of single-ph photon Rabi frequencies divided by the detuning, and it's the same as the absorption frequency, so it's exactly the same for two- photon absorption. Any Questions? Yes, Professor. "It would be an amazing coincidence if accidentally it would be in resonance with another one," he says. "We are working hard on our lasers to be close to one resonance," he adds. "I would say, if you had a situation-- let's let's say, let's go to the moon, you would have a very, very good chance of getting there," he concludes. "It's just a matter of time before you get there," says Dr. David Weinberger, an expert on lasers. say in a molecule, which is a high density of state, the Raman process would be a rotation or vibration of the ground state. And if you're unlucky and don't choose your lasers wisely, the two laser photons could get you high up into an electronically excited state. But if you do choose wisely, you'll be able to see the world from a new vantage point. And you'll have a better view of it all if you have the right laser photons on your head. state. And this may have some detrimental effect, depending what you want to do. But in general, I would say if you have more than one process, there is no interesting interference term. You just get two different rates. One is the two-photon Raman rate and the other one is theTwo-Photon absorption rate. And you just have both simultaneously. They're not leading to the same final state. This is more subtle because you kind of cram the interference effects. coherence. I want to now take it one level higher, where we talk still about two-photon processes but we are allowing one of the photons to be spontaneously emitted. Again, we don't have to learn new things. We just have to map it to knowledge we already have. Any other questions? OK. I'll be back in a few minutes with the next part of the interview. Back to Mail Online home. Back into the page you came from. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter. already have. And let me sort of do it in the following way. I just want to sort of give you a clear understanding what this expression for the two-photon rate is. If we assume laser one and laser two are near-resonants with a transition a to k and k, then we have a rate of 1.5. And if we assume that laser one is a near-Resonant, then laser two is 1.6. And so on and so on. to b, respectively, we can sort of look at the two-photon process in the following way. We can say the photon omega 2 cannot be absorbed by the initial state. It can only be absorbed because omega 1 mixes in with a certain probability, the state of omega 1. The photon omega 1 cannot beabsorbed by theinitial state because omega 2 can't be absorbed. The state of the photon is omega 1, and omega 2 is omega 2. The process is called the photon-to-phonon process. k into the ground state. So if you would first forget about it and you just do perturbation theory, then you would say in perturbion theory with the field one, the state a has now a probability, given by this term, that the state  has now an admixture. And so on and so on. And that's how you get the theory of gravity. It's a very simple way to understand how gravity works. And it's very simple to understand. now, if we have sort of-- we have dressed up our state a with admixing for the near-resonant field some probability of state k into it. And this stressed state now has sort of a stepping stone here. And from this stepping stone, it can now absorb the photon omega. From this step stone, the state a can absorb the photons omega. And it can then absorb them in a way that they can then be absorbed by the state k state. 2.2. I'm treating this dressing up of the initial state just a perturbation theory. And that's why everything was in one formula when I applied perturbion theory. But as we especially cover in the second semester of the course, you can also use this theory to solve other problems. So that's how we should think about it. We'll be covering this in the next few weeks as we go through the course. We hope you'll enjoy it. Back to Mail Online home.back to the page you came from. say if omega 1 is very, very strong, you can exactly diagonalize the Hilbert space of states k and a. And this is called the crest atom picture. But again, what happens is you mix those two states. And it is the admixture now in a non-perturbative way of state. It is a new way of looking at the state of the atom. It's a new type of atom. We call it a crest atom. The crest atom is a type of atomic structure. In this kind of picture I just suggested, I start with a dress state a.k, which is sort of the stepping stone. And from this stepping stone on, you can absorb a photon omega 2. So we could actually-- let me just redraw this-- that we want to go to the final state b. But what is relevant is only kind of this admixture. And so it looks like, actually, now a two-level system, where we go from the dashed line-- called called b. the virtual state-- to the final state b. And let me just point out what this virtual state is. Well, you know already everything about it because everything which can be known about it is what we have derived in our formula. I'm just interpreting the perturbation theory I've written, and I'm not saying what it is or how to get there. But it's the same thing. It's just a different way of looking at it, and that's what I'm trying to do. down to you. And if I now call it a virtual state, there is nothing more you can ever know about this state than what was in this formula. But it's maybe helpful to summarize it. Because we have a resonant with frequency omega 2 in this situation, it is. It is not a perfect formula, but it is a good one to start with, and it's a good way to get the most out of it. It's a very, very simple formula. It doesn't have to be perfect. clear that the energy of this state is where the dashed line is. The stepping stone is created with the first photon. And the dashedline is the energy level of the virtual state. What is its character? Spatial bay function. The energy of the real state k is not theenergy of thevirtual state k. It's not a stepping stone, it's a way to get to the top of the pyramid. It is a way of getting to the center of the universe. It can be used to get into the centre of the galaxy. and such? Well, it is exactly the intermediate state k. And what is the population? If you had a two-level system, we sort of start with 100% amplitude in state 1. But here, our population is diminished by the probability at which we have it admixed the state. So in in the case of a state 1, we have a population of 1%. In state 2, the population of the state is 1%. So in the state 1 state, the probability of admixture is 1. other words, if I really wanted and I want to use this concept, I could make a simplified description of two-photon process. I would just say the two-Photon process is just a similar photon process starting from the virtual state, and the virtualState is created by the first photon. I could just say that the virtual State is created from the first Photon, and then the second Photon creates the Virtual State. That would be a very simple description of the process. Well, you would say, well, why do you do that? I think the picture I've just drawn for you is sort of helpful when we discuss now two-photon emission-- spontaneous emission. With two lasers, it's sort of simple. But with two-Photon emission, we have the situation that we start in. It's a little bit more complicated than that, but it's still a good starting point for a discussion about how to use a laser in the future. an excited state b. We have one laser, omega 1, and that's it. But we will find out that, eventually, the system populates the ground state. And one possible process-- and. that's the one we are focusing on is-- that it was first emitting a photon in a stimulated way, says Dr. David Schulder, a physicist at the University of California, Los Angeles. "We have to find out what's going on," he says. "It's a very exciting time for us." but the second photon, since we're not offering any extra stimulation, had to be emitted spontaneously. Now, you say, well, how do I calculate it? I can write out long equations. But with the concept I've given to you, it should be clear that what we actually have is here, says the physicist. The second photon was emitted spontaneously, he says, since there was no extra stimulation to stimulate it. The photon was then emitted in a similar way in the same way. we have nothing-- let's just look at the first part as a dressed atom, an atom in state b with some admixture of state k. And this admixutre can now decay by a single-photon process. So in other words, you don't need to re-derive anything. You can just sort of do it yourself, I think. I don't know if that's true, but that's what I'm going to do. I think that's the way to do it. use analogy to write down what is the spontaneous emission rate out of the state k. So what you would write down now is the rate for this two-photon emission-- one photon stimulated, the second photon spontaneous-- is simply the Einstein a coefficient, or the spontaneous emissions rate. The rate for the stimulated and spontaneous emission is the same thing, just written out as the rate of emission out of k. The second photon is the one that was stimulated, and the first photon was the spontaneous one. this intermediate state gamma ka. But then we have to multiply with the probability that this state is present in the state b because b-- that's what we assumed has no direct matrix element to emit to state a. And now you should sort of be amazed about the beauty of the state a, because that's the one we assumed was present. And then we multiply that probability by the probability of being in state b, which is the state we assumed to be present in, and so on. of concepts you have learned. We are talking about something which maybe before this lecture-- wow, one photon stimulated, one photons spontaneous. That must be complicated. But it's just that, except for one thing. And this is the following-- remember, you should always remember how we derived the formula for photon-spontaneous. It's a very simple formula, but it's very important to remember. And it's also important to keep in mind that it's not just one thing, it's many things. spontaneous emission. The physics of spontaneous emission is that you can put one photon in each of the empty modes and you have to sum overall modes. And what was important was the density of modes at the frequency. And now the frequency is omega. So when we calculated the frequency, we found that omega was the right frequency for the photon to emit. We then found that the photon could emit a photon at a frequency of omega. We found that this was the correct frequency for spontaneous emission. spontaneous rate-- emission rate-- the decay of the excited state k, we had an omega cubed dependence at the resonance frequency. But now we are interested in the density of states at frequency omega. Well, you'll remember, two factors of omega are omega are two times the energy of the electron. We are now interested in omega density at the resonant frequency for the transition ka. We want to know if omega density can be used to predict density at a certain frequency. from the density of states. One came from translating for momentum matrix element to-- no, one was-- yes, it was set. But one was pretty much the single-photon Rabi frequency. And this is also at the frequency of the photon. So you just have to correct for the omega cubed for the photon to be in the right place. It's the same thing with the photon, it's just the opposite of it, so you have to get it right. factor. And this is our result now for two-photon emission. OK. This may be even more relevant at least in the research which is done in my group and in other groups at MIT. We often have Raman processes-- you know, you need a reason why. And we often have two-Photon emission, which is a type of emission. It's an example of a Raman process. We can use this to understand the origin of light in the universe. you want a two-photon. If you can't reach the upper state with a single photon like people in [INAUDIBLE]-- they may just use two photons. But this is more limit because they don't have the laser, which can bridge the gap. In situations where you work with alkali atoms, we use a laser to bridge that gap. We use the laser to work in situations where we need to get rid of the alkali atom. We can do that with the laser in the lab, but not in the real world. are often very happy with-- we have one resonant line and we can do all the laser cooling, everything we want. But often, we don't like that the line width of the excited state is very large. And therefore, certain precision work, where we want to be very accurate in, can be very difficult to achieve. It can take a long time to get to a point where the laser can be used to do the job properly. It's a very, very complex process. what we're doing with the atoms, cannot be done on the d1 or d2 line. And therefore, we often use a two-level system, which consists of two hyperfine states because then there is no broadening to do spontaneous emission. So one motivation why we again and again and once again consider is that we can't do it on d1 and d2. So that's one reason why we keep going back to the same process. And that's why we're always trying to improve it. two-photon processes in our laboratory is because it gives us excess to very narrow resonances. But I think you get the gist now, and it will become even clearer later on, that often when you do a transition between two ground state levels, a lot of the physics is the physics of the process. We will be writing more about this in the coming weeks and months. We hope to share our findings with the rest of the world in a series of blog posts and videos. same as of a single photon. You just replace your single photon Rabi frequency by two-photon Rabi frequencies. But now with the benefit of having a very narrow resonance. So anyway, therefore, I think the. same as a single photons, but with a much narrower resonance. I think that's the key to the discovery of the new type of light. I don't know why, but that's what I think it is. I'm not sure why I'm saying that. most important aspect of two-photon processes is Raman process. 99% of the research people in our field are involved is actually in the form of Raman processes. I think as you realize when you go from the two- photon absorption to Ramanprocess, there's nothing you have to re-learn. You just have to be careful with the two photons you're using. The first photon is absorbed and the second photon is spontaneously emitted. The Raman transition is a type of Ramans. signs of omega 1 and omega 2. So if I would ask you now what is the rate of the spontaneous Raman process, well, it is the probability to be in the intermediate state. And this probability is just re-writing in a different way what we call the Raman rate. It is just the probability of being in an intermediate state, which is the same as being in a positive state. It's just the rate at which we are in that intermediate state that is different. have used, is the Rabi frequency of the first step squared, divided by the detuning squared. So this is the probability to be in the excited state. Now, the spontaneous emission occurs with Einstein's a coefficient connecting the intermediate state to the ground state. And then, of course, as we we. have used, the probability of being in an excited state is the same as that of a ground state, which is the opposite of the excited one. And so on and so on. just learned, we have to correct the spectral density and such. The correct omega factors-- we must calculate it at the frequency of the emitted photon. This is actually also-- this kind of spontaneous Raman process -- it's called a 'spontaneous Raman' process. It's a type of quantum electroluminescence. It can be used to study light waves and other phenomena. It is also used to understand how light travels through space and time, for example, or to predict the speed of light. Before lasers, all you had is light bulbs, strong light bulbs and maybe mercury lamp. And you couldn't really resonantly, he says. "It was somewhat spectrally narrow. But still very, very broad," he adds. "You couldn't have a very wide beam of light." He says lasers have changed the way we see the world. "We can see in new ways. We can see more clearly," he says, "and in a new way. It's a very exciting time." you know, stack up two light bulbs and have enough spectral power to excite to a certain state. But look here-- you could still, with a strong light bulb, create an admixture of the excited state. This virtual line was terribly broad because of the width of the light bulb -- it was a very broad virtual line. It was very difficult to get a clear picture of what was going on in the brain. It took a long time to get to the point where we could see what was happening. spectral width-- but then this spontaneous photon was just compensating for it. So in other words, it should be obvious-- this process only depends on the power for the first step. And it doesn't really matter if the power is delivered by a laser or a light bulb. The rate is the same, even if the light is coming from a camera or a laser. It doesn't matter if it's a camera, a laser, or even a lightbulb. It's all about the power. for this process is the same. And this actually was the discovery by Raman, which was rewarded with the Nobel Prize, for suddenly observing when you excited molecules with a very strong light bulb, you suddenly saw very different frequencies of photons coming out. and this was a landmark discovery. For more information on the Nobel Prizes, visit NobelPrizes.org and the Nobel Center for Research in Physics at the University of California, Los Angeles. For confidential support, call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. "We are not changing the internal state. So that's also important for a lot of research within the CUA," he says. "When we simply want to change the momentum state of an atom, we have two lasers. We go up and down," he adds. "I've already written it out. OK, what is next? I've already wrote it out," says the scientist, who is also a professor at the University of California, Los Angeles. "It's a very exciting time for me. I'm looking forward to the future" it is still a Raman process because state a and b differ by the photon recoil. So we are going back to the same internal state a, but it may have 2h [INAUDIBLE], two-photon recoil different. And therefore, as long as, in the same state, we are not going to go back to same state a. We are going to be in a different state. We will be in state b, but we will not be in same state b. quantum physics, one quantum number is different, it is a different state. And therefore, if you just think about it Rayleigh scattering resonance fluorescence, that you go up and you go down to the next state. You may think you have your favorite atom, and you going up on a quantum number. You go up on an atom and then down on another one. And so on and so on. It's a very complex system, but it's very, very interesting. cycling transition. Well, when the atom goes up and then emits a photon on a cycling transition, there is recoil involved. So actually what you're doing is on the cycling transition,. You cycle it through many, many spontaneous Raman processes. So this is the correct description of resonant fluorescence and resonant. fluorescence is a type of light that is emitted by the nucleus of an atom or nucleus of a nucleus. It is a form of light which can be used to make light-sensitive materials. Rayleigh scattering. When we do Reyleigh scattering, we have to consider that the photons have momentum, and this takes us to another state. Let's now be a little bit more careful and consider what is the role of the momentum in the transition. Any questions? Good. I've just mentioned that when we do Rayleigh scattering,. We have toConsider that the photon has momentum. This takes us into another state, and we are in a new state. We are in the new state of Rayleigh Scattering. This is a new type of scattering. It is a type of light scattering. in the two-photon process. And in particular, I want to come back to this Fermi's Golden Rule formula and include in this spectral profile, which in the simplest case is always the Lorentzian. But I Want to include now Doppler shifts. So in other words, what I want. to do is to include in the spectral profile the Dopplers, which are the most sensitive to light changes. And that's what we're going to do. now is I want to talk about recoil and Doppler shifts in a two-photon process and see how it will affect the line shape. All we have to do is-- or maybe let me back up. You should maybe consider what I've discussed so far, is the situation of an an in-flight camera with a high-speed, high-pitched sound system. That's what we're going to do. We'll see how that affects the shape of the image. atom which has no motion. We could just fully focus on the internal degree of freedom. And just to remind you, we have discussed two ways how you can eliminate motion out of the picture. One is assume the atom has infinite mass. That's one possibility. The second one is to assume the atoms have no motion at all. That would be the most accurate way to look at the atom. And that's the way we look at it now. We can't go back to the old way of looking at it. assume the atom is tightly localized in an ion trap, deep in the [INAUDIBLE], that it is localized to less than the wavelength. And actually, the two ways of how you can eliminate recoil in Doppler shift are actually the same. When I said, give the atom an infinite mass, I was talking about the atom's mass. I was referring to the fact that the atom has infinite mass. That's the way to eliminate recoil. It's the same as giving the atom a mass that is infinite. It doesn't matter what the mass is. well, you give the atom an infinite mass by tightly connecting it to the laboratory. And this is what tight confinement in an ion or atom trap does. Because then the recoil is absorbed no longer by the atom, but by your experimental structure, or by your whole laboratory, or the whole of the scientific community. It's a very, very powerful way to make an atom, and to make it behave in a very particular way. It can be very powerful, and it can also be very dangerous, because it can cause a lot of damage. even by the building, if you want. But now, we are kind of going beyond this restriction. We are now saying, OK, now we allow the atom to move. And we can deal with that by simply saying when the atom has a velocity v, we can transform. We can transform-- we can can transform the atom into an atom of light. And that's what we are trying to do with the atom. We're trying to get it to move in a different way. just use the Galilean transformation and say OK, the physics is the same. However, the atom, due to its velocity, sees a slightly different frequency. So therefore, we have our Lorentzian. But now, we calculate our LoreNTzian by using the frequencies perceived by the atom. The different signs-- plus minus-- are the different signs -- plus minus -- of the LorentZian. It's a very complex process. It takes a long time to get it right. are, of course, distinguishing whether we have two-photon absorption or Raman process. And the frequency shift, going into the frame of the atom, gives us Doppler ts k1v and k2v. And now you'll see that there is something which is potentially interesting, and I want to discuss that. If k1. are, for example, in the same way that k2. are in the other direction, then k1 is the same as k2, and so on. and k2 end up here with a minus sign, it may eliminate Doppler shifts, maybe even completely. So this is something new. If you have a single photon, you always transfer momentum to the atom. But if you have two photons, the two momenta can cancel. And this is actually a new way of transferring momentum. It's a very exciting time for the quantum field and for the field theory of light. We'll have to wait and see how it pans out. a powerful method to avoid Doppler broadening in spectroscopy. The message you get from this formula-- it's actually much easier to say it in words than to write it mathematically because it's all hidden in the plus minus sign. But the gist is that it's a powerful way to avoid broadening of the spectrum of light in a spectroscopic instrument. It's also a way to get rid of the need for a spectrophotometer in the first place. two-photon absorption or Raman processes-- so any kind of two-Photon process-- they are like single- Photon transitions. And we've already discussed it, that we said we have Fermi's Golden Rule like for single photon. It's just we have to use the suitable definition of the two- Phonon Rabi frequency. and we had to find a way to make it work with two Phonons. We have found a way. to do it with two Photons. also seen that we can treat, actually, the two photons at one. But the frequencies, sort of, of this photon-- if you want to regard the two-photon process as a super photon, the frequency of the super photon is now either the sum or the difference off the two frequencies, as in the case of the two photon process. The super photon process is called a "two photon" process, or a "super photon" The process is thought to be the most powerful way to create light. depending whether we look at two-photon absorption or Raman process. But what we see now from the Doppler shift formula, that we can apply the same also to the momentum. It is as if we had a super photon, which drives one transition, but the momentum of this super photon is also driving the other transition. The momentum of the super photon drives the transition, and the momentum drives the second transition. It's like a 'super photon' that drives both the absorption and the Raman processes. is now the sum or the difference of the two momenta of the photon. What really matters is what is after the two photons have been exchanged, what is the total momentum transferred to the atom. So what appears here is the sum of the momenta and momentum of a single photon, or a pair of photons, which is called a quanta. The total momentum of an atom is then known as the quanta, or the momentum of the atom as a whole, or its total momentum. k1 plus minus k2-- is the total momentum transfer to the atom. If you have two-photon absorption, if the two laser beams are counter-propagating, thetotal momentum transfer is zero. But if you have a Raman process where you absorb one photon and then emit it, the momentum transfer  is zero, assuming similar frequencies. So in other words, the situation without momentum transfer-- and you will see in a moment, or I've already said this is a situation where you are Doppler free. Now you have it twice. Let me just focus, because there is very special interest in that, for precision spectroscopy of hydrogen. Let's assume we have just one laser, which produces-- but we want to dive a two-photon process with it. In this situation, omega 1 equals omega 2. In that case, omega 2 equals omega 1. And so on and so on. It's a very, very complex process. It takes a long time to do it. The momentum transfers are the same. And if we arrange for the two photons to be absorbed from opposite directions, we reach the situation where the Doppler shift is really zero. So this is the way where we do Dopplers free spectroscopy. And two-photon Spectroscopy is one of the handful of ways to do it. It's a very special technique that is very difficult to get hold of, but it can be done with a very small amount of effort. of methods of practical importance for eliminating the first order Doppler shift. So if you take an atom-- and let's just quote Dan Kleppner research, where this is the hydrogen atom -- and you have two laser beams from opposite direction. How will the spectrum look like? Well, we have a number of ways to look at the spectrum. We have a variety of ways of looking at it. We can see the spectrum of a laser beam hitting a hydrogen atom, for example. the feature, which I just emphasized, that the two photons-- one is absorbed from the left and from the right, and therefore you get a very, very sharp line. I will talk about it in a second. But you cannot, of course, suppress the process where you absorb. The two photons are absorbed from each other and the result is a sharp line, which is very sharp. It's a very complex process, but you can't suppress it, and I'll talk about that in a minute. The Doppler free peak is where you have photons from counter-propagating directions. Since hydrogen has two sides, you have sort of a broad pedestal. So the pedestal is. where you take one photon-- both photons from the same side, whereas. the Dopplers are more focused on one side of the spectrum. Two photons from left or right, for example, would be on the same pedestal as one photon from the right. So you have two photons on a pedestal, one from left and one from right. is of methological importance, measurements of-- fundamental measurements of -- the Lamb shift, comparisons with QED calculations, measurement of the Rydberg constant -- these are all done by hydrogen spectroscopy. So therefore, it is very important to have precision method which suppresses the Doppler effect. However, let me point out that once the method has been used, it can still be used to make other measurements, such as the Lamb Shift. It can be done by using other techniques such as X-ray fluorescence. you have completely eliminated the first order Doppler broadening, you are then limited by the second order Dooppler effect. And as I pointed out, there is no geometry-- no arrangements of beams, no tricks you can play-- because one contribution to the second-order Dopplers effect simply comes from time. And so on and so on, until you get to the point where you have eliminated all the first-order broadening. And then you have to go back to the beginning and do it again. dilation, that in the frame of the atom, relativistically speaking, the clock ticks differently. And therefore, the spectral line is different. So this is what we had discussed already for the second order Doppler effect, and this is not suppressed by two-photon. If you now estimate what is the relative magnitude of this effect, you can get a better idea of what is going on at the atomic level. That's what we're trying to find out here. line width-- so what is the delta, the line broadening you to the second order Doppler effect, in relation to the transition frequency? So just give me a second. Yeah. Then this omega cancels and we have an expression which is sort of interesting. It is mv squared. It's the mv square of the line width. So it's the delta plus the omega plus the delta + the omega + the delta = the delta squared. That's what the delta square is. energy -- the thermal energy-- but since we have normalized it to the transition frequency, it becomes now the Thermal energy relative to the rest mass of the atom. You would think, well, this must be really tiny. Well, it is tiny. If you take room temperature,. it is 2 times. The thermal energy of an atom at room temperature is the same as that of a human body at the same temperature. It is the equivalent of about 1,000 times the energy of the human body. People are now looking for precision in optical clocks, which is in the 10 to the minus 15 range. So you really have to know the temperature, know the kinetic energy distribution of the atom, and be able to correct for this, he says. The accuracy of optical clocks can range from 0.10 to theminus 11.5 per cent, according to the International Organization for Standardization. The precision of optical clock clocks can be as low as minus 11 per cent or as high as minus 10 per cent. You can't know for certain that the velocity distribution of the atoms in your laser beam is exactly at room temperature. Or ultimately, if you can't correct for it, you would not be able tocorrect for it at room temperatures. You really have to go to low. It's a very, very complex process, and it takes a long time to get it right. It can take up to a year for a laser to work at full power. It takes a lot of time and energy to get the beam to work properly at low temperatures. temperature, go to cryogenic temperatures. And in the famous experiments in Munich and [INAUDIBLE] group, the typical situation is for the 1s to 2s transition, they observed residual line broadenings on the order of a few hundred Hertz. This is not limited at all by the natural lifetime of the material. It's a very exciting time for scientists and engineers around the world, and I'm looking forward to seeing what the future has in store for us in the years to come. 2s transition. As you calculate in your last homework assignment, the lifetime of the 2s state is actually due to two-photon emission. Amazing. Two photons in series. This is the way how the2s state decays. And you will, actually, with this rather simple description, get a fairly accurate estimate, get an accurate estimate of how long it will take to get to 2s.2s. 2s Transition. 2 photons in Series. 2-photons in series, 2s transition, 2- photon emission, 2. photon emission. for the lifetime, which is a fraction of a second. And [INAUDIBLE] group uses a cryogenic experiment. They cool the hydrogen by collisions with liquid helium, cooled vaults, to maybe a Kelvin or so, three hundred times below room temperature. And this has been important to reach this precision. And it's a very, very exciting time for us at the University of California, Los Angeles, and the rest of the U.S. scientific community. And we're looking forward to seeing what the future holds. still, I think, even at Kelvin temperature, the second order Doppler shift is one of the important-- is oneof the important systematics. This is what I wanted to discuss with you about two photons. Any questions? Yes. Audience: Just-- very lightly-- I would have thought [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: That's OK. That's what I was going to ask you to think about. That was the first thing that came to my mind. correct. It really depends what you want. If you simply want an atomic clock, all you want is a very,very, very stable reference point. And people use for that [INAUDIBLE] and strontium, or the people who do ion traps use the aluminum ion. All they want are a spectral reference point, and that's what we have. We have a very stable atomic clock that we can use. We can use that for our clocks. We don't need to use any other kind of reference point at all. line, which is sufficiently sharp, sufficiently narrow, and also insensitive to magnetic fields and electric fields. But people who want to measure fundamental constants-- the Rydberg constant-- want to compare lame shift with first principle QED. "So they select all over from the whole periodic table what they want. And so they choose lame shift," he says. "And so they select lame shift as the way to measure QED, and that's what they do" "It's a very, very complex system," he adds, "and it's very difficult to understand." Calculations verify that quantum electrodynamics is a complete description of atom photon interaction. They can only deal with simple systems where all the calculations are possible. This is the case for hydrogen. And, actually, with some advance in the numeric calculation of hydrogen, the calculations can be done on a much larger scale. The results will be published in the Journal of Quantum Electrodynamic Theory and Theory of Phenomenon (JQET) in the next few months. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. wave functions and all that, it may also be possible to do it with helium. I know in the literature people have often suggested helium have pushed the precision of two-electron calculations further and further. I think so far it hasn't kind of-- helium has not replaced hydrogen. It's still a very important element in the universe, but it's still not the same as hydrogen, as we know it to be, and it's not going to replace it in the future. hydrogen. In all atoms other than helium and hydrogen, you would be limited by the infeasibility of many electron calculations. But this sort of tells you what the choices if you want to test fundamental physics or determine fundamental constants. Yes? Yes? AUDIENCE: Going back to the two-photon Raman process where the electrons are used to create the nucleus. The electrons are then used to make the nucleus into a solid. The nucleus then becomes a nucleus, and so on. Theoretically, the nucleus can be used to form a nucleus. you had the second spontaneous emission, I just want to clarify. So in the past, all this time when you were talking about off-resonant single photon scattering, was this actually, really, the more descriptive picture or was there actually a different physical-- PROFESSOR: No, this is off resonance scattering. And this is a different type of emission. And it's a very different kind of emission than the one we've seen before. It's a new type of spontaneous emission. if you ask me, when do you have a situation where you first absorb the photon and then emit it? I would like to know that. You always-- you should always use a two-photon picture. Or the only situation, if you press a little bit harder, where I think you can think in first absorption and then emission, is if you have lots and lots of collisions, the first photon may not be fully resonant. But then you have another collision and the first one is. collision stabilised, provides the missing energy or takes away the extra energy. And then with something which is much more complicated than you ever wanted, you have now truly an atom in an excited state, which has completely lost its memory from how it was excited. And yes, for this we are grateful to the scientists at the University of California, Los Angeles, who have been able to make this possible for the first time in the history of the universe. We hope to see more of their work in the future. atom, it will now simply spontaneously emit a photon. But in all other situations where you don't have any loss of coherence or something in between, you're never really going to the real state. You're always going to virtual state. It's all two-photon. And, I mean, we discussed that. Remember that. We're in a virtual state, we're not in a real state, and we're never going to be in that state. We are always in a two-Photon state. the clicker question where most of the class was confused when I said we go up-- if we're exciting the atom? But now we are asking, what is the spectrum of the emitted photon? It is a delta function at the drive field, and we discussed it at length. If If If is the answer to that question. It's a function of the speed of light and the direction of the light beam. It can be used to explain how light travels through space and time. you allow in your head any picture of first absorption then emission, that's where all the wrong answers come from. This is really the picture behind it. Photon in, photon out-- should be described together. Unless you have-- and I'm just repeating myself-- something in between, you're not getting it right. You're not seeing the whole picture. You don't see the whole thing. You just see the first part of it. And then the second part. And the third part. which is sort of some form of de-coherence which decouples the two processes. OK. But that's a wonderful opening to our next chapter, namely coherence. To what extent-- we just discussed one aspect of it and we come back to this in this chapter-- to what extent is the photon which is scattered coherent with the incoming photon? So I want to feature, in this last big chapter of this course, coherence in all its different manifestations. I think this is rather unusual. similar in spirit to what we did on line broadening. I felt I could create spatial connections by discussing all possibly line shifts and line broadenings together. And now I hope you will also see certain common traits if I discuss together all the different manifestations of coherence. So what do you think? Let me know in the comments below. I would love to hear from you. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the rest of the article. we want to discuss is-- we start out by talking about coherence in a single atom. We can have coherence between two levels. Usually, I try to stop at the simplest possible manifestation. But when we talk aboutCoherence, I cannot stop at two levels because there are many new new levels to talk about. We want to start at the beginning and work our way up to the end of coherence. We don't want to end up at the end. We need to start with the beginning. qualitative features which come into play when we have three levels-- like lasing without inversion, like electromagnetically-induced transparencies, for those of you who have heard about it. On the other hand, I can reassure you, I don't think there's anything fundamental to be learned by going to four, five, and six levels. We're not going to go to seven or eight or nine or ten, but we're going to try to get to nine or 10. six levels, so we will stop at three levels. We can have-- so this is a single atom. But we can also have coherence between different atoms. And phenomena we want to discuss is superradiance, which is very, very much related to the phenomenon of phase matching. Everybody who has ever been to a supernova has had a supermassive black hole in their room. They have had a very high level of superconductivity in their superconductors. They can have a very large effect on the environment because they are so close to each other. doubles a laser knows about phase matching and phase matching conditions. You have to rotate the crystal or heat the crustal to the temperature where the whole crystal-- all the atoms in the crystal act coherently. But it's very related to superradiance. There is a third aspect of coherence between the laser and the crystal. It's called phase coherence and it's the same as phase co-herence. It can be achieved by rotating the crystal and heating it to a certain temperature. atoms which I will not discuss this semester, and this is the situation of Bose-Einstein condensates and macroscopic wave functions. This is covered together with quantum gases in the second part of the course. So having these very different manifestations, it's very interesting to see how they interact with each other. It's a very interesting phenomenon. It can be a very exciting thing to watch, and it can be very exciting to be a part of, as well. of coherence, I want to try now to give you a definition of coherence. But it's a bit difficult because I. want to cover with my definition all the cases I know. For me coherence-- we have the phenomenon of Coherence. Coherence exists if it exists if you are able to look at the same thing in different ways. For example, if you can look at different ways of looking at something from different angles, you can see the same result. Coherence exists if there is a well-defined phase between two or more amplitudes. We can only observe it if.there is a Well-defined Phase. Coherence is always a phase between quantum mechanical amplitudes, so we need two. or more. amplitudes to observe coherence. For more information on coherence, visit the Coherence Project website, which is run by the University of California, San Diego, and is open to the public. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. those amplitudes interfere. And it can be two amplitudes describing two different atoms, or it can. be two amplifyitudes of two states within the same atom. But what is really relevant is an indistinguishable ability that those two Amplitudes are involved in two branches, and that those amplitudes can interfere with each other. And that's what we're trying to get at with quantum computing. It's a very, very complex process. But we're getting closer to the core of it, and we're starting to get there. of a process which has the same final state. And like in Feynman's double-slit experiment, you don't know which intermediate state was taken. So that means when we observe an interference, that means we obesrve. One observes a physical quantity, the population in a certain quantum state, total electric field emitted, but this quantity is usually proportional to the square of the total amplitude. And that means We get an interference term. So coherence is important. is an important technique and important tool for measurements. In a way, it's subtle but trivial at the same time. Whenever we do spectroscopy, we are actually interested in doing a measurement of energy. We want to measure energy levels. And those energy levels can tell us something about magnetic fields. It's a very simple technique but it can be very powerful. It can be used to understand magnetic fields in a very complex way. It has a lot of potential to be used in the future. fields through Zeeman shifts. If you're addressing energy levels in the gravitational field for atom interferometry, the energy levels reflect gravitational fields. Or if we are not interested in-- if we try to eliminate or shield the atoms from magnetic fields and we just want to get the most precision, we just use Zeeman shifting. We don't want to eliminate the magnetic fields. We just want the best precision. We're not trying to get rid of the magnetic field, we're just getting better precision. in a reproducible energy level, this is the situational of atomic clocks. So pretty much when we use atomic spectroscopy for any application, we are interested in the energy levels. But this is very deeply connected to coherence and the phase because the relative phase between two states is nothing else than the time integral over the energy difference between two levels. So therefore, when we are talking about coherence, how can we maintain longer coherence between energy levels? How can we create coherence in three level systems? This is actually intricately related to the fact that we can obtain more precise information. form of coherence I want to discuss is the coherence of-- theCoherence involved in exciting atoms and the atom emitting light. It's related to the spontaneous emission and scattering problem. So just to sort of figure out what you know already, let me ask you something about the nature of the Coherence of Light. I want you to tell me what you think about the Coherent Coherent Light Theory. I'll be back in a few minutes with more information on this topic. of spontaneous emission. So what is the picture you have on spontaneous emission? OK. So the answer is whenever you have a system and it couples to the electromagnetic field-- you have spontaneous emission, which introduces a random phase into the time evolution of the quantum mechanical system. So at least half of you better pay attention now. OK. The first choice is spontaneous emission,. is nothing else than a unitary transformation. or unitary time evolution-- of the wave function of the total system. And option B is spontaneous. emission introduces-- well, maybe through a master equations or optical Bloch equation-- introduces a. random phase. just put a system in an excited state and you wait. The 100% unique and correct answer is the system involves with the following operator. This is the operator which completely describes the interaction of an atom with the electromagnetic. The operator we have discussed many times is the one that describes the atom's interaction with theelectromagneticfield. It is the only operator that can be used to describe the interaction between an atom and the electromagnetic field. The only other operator which can do the same thing is that which describes theinteractionof an atomwiththeelectron. field. Since the whole system is completely described by this Hamiltonian, the. whole system undergoes a unitary time evolution. So if you talk about the total system consisting of the photons in all electromagnetic-- in all relevant modes-- and the atomic system, this total quantomechanical system has aUnitary Time Evolution (UTE) The total system consists of the photon, the atomic, and all other modes of light. It is a total system with a Unitary Time evolution (UTD) time evolution with this operator. And to the best what our knowledge, this is a complete description which covers all aspects of the system. OK. But, and this is now the next question, there is a certain randomness in spontaneous emission. When we go to the laboratory and look at this operator, we find that there is this randomness. And this is what we are trying to get rid of. We are looking at the randomness of spontaneous emission in this system. And we think that this can be overcome. the spontaneously emitted photons. And this is actually what I want to work out with you in-- maybe even today, I think ten minutes may be enough-- what is really the information-- the phase information-- which we have in a photon, which has been spontaneously emitted. I know how to do it. I think I can do it in 10 minutes or so. I don't know if you can do that, but I'll try. I've been doing it for a long time, and I've learned a lot. phrase-- the randomness of spontaneous emission. This question does not contradict the first one. The fact that we have a unitary evolution with this operator is 100% or 110% true. But this operator will actually lead to final states. It is not the same as saying that the universe is a single entity. It's not a single thing that can be said to be 100% true or 110%. It's a very big disclaimer. It doesn't contradict the other one. It just says that it is the same thing. of the photon field, which may not have a specific phase. So if you say there is some intuition that there is something going on with the phase, you may be correct. But everything which is going on in the phase is the result of a unitary time evolution. The photon field is not the same as the light that is visible to the human eye. It is a very different type of light that can be seen in the night sky, for example, or in the middle of the night. system itself is described by an operator, by a Schrodinger equation for the total system. But the question I have for you now is if you detect, let's say, the photon emitted in spontaneous emission, the randomness of spontaneous emission. The-- let me call it loss of phase, or at least at the time of the photon's emission, what is the effect of this randomness on the system? I would like to know if you can detect this, and if so, how you do it. least the diminishment of the read out. There may be situations where we have a laser beam which has a well-defined phase, photons are scattered, and we just cannot retrieve the phase of the laser beam by looking at the photons. So this is what I mean here. Also, the fact that the light is so bright means that it can't be seen by the human eye at the same time as it can be seen in a microscope. That's a big problem. It means that we can't see the light at the right time. photons can't come out of a unitary time evolution. My question now is, is the randomness or this loss of phase of spontaneously emitted photons-- and now we should, I want to know your best guess-- what is it due to? Is it only due to the-- does it only be the loss of a phase? I want you to tell me what you think it's due to. I'll post my best guess in the comments below. I'm looking forward to hearing from you. occur, is it only due to the measurement process of the photon? Or is it due to performing sort of a partial trace ever-reaching over certain states? So if you're interested in the photon, maybe tracing out the states of the atom. Or ever- reaching over modes of the electromagnetic field. Or even tracing the state of the electrons in the nucleus. Or maybe tracing the atoms of the atoms. Or tracing the states in the electrons of the nucleus of the electron. And question C is both is actually possible. So if you look at spontaneously emitted photons and they're not perfectly phased coherent-- they's not reproducing the phase of the laser who has created them-- what is the reason for that? Is it always the fundamental reason or is there no reason for it? And question D is that it's possible to find a way to do both at the same time. And question E is that if you can do both, it's actually possible to achieve both. fundamental reason? It's only a kind of reason of ignoring information, taking a partial trace? OK. That's pretty good. Yes. What I want to emphasize is that A is very, very important, andI want to discuss it now. But B is always the case. If you ignore the position, if you Ignore the Position, If you Ignore The Position, You Ignore The Position. You Ignor The Position By Ignoring The Position You Ignite The Position by Igniting The Position where the atom has scattered the light. If atoms scatter light and they are wavelengths apart, then you have maybe optical path length differences. The photon from the laser hits an atom here. It goes to your detector. But from another atom, the photon has accumulated a different spatial phase. That's where the light goes to the detector. It has accumulated an optical phase that is different from the one it came from. The light goes into the detector and is detected by a detector. The detector is called an X-ray source. into the IKR. And, of course, what you get here is the random phase. This is why quite often when we scatter light for many, many atoms, we're not even asking for the phase. We say, one atom scatters light-- really scatter light at a certain intensity, i1. And n really scatterslight at acertain intensity, n. And so on. And that's what we get with light scattering in this way. It's a very, very simple process. atoms-- well, we get n times the light. You immediately perform an incoherence sum because you sort of know deep in your heart that there won't be any interference. So it's always possible, of course, to lose the phase by not controlling every aspect of your experiment. So B is the phase that we get from A to B, which is the state of the universe at the time of the experiment. The phase of B is also known as the phase of incoherence. always possible. But for so many reasons that I don't want to discuss it, but the measurement process is very relevant. And so, therefore, I would have answered C here. But let's now discuss the most fundamental situation. And the most basic situation is we take our favorite atom with always possible. That's what we call the atom of our choice. We call it our atom of choice. And that's what I'm going to call it. I'm not going to say 'C' here. infinite mass-- no Doppler shift, we just put it. And we put it in a cavity that it can only interact with a single mode of the electromagnetic field. So this is a fundamental situation. And a lot of the general situations, you get by just summing up over many situations. And this is one of the fundamental situations that we have to deal with in space and time. It's a very, very complex situation, but it's a fundamental one, and we're going to get through it. modes, summing up over many positions of the atom, introducing Doppler effects and all that. It just messes things up. And this is more in the spirit of answer B, that you perform partial trace and average over many states. But let's now pinpoint what I think is intellectually the best way to do it. And that is to try and find a way to make the atom behave in a certain way. And I think that's what we've done here. most important one, the pure situation where an atom is just talking to a single mode. So let us assume that we have an atom which starts in the ground state, but now we excite the atom. And weexcite it by a short pulse. And this can be a lot of things, but the most important one is that it is in a state where it is talking to one mode. This is where it can be excited by a very short pulse, and this is the most common case. pulse which has a pulse aimed between zero and pi. And depending what the pulse angle is, it will admix-- we have the ground state and it will Admirix something of the excited state. And in case of a pi pulse, we have 100% in the excitedState. So our pulse is aimed between 0 and pi, and depending on the angle, it is aimed at 0.0.0 or 0.1. The pulse angle of the pulse is the angle at which it admixes the ground and excited states. atomic wave function is this. The excited state-- let's just assume the photons are in resonance. We know how to deal with off resonant lasers. So therefore, the phase evolution is e to the i omega naught t. But now, and this is what coherence is about, there is a second phase evolution. This is the second phase of the wave function. And this is the phase that leads to the coherence of the laser. The phase evolution of this phase is called coherence. very specific phase. And this phase phi comes from the laser. If you excite the atom with a laser beam but it has a phase shift, then the atomic wave function is phase shifted. Every amplitude you admixed into the ground state in form of an excited state was phase shifted, so the wave function was also phase shifted by the laser beam. This is the reason why the laser is able to excite atoms in such a way that they are in a very specific state. driven by the operator-- the dipole operator, e-- and e, the electric field, has the phase of the laser beam. Sure, there may be-- and kind of all other trivial factors I've set to one here. But there is the phase, which directly is imprinted into the wave function. OK. So this is what the atom does-- what the laserbeam does to the atom. So we have now an atom which is partially excited. And it carries is an imprint of the phase. And now after the laser pulse is over, the photonic part of the wave function is a vacuum. We have no photon in our cavity. And now we wait and we allow spontaneous emission. And spontaneous emission is nothing else than the time evolution with the operator I just discussed with you. So after spontaneous emission, well, well- well, after spontaneous. emission, we have no more photons in the cavity. We just have to wait for spontaneous emission to occur. And that's what we do. We wait for it to happen. one is we know for sure the atom is in the ground state. Let me write down the result. If we apply the operator which couples to the electromagnetic field, and we assume only co-rotating terms here. Let's just neglect counter-rotting terms, which can be-- which in near-resonants are irrelevant. We know that the atom has been placed in a ground state, and that it is not moving. We also know that it has been put in a state of zero energy. What happens is we are now propagating this wave function. Ground state with one photon, excited state with zero photons. This part of the wave function undergoes single photon vacuum Rabi oscillations. And if we start out with the superposition of ground zero and excited zero, we have now our knowledge from the vacuumRabi oscillation that this part ofthe wave function does nothing. And so we have our knowledge that the excited state of the photon does not have a single photon. well, this is a superposition principle of quantum mechanics. We can just propagate this part, and we can propagate that part. So what I suggest is when we, really at the fundamental level now, discuss spontaneous emission, we allow this part-- excited atom, empty cavity-- to undergo half a vacuum. That's what we call spontaneous emission. And that's the key to the theory of quantum electrodynamics, which is the study of how atoms and molecules behave in superpositions. Rabi oscillation. And then the excited state is in the ground state and the photon state has one photon. It's a completely coherent Rabi oscillations. I just allow half a cycle to evolve. And the result of that is, well, nothing happened to this part. and the Rabiobscurehas never been seen before in the world of quantum computing. It is a very exciting time for the field of quantumcomputationand quantumnetworking. now taken us to the one photon state. And it has just swapped excited zero to ground state one photon. So let me write down something which is really remarkable, and then we discuss on Monday-- next Monday-- we discuss how we would really measure the phase. But just look at it. It's really remarkable. It has just swap excitedzero to groundstate one photon, which is a really remarkable thing to do. It is a new state of the universe, and it is a very exciting state. at the two expressions I've underlined. And this tells us that the quantum state of the atom as a two-level system-- ground excited state with all the phase factors-- has been now exactly matched on the quantumState of the cavity. So if you regard ground and excited state as the same, then the atom is in a state that is exactly the same as the cavity state. And so the atom's quantum state has been matched to the cavity's quantum states, and the cavity is in the same state. a two-level system, every quantum mechanical subtlety of the atomic system has now disappeared. It's in the ground state. But everything which was coherent, which was interesting about the atomic. system, has been transferred to the photon field. Yes? AUDIENCE: Do you want to have an atomic bomb? Do you think we should have one? Yes? Do we need one? No, I don't think we do. Yes, I do. We need one. Do you have an idea of what it would look like? alpha e there also? PROFESSOR: Oh yes, please. Thank you. When I said everything, I meant everything. Yes. OK. So let me write that down and then we have-- so this is the most fundamental aspect of spontaneous emission, that the quantum state of. spontaneous emission. This is what I meant. Yes, I did. I meant it. I was talking about the spontaneous emission of electrons from atoms and molecules. That's what I was referring to. I'm sorry, I didn't say that. the atom has been perfectly matched. Perfectly mapped onto the photon field. And the one thing we have to discuss on Wednesday is the whole of the phase phi. Phi-- we started out by phi being the phase of the laser. And if the laser is in a coherent state, it can be used to make laser beams. It can also be used as a way to make lasers that can beam beams into space. It's a very exciting time for the laser industry, and it's going to be exciting for the world. I will talk about on Wednesday, in a homodyne measurement we can measure phi to any accuracy you want. We can determine the phase of the laser in ahomodyne or heterodyne experiment. This phase phi has been now perfectly imprinted into a two-level system for the atom. And now we can use this information to create a new type of laser. We call it a laser that can be used to make a new kind of laser in the future. Phi.it appears mapped into a two-level system for the photons. But if we are now doing a measurement either on the atomic system or on the photonic system, we are limited in the accuracy at which we can retrieve phi. It appears that the two- level system between zero photons and one photons is the most accurate way to measure the distance between two points in space and time. But it's not clear if this is the case for all photons, or just some of them. This is what I referred to as the fundamental limit of spontaneous emission because we have not lost any coherence here. It's just if the phase is only imprinted in one particle-- one particle quantum physics sets us a limitation. This is what we want to discuss on Wednesday. And this is what i want to talk about with the rest of the team. I'm looking forward to it. I think it's going to be a very interesting discussion. I hope you will join us. Oh well, we can read out the phase phi. OK. Any question? To be continued on Monday. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from. Back from the page where you came From. To be Continued on Monday, Back to the Page You Came From. back to thepage you cameFrom. Back To the Page you Came From, Back To The Page You came From, back to. the page we came from, back To the. page we come from, the Page We Came from.