Professor Steven Smith: Anyone see the movie yet? Yeah, I saw it over the weekend. Had to cheer myself up a little bit after Saturday afternoon but there's still another week to go. Still time. Good morning. I want to talk today about my book, "Borat," which is published by Simon & Schuster. The book is based on the novel by Russian author Andrei Nekrassov, who was also the inspiration for "The Godfather: Part II" favorite part of the Second Discourse, a book that never grows old, that never fails to produce. Last time, I focused on a famous passage in which Rousseau claims it was the establishment of private property that was the true formation of civil society. But in fact, that's not really true. If Rousseau were only interested in issues of class and economic inequality, he wouldn't have written about inequality. He would have been more interested in the social ills of the time. Rousseau understands that even for institutions like property and civil rights there would be very little difference between him and materialist theorists of society like Karl Marx. Marx was in fact a very appreciative reader of Rousseau and got most of his best lines against capitalist society from him. Nevertheless, Rousseau was a great critic of capitalism and his views on property were very much in line with those of Karl Marx and others of the time. He was also a great defender of the rights of the individual. society to be possible there must be huge and important developments that go on or take place even prior to this, says Rousseau. And it is for Rousseau far more what we might call "the moral and psychological injuries of inequality" than the material aspects, he says. Rousseau: "Inequality is a disease of society, not of the individual, but of the society as a whole" He says this is true of both the rich and the poor, as well as of men and women. of the phenomenon that is of concern to him. Rousseau very much takes the side of the poor and the dispossessed. It isn't property, or it isn't poverty rather, that really rouses Rousseau's anger. It is the attitudes and beliefs shaped by inequalities and of wealth and power that rouse his anger as it is the attitude and beliefs of the rich and powerful that rouses his anger in the first place. The French Revolution was fought on the streets of Paris from 1793 to 1794. It is Rousseau the moral psychologist where his voice truly comes out. In many ways, Rousseau like Plato finds his voice when discussing the various complexities of the human soul. So what is the chief villain in Rousseau's Second Discourse and his account of the beginnings in development of inequality? For more on this story visit CNN.com/soul and follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @jennifer_newton. For more from CNN.co.uk, click here. Real inequality begins in a faculty or a disposition that is in fact in most editions of the book rendered simply by the French term because it is really untranslatable into English. It is amour-propre, the first term I put on the board, which is the first and most durable. That is the term I use to refer to inequality. It's the term that is the most durable in the world, and it's the one I use the most often in this book. cause of inequality for Rousseau. Amour-propre, again, is an untranslatable word but in many ways is related to a range of psychological characteristics such as pride, vanity, conceit. In the translation that you have, I believe, the translator refers to it as egocentrism, a kind of ugly modern psychologistic term I think but better and more accurately, evocatively translated by terms like vanity and conceit or pride. And in a lengthy footnote that I hope you checked, he distinguishes amour- propre from amour. from another disposition that he calls amour de soi-meme, a sort of self-love. He says in that note: "We must not confuse amour-propre with love of oneself. These are two passions very different by virtue of their nature and their effects" "Love of oneself is a natural sentiment," he writes, "which moves every animal to be vigilant in its own preservation" " directed in many by reason and modified by pity produces humanity and virtue," he says. "Amour-propre is merely a sentiment that is relative," he says. "It inspired in men all the evils they cause one another" "It is the true source of honor, both evil and honor, the desire to be recognized and esteemed by others" "Amour" is "what moves every individual to value" him--or herself, he says, "more than any other" 'Amour' is an entirely different kind of passion or sentiment, he goes on to say. How did this sentiment arise first of all? How did it come about and I suppose fundamentally and more importantly, what can or should be done about it? For Hobbes, recall, and this idea of pride, vanity, what Hobbes called vainglory, you remember, a very important part of Hobbes' political political life. This is what he meant by 'vainlory' and 'vile' Hobbes thought of himself as a man of pride and vanity. and moral psychology in Leviathan, pride is seen as something natural to us. Hobbes writes that pride is part of our natural desire to dominate over others. But for Rousseau by contrast amour-propre is something that could only come about after the state of the country. Rousseau wrote that amour was something that only came about after a state of amour, not before it had been established in the society at which it was to be found. For more on this story, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories. nature, a state that Hobbes, you remember, had called solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short. After the state of nature had already begun to give way to society. Hobbes' account for Rousseau is incoherent. If the natural state is truly solitary,poor, nasty,. brutish and short, what would it mean? What does it mean to be a human being? What do we mean by human? What are we to make of it? What is it to be human? in such a state to feel pride or vanity that requires human sociability and requires the esteem of others and somehow the gaze or the look of others. How could pride have arisen in a state of nature which on Hobbes' own account is solitary? Rousseau uses Hobbes in a book called "Hobbes" in which he asks the question: "How can a solitary person feel pride?" The book is published by Verso, priced £16.99, with a p&p of £7.99. way to prove his own point, that amour-propre, vanity, is not a natural sentiment. But, as he says in that passage, a sentiment that is relative and artificial, could only have come into being once we enter society in some ways. But how did that happen? Rousseau asks in a passage from his novel, The Amour-Propre of Jean-Baptiste-Rousseau. He says: 'Amour- Propre is not natural, it is artificial. It is a sentiment which can only have been created in society' speculates about this and, again, this is part of his hypothetical or conjectural history. He speculates that amour-propre began to arise and develop as soon as people began to gather around a hut or a tree and to look at one another. As soon as we became conscious of the possibility of looking at each other, he speculates, we began to amour each other. And so on and so on, until we began amouring each other in a way that we never had before. gaze of another, and it is from that gaze, from the look or gaze of another that the passion of vanity was born. Listen to the way in which he speculates how this arose. "Each one," he says, "began to look at the others and to want to be looked at" He says this is the way vanity was created: by looking at others, looking at themselves, looking in others' eyes, looking into others' faces, looking up at them. at himself and public esteem had a value. The one who sang or danced the best, the handsomest, the strongest, the most adroit or the most eloquent became the most highly regarded. This was the first step toward inequality and at the same time toward vice. From these first years of the 20th century, the world was transformed into a society of the rich and the powerful. It was a time of great inequality and vice, but it was also the beginning of a new era. preferences were born vanity and contempt on the one hand and shame and envy on the other. The fermentation caused by this new leavens eventually produced compounds fatal to happiness and innocence. So the rise of this passion to be seen, to being seen to be best at something, was the birth of the modern obsession with being seen as the best in the world. It was also the beginning of the obsession with beauty and beauty in general, and with beauty in particular, to be the best at anything. produced in many--for many people again, as he puts it, pride and vanity from some shame and envy on the part of others. Rousseau, I think is very much onto something, says the author. "From this fatal compound grew tendencies that were ... fatal to our happiness and innocence," he says. "Rousseau ... is verymuch onto something," he adds. "I think he's very much on something," says CNN's John Sutter. "It's a very interesting time in our history," says Sutter, "and it's going to get worse." here. Amour-propre is presented in the passage I just read and throughout much of the Second Discourse in largely negative terms. But it is also related to something positive, in many ways, for the development of humanity in society. The desire felt by all people once we enter society, to be part of society, is the desire of all people to be a part of a society. To be a member of society is to become part of it, to have a part in it. be accorded some kind of recognition or respect by those around us. That too is a part of amour-propre, the desire to be seen and recognized and respected. The desire for recognition, he says, is at the root of our sense of justice and underlying this, I think, is the desire for amour and amourpre, he adds. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. intuition powerful and in many ways I think deeply true, that our feelings, beliefs, opinions and attitudes be acknowledged and respected by others around us, that we matter in some way. When we feel that our opinions are slighted, when others do not recognize our worth, we feel angry about it. I think it is important that we feel our feelings and opinions are acknowledged and that we are respected by those around us. It is also important to feel our opinions and beliefs are respected. this and this need for recognition, which is part of this passion of amour-propre, is for Rousseau also a cornerstone of justice. But it is also, as he says, at the same time the demand for recognition can easily become cruel and violent as we demand this from others. Consider this and this and think about it for a moment. It is a very difficult thing to do, but we must do it. We need to do it for the good of the world. again just the following. I want to read one other passage from the same part of the text. He writes: "As soon as men had begun mutually to value one another and the idea of esteem was formed in their minds, each one claimed to have a right to it, each of them claimed to be superior to the other" He says: "Each of them said that they were better than the other, and that they had a right" He adds: "And each one said that he was better than his brother, and so on and on" each one claimed to have a right to esteem or recognition, and it no longer possible," he writes. From this came the first duties of civility even among savages, he says. "From this every voluntary wrong became an outrage. Every time someone was wronged, it was an outrage," he adds. "It is no longer Possible" for anyone to be lacking it with impunity, he writes, adding that it is now impossible to be without it with "impeccable impunity" harmed or injured, it became an outrage because along with the harm that resulted from the injury," he says. "The offended party saw in it contempt for his person, which often was more insufferable than the harm itself," Rousseau says. Think about the psychology, the moral psychology that Rousseau is invoking here, the author says. He says, "Think of the psychology ... of the moral Psychology" of injury and punishment. It's a "moral psychology" that can be applied to any situation, the writer says. in his talk about harm and injury. It's not the physical aspect of the harm that bothers him. It is the sort of contempt that is implied or entailed in the act of injury. Hence, he goes on to say, "each man punished the contempt shown him in a matter in a way that showed him that he was not worthy of the contempt," he says. He also says that each man punished himself for the contempt he had shown others in the course of a matter. proportionate to the esteem in which he held himself. Acts of revenge became terrible and men became bloodthirsty and cruel. That is to say, amour-propre and society gave rise to the state of war. Does this sound familiar? I think it should. I was trying to think of some example. I couldn't think of one. So I thought of something else. And I said, 'What if we were to go to war with each other?' And I thought, 'Well, that's a good idea.' So we went to war. The Danish cartoon controversy. Do you remember that, about the cartoons of the prophet? That might fit this and one I came up with when I was thinking about this earlier--consider a story that was much in the news. I forget if it was last spring or last summer sometime. DoYou remember that,. about the Cartoon of the Prophet? Do youRemember that,About the Cartoon Of The Prophet? I forget. If you do, I would like to hear from you. Please email me at jennifer.smith@mailonline.com. Muhammad and the outrage and the protests, often violent, that occurred about that? To some degree, Rousseau might argue, the protests were about disrespectful cartoons of the prophet. But he would argue, I suspect, that the deeper cause seemed to be that the protesters believed was disrespect being shown to Muhammad. The protesters believed that the disrespect was shown to them, and they were angry about it. The protests were sometimes violent, and often violent. But they were not about cartoons of Muhammad. them, to their beliefs, to what it is they held sacred in some sense. It is their beliefs that were being disrespected and were the cause of the protests. Amour-propre, as Rousseau I think himself recognizes, is this very volatile passion. It contains the desire to be respected again and acknowledged that is at the root of justice and virtue and yet at the same time this passion, as we know, is easily manipulable by those who wish to convince others that their basic entitlements or views are not being respected. protesters over those cartoons had a point. Their views were not being respected. Lockean or a liberal formulation of the problem or response would be, "Well, so what?" The task of government, according to Locke or the liberal view, is to ensure the rights of the people are not trampled on by the government. The task is to make sure that the people's rights are respected and not trampered on. The role of the government is to protect the right to freedom of speech and expression. It is not the business of government to ensure that your beliefs are being respected. This is to protect you from harm and provide you the freedom to practice what religion you like, consistent with the freedom of others to do so too. It is also to provide you with the security of person and property. This. is to ensure you are protected from harm, and that you are treated with respect. This, in turn, is to provide. you with. the freedom for you to practice your religion as you see fit. The Danish prime minister refused to apologize for the cartoon. The government's job is not to impose a gag order on what can and cannot be said, he says. "It's clearly the view, for example, of the Danish newspaper editors that published the cartoon as well as the Danish PM," he adds. The Danish government has been criticized for its handling of the case, but has so far refused to issue an apology for the Cartoon of the Death of King Frederik. The cartoon was published in a Danish newspaper, and the prime minister has not apologized. on the grounds that some people might find it offensive. This is a respectable, sort of liberal line of thought going from Locke to John Stuart Mill. Yet, while I am inclined to agree very much with that point of view, there is something powerful and true about what is being said in this article. It is a powerful, powerful, and true statement of what is going on in our society at the present time. And it should be read in its entirety by all of us, not just by a few. Rousseau has to say about it, about this kind of issue. Lockean liberal thought was addressed in many ways to people who had experienced the crucible of civil war, a century of religious conflict and were looking for a way to settle their religious and political differences. Toleration in many cases is a good thing, Rousseau said, but it is not the same as tolerance in many other areas of life. He said: "Tolerance in many places is a bad thing, but tolerance in other places is better" ways is a liberal virtue because it requires us to distinguish between beliefs that we may take with the utmost seriousness in private life and yet nevertheless bracket them in some way once we enter the public world. This, in many ways, is the peculiar liberal virtue of self-restraint or 'self-rest restraint' or ' self-control' in the public sphere. This is the way we should behave in public life, and in private, as well as in our private lives, says the writer. self-denial, that we refuse to allow our own moral point of view to, in many ways, dominate in the public space. But it is one thing, you might say, to tolerate other views and another thing to accord them respect and esteem. That seems to be something very different from self-denials, which seems to me to be a very different thing from tolerance, which is the opposite of tolerance, and which I think is a very bad idea in the first place. what Locke talked about. To tolerate simply means not to persecute, to leave alone, while respect for something requires that we esteem it. You might ask yourself, "Must we esteem and respect values and points of view that we do not share?" This seems very different, again, from the sort of toleration Locke talks about. It's a very different kind of respect, and it's very different from the kind of tolerance Locke describes. It is a different sort of respect. of liberal understanding of toleration that means only extending acceptance to views again that are very different from our own. It doesn't require us to, as it were, censor, self-censor, our own views on the ground that they may be--our views may be in some ways disrespectful or hurtful to others. It's not about censorship, it's about tolerating, not censoring, views that are different from your own and that you may find offensive or offensive to other people. others. This is a vast topic. I've sort of used the opportunity to sort of move away from Rousseau a little bit but his point is I think that amour-propre, the desire to be esteemed, recognized, and to have your values and points of view esteemed by those around you is a very real thing. I think it's a very important part of being a human being. It's very, very important to have a sense of self-worth. is in fact a violent and uncontrollable passion. It is the passion very much like Plato's thumos, spiritedness, back in the Republic. It's a passion that makes us burn with anger over perceived slights. It makes us also risk our lives and endanger the lives of others to rectify it. And it is a passion which makes us risk our own lives and others' lives to get it right. And that is a very dangerous thing to do, especially in the modern world. what we believe to be acts of injustice. Like Plato, in many ways, Rousseau wants to know whether amour-propre is purely a negative passion or disposition or whether, like thumos, whether it can be redirected, in some way, to achieve social goods and social benefits. So much of Rousseau's subsequent account of civilization and its discontents grows out of this peculiar psychological disposition and passion. In Woody Allen's movie, Annie Hall, you might think you might be in Annie Hall. Recall a scene in which Rousseau says there are two kinds of people. The horrible are those who have suffered some kind of personal tragedy, a disfigurement of some kind. The miserable is everybody else. Rousseau wants us to be miserable. We should be miserable, too, he says. We're all miserable, he adds. We are all horrible. We all have terminal illness. We must be miserable or we will be horrible, too. We will be miserable if we are miserable. to be miserable. He wants us to feel just how bad things are, how bad we are. The only exception to this general human misery is, as he tells us, kind of early primitive society. These societies described by him, not quite as miserable as he describes them. But they are not quite free from misery, either. They are not free from pain. They have to live with the pain of the past. And they have to deal with it. They can't escape it. the state of nature to be sure, maintained a kind of middling position between the pure state of. nature and the development of modern conditions. He says these were the happiest and most durable societies and the best for man. It was primitive man, not the pure savage of the jungle, he says. He adds: 'It was primitive men who made the world a better place for all of us to live in' The full interview will be broadcast on Channel 4 at 8pm on Monday, November 26. state of nature, where Rousseau finds a happy equilibrium between our powers and our needs that he says is the recipe for happiness. But the end of that happy state came with two inventions, two discoveries: agriculture and metallurgy. With agriculture came, with agriculture, came the invention of agriculture. With metallurgism, came, the discovery of metallurgical processes, which allowed the production of metals and other materials for the first time in the history of the world. The end of the happy state of nature came with agriculture andmetallurgy, which led to the development of industry. With metallurgy came the art of war and conquest, he tells us. With these two developments, humanity entered a new stage, one where laws and political institutions became necessary to adjudicate, he says. Here we see the division of land and property, and the subsequent inequalities that came with it, he adds. He tells us that with these developments, humans entered an era where laws were necessary to be made and adjudicated. He says this was a time of division and division of property, which led to inequality. Conflicts over rights, and the establishment of governments that this entailed rather than bringing peace, as it would for Hobbes or Locke. Rousseau: Government had the effect of sanctioning the existing inequalities that had begun to develop. For Rousseau, there is something deeply shocking and deeply troubling about the state of affairs in Europe at the time of the French Revolution. He says: "Government has the effect simply of sanctioned the already existing inequalities" He adds: "Rousseau: There is something profoundly shocking about the State of Europe at that time." about the assertion that men who were once free and equal are so easily, as it were, led to consent to the inequalities of property and to rule by the stronger, which government brings into being. The social contract, as he presents it in the Second Discourse, is really a social contract. It is not a contract between men and women, it is a contract with the state. The contract is between the state and the people, not between the men and the women, as we have seen in this case. kind of swindle. Rather than instituting justice, this compact merely legitimizes past usurpations. Government is a con game that the rich play upon the poor. The rich and the powerful use it to control the poor and the dispossessed. The establishment of government is a kind of swindling that therich and thepowerful use to control. the poor, writes Julian Zelizer, the former president of the Communist Party of the United States and a former member of the House of Representatives. power simply helps to legitimize economic inequalities. Governments, he tells us, may operate by consent but the consent they are granted is based on falsehoods and lies. How else can one explain why the rich live lives that are so much freer, so much easier, and so much more open to the world than the poor? The rich live life that is so much free, the poor live a life of fear and anxiety. The rich are able to live life as if it were their own. enjoyment, than the poor? That is Rousseau's real critique and real question. And it is the establishment of government that is the last link in the chain of Rousseaux's conjectural history. But what, again, is most painful to Rousseau is the emergence of a new kind of human being that this stage of civilization has been brought into. And Rousseaux is the first, I think, to use that term, "new kind of person" or "human being" so powerfully, which became used very much in the next two centuries, the bourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie is Rousseau's invention and most striking about this human type for him is the necessity to appear to be one thing where actually being something else. Go back again to think of the way in which Rousseau described the bourgeoisie, and the way he described it so powerfully, and you can see how he was trying to make a point about the difference between the two types of human beings, he said. The tension between seeming and being is so central to Rousseau's account of what he calls the bourgeoisie. In the penultimate paragraph of the Second Discourse Rousseau describes the dilemma. "Being something and appearing to be something," he says, "become two different things" "From this distinction there arose grand ostentation, deceptive cunning, and all the vices that follow in their wake," says Rousseau in his Second Discourses. In Book II of the Republic, someone who seems to be and someone who is just. of the bourgeoisie in the following way. He says, "The savage lives within himself. The man accustomed to the ways of society, the bourgeoisie, is always outside of himself and knows only how to live in the opinions of others. It is, as it were, from their judgment alone that the savage lives," he says. He adds that the "savage lives in the savage within himself," and that the bourgeoisie lives in society's opinions of him. The savage lives from the judgment of others, he says, and it is his own. that he draws the sentiment of his own existence." Think of that sentence. It comes from the next to the last paragraph of the book, that in society we only live through the opinions of others, through the gaze of others. We are constantly being judged by what others think of us," he says. "We are constantly trying to live through other people's opinions," he adds. "That's the way we live. That's how we live our lives. We live through others' opinions." our own sentiment of existence, he says. The bourgeoisie, in other words, is someone who lives in and through the opinions, the good opinions, of others, who thinks only of others. Our own sentiment. of self and existent comes entirely from the judgment, as he puts it, of those around us, he writes. The. bourgeoisie, he adds, is a person who lives through and through other people's opinions, good or bad, and who thinks. only of other people. himself when he is with other people and only of other people when. he is by himself. Such a person is duplicitous, hypocritical, and false. This is why this is the true, you might say, discontent of civilization. It is what our perpetual restlessness and reflectiveness have made of us. It's the reason why we are so restless and reflective. We want to know what is going on around us. We need to know if we are doing the right thing or not. Goaded on perpetually by amour-propre, this is the particular misery that civilization has bequeathed us. So the question at the end of the book is what to do about this and here, in many ways, one has to say the Second Discourse falls short. The book ends on a note, however, and the author ends the book on a high note. It's a good way to end the book, and it's a great way to start a new one. of utmost despair. It offers no positive answer to cure the problem of civilization but only hints at best at two possible solutions. One is suggested, you will recall, by the letter to the City of Geneva which, in a sense, prefaces the book. Perhaps the closest approximation to the book is the book's title, which is a play on the title of a famous novel. The book is published by Simon & Schuster at £16.99. For more information on the book, visit www.simonandschulder.com. early state of primitive society lauded by Rousseau are the small, isolated rural republics like Geneva. Only, he says, in a well-tempered democracy like Geneva is a love of country not overwhelmed by the agitations of amour-propre. In Geneva, a kind of simple patriotism has not been completely overwhelmed by amour and amour is alive and well. In a democracy, however, it is not so much alive and living as it is alive with a love for the country. it possible for citizens still to enjoy some of the equality of the natural man. Democracy for him, this kind of simple rural democracy like that of Geneva, is the social condition that most closely approximates the equality. of the state of nature and that of course is a theme of the book. The book is published by Simon & Schuster and is available in English and French. For more information on the book, visit www.simonandschuster.co.uk or see the book's website. that Rousseau will take up powerfully in his book the Social Contract. But Rousseau offers another hint to the solution of the problem of civilization, what to do about it. How can we restore happiness in the midst of society? The Second Discourse leaves us to believe that all society should be happiness-loving. But that is not the case, as Rousseau argues. The Social Contract offers a way to restore happiness to all society, even if it is not happiness-seeking. The social contract is a form of happiness-making. is a state of bondage and alienation from nature, from our true being. We have lost our true humanity that he describes in the state of nature, our state of--our capacities for pity and compassion and the like, he says. "The answer to the problem of society is, in many ways, society is," he says, "a state of abandonment and alienation from nature" "We have lost ... our capacities for pity and compassion," he adds, "and the answer is society," he writes. to return to the root of society and this root of. society is not just the need for self-preservation but a kind of primordial. as he calls it in that passage I read a minute ago, sentiment of existence, the sentiment of our own existence. By giving oneself over to. this sentiment, one is able to become a member of society, a part of it, and to be part of the community of the world. This is the way to become part of society. this feeling of existence without a thought for the future, without care or fear, the individual somehow psychologically returns to the natural state. Only a very few people, Rousseau writes, are capable of finding their way back to nature, he being one of them of course--only avery few people are able to do this, he writes. He is one of the very few, of course, who can find his way back back to the nature he was born into, he adds. The type of human being who can find their way back to the sort of pure sentiment of existence is not going to be a philosopher, but will more likely be an artist or a poet. He is not a person of high order reflection like Socrates, but a person who finds his way to the purest sentiments of existence. He will be a poet or an artist, not a philosopher or a person with a high opinion of himself or of others. He can find his way back. He has found his way. is one of those rare aristocrats of nature, you might say. His claim to superiority is not based on a higher understanding but a superior sensitivity, less on wisdom than on compassion. Rousseau believed himself to be one of these people. Maybe you also are one of them. Yes? But do you know who they are? If you do, please contact us at editorial@dailymail.co.uk or on Twitter @dailymailonline. Back to the page you came from. it requires you, in some way, to distance yourself severely and psychologically from all of the possibilities of society, to return inward. It was that inward journey that Rousseau took and that he writes about so powerfully in his Confessions and his final book, The Reveries. But the Second Discourse leaves us, to be sure, with a paradox. The progress of society requires us to look inward and return to nature, their natural self as opposed to society. It's the romantic disposition that you get again in writers in America like Thoreau and others. of civilization is responsible for all of our miseries. Yes, it is society's fault. It's not your fault, he wants to tell us. Yet he also leaves us with no real apparent way out. He denies that we can, as a practical solution, return to simpler, more simple life. He wants us to look to the past, not to the future, to find a way out of our problems, he says. But he leaves us no real way out, and no real solution. natural forms of political association but how then do we resolve the problem that he leaves us with? And his answer to it, his political answer to the problem is contained in his book, yes, called the Social Contract, Du Contrat Social, published in published in 18th century France. And his answers to it are contained in the book, his most famous political answer is in that book. And that book is called Ducontrat Social. And it is published in France. It's called Du Contat Social. 1762, seven years after the Second Discourse. Here he attempts to give one such answer to the problems of inequality and, again, the injuries of amour-propre. It is not his only or final answer, but one of many. The Social Contract begins with The Socialcontract begins with the First Discourse of 1762. The second Discourse was published in 1763, and the third in 1764. The first Discourse is called The Second Discourses of 1763 and 1774. One of the most famous sentences in all of the history of political philosophy, "man is born free and is everywhere in chains" Always begin your essays with a good, strong sentence like that. Rousseau knew this. He knew something about how to write. The phrase seems to be perfectly suited to a good essay. It's a great way to start a new essay, and a good way to begin a new one. It was a good start for this writer, and it was a great start for all of us. in keeping with the Second Discourse. In the state of nature, we are born free, equal and independent. Only in society do we become weak, dependent, and enslaved. It is what follows after that sentence in a way that is the shocker. How did this take--how did this change take? How did we get to this state of affairs in the first place? We have to ask ourselves how we got to this place in our lives, and how we are going to get out of it. place, Rousseau asks. What can render it legitimate? I believe I can answer this question. By the "it" I take it he means the chains as in--that states man is born free and is everywhere in chains. In the Second Inscription, he writes: "I do not know. I do not think it is possible to say that a man is free when he is born in chains" In the Third Inscription he writes, "I think it can be said that a person can be free if he is always in chains." Discourse, he had attempted to completely delegitimize the bonds of society, he says. Now in the Social Contract, he asks the question, "What can give these chains or bonds moral legitimacy?" He says that in the past, "the Social Contract and the creation of government was nothing but, in many ways, a sophisticated swindle" He says in the new book, "The Social Contract," the question is: What can give the chains or Bonds moral legitimacy? He says the answer is "moral legitimacy" I believe I can answer that. Has Rousseau simply undergone a massive change of heart in the seven years between these two books? I don't think so. But I think these are--this is part of his--one of his answers to this fundamental question. But before going into the details of the details, I want to make it clear that I am not a historian. I am a philosopher. I believe in the theory of history. And I believe that Rousseau was a philosopher as well. The Second Discourse, the discourse on inequality, presents itself as a hypothetical or conjectural history of human development from the state of nature to the civil condition. It is written in a vivid language, which is very different from the language used in the first book. This is why it is so important for us to understand the difference between the two books, and why they are so different in terms of their subject matter. The difference between them is that they are both about inequality, but they are very different. Rousseau's masterpiece is often considered one of his most powerful pieces of writing. It is a vivid language drawing on in many ways the biological sciences of his day and newly discovered knowledge of animal species like orangutans. Rousseau's work is considered to be one of the most influential of the 20th century. It has been translated into many languages, including English, French, Spanish and Portuguese. The book was published in Paris in 1852 and is still widely read today. For more information on the book, visit the publisher's website. American peoples, a very vivid work. The Social Contract, by contrast, is written in a dry, even a kind of bloodless language of a lawyer. It is very much written in the genre of a legal document. Its subtitle is The Principles of Political Right. It's a work of political right. It was written by a man who wanted to be a political right-winger. He wrote it in the style of a political lawyer. He wanted to make a political statement. considerable philosophical abstraction whose leading concepts are abstractions like the social contract, the general will, and so on. The book, he tells us in a short preface, was originally part of a longer investigation of politics which has since been lost. Also, the Social Contract presents a.considerable philosophy of politics that has been lost, he says. The Social Contract is published by Simon & Schuster at £16.99. For more information on the book, visit www.simonandschuster.com. itself in many ways as a utopia, an ideal city, in some respects an answer to the Calipolis of Plato's Republic and yet this is also--this seems to be not quite true. The work begins, even before the famous sentence about man being born free, the work is prefaced with "The City of the Sun" The City of The Sun is published by Simon & Schuster at £16.99. For more information, visit www.thecityofthesun.com. a statement that could have come directly out of Machiavelli's Prince. Let us look at the effectual truth of things, not what is imagined to be but the way people actually are, Rousseau says. He will not begin, he tells us, by making any heroic assumptions about human nature, no metaphysical flights of fancy, but rather stay on the low but solid ground of recognized fact. "I will try in this inquiry to bring together what right permits with what interest prescribes," he says. to the basic premise of the book. The basic premise, I think, from which the entire Social Contract unfolds is the claim that man is born free. All subsequent relations of hierarchy, obligation and authority are the result not of nature but of agreement or convention. Society and the moral are not the same thing, and we should not expect them to be the same. We should not try to impose our will on others, but to create a society that is free from the tyranny of authority. ties that constitute it are conventional, you might say, by agreement, all the way down. There is nothing natural about any of the social contract. And from this basis of man as a free agent, that we are born free, Rousseau attempts to work out a system of justice. The social contract is not natural. It is not a social contract, it is a political contract. It's a contract between a man and a society. It can only be agreed by agreement. It cannot be natural. Principles of Political Right suggests that are appropriate to human beings conceived as free agents responsible to themselves alone. Rousseau's political philosophy begins, at least he believes I think, with the realistic or even empirical. But how do you do that? How can you do it? Rousseau says it's possible to do it with the help of empirical evidence. But it's not easy, he says, and it can't be done in the way we think it should be. It's not possible to have a political philosophy that is realistic and empirical. assumption that each individual has a deep rooted interest in securing the conditions of their own liberty. The state of nature and the social contract. presuppose individuals who are in competition with others and each attempting, as it were, to secure the conditions for their own. liberty. He does not.assume that each. individual has an interest in security of others' liberty, but rather that they are in a competition with each other to secure their own freedom. The social contract presuppose that individuals are competing with others for liberty. presuppose altruism on the part of any human being or any other kind of self-other regarding characteristics. He doesn't make the assumption that we act for the interests of others. We are selfishly concerned with our own freedom and the best means to achieve it. We don't act for other people's interests. We act for our own. We're not altruistic, we're selfish. We want to achieve our own goals. We can't do that if we're acting for others' interests. Each of us has a desire to preserve his or her own freedom and that social order will be rational or just, that allows us to preserve that freedom. The problem, of course, is that in the state of nature the desire to preserving it and protecting it is not strong enough. We need a social order that is rational and just to preserve our freedom and to protect it from harm. We can only do this if we are willing to accept the consequences of our actions, and we need to be prepared to accept them. my freedom comes into conflict with the selfish desire of everybody else to preserve their freedom. The state of nature quickly becomes a state of war based on conflicting desires and conflicting again means of liberty preservation. So how do we preserve our liberty without lapsing into anarchy, that is the key to preserving our freedom? The answer is not to give up on our freedom, but to fight for it with all our hearts and minds. The key is to fight back with all of our hearts, minds and bodies. the state of war? This is the question that the Social Contract sets out to answer and to which his formulation, his famous formulation of what he calls the general will, is the solution. I'm going to end on that note today and Wednesday I want to talk about the state of the war in the world today and the future of the world as a result of the conflict in Iraq. I'll be back on Wednesday with a look at how the U.S. is responding to the crisis in the Middle East. general will and how Rousseau sees it as a sort of collective answer to the problem of the securing of individual liberty. So meditate on that if you like for the next day. If you like, you can read the rest of the book tomorrow. It's a great read and a great way to start a new day. I hope you'll join me for a cup of tea and a glass of wine in the next few hours. I'm looking forward to seeing you in the morning.