In this video, we're going to think about marginal revenue and marginal cost for a firm in an imperfectly competitive market. But before we do that, I just want to be able to review and compare to what we already know about a company in a perfectly competitive market, such as the U.S. market. In the next few minutes, we'll take a look at some of the most successful companies in the world, including Google, Facebook, Microsoft and Twitter. We'll also look at a few of the worst-performing companies in history. In a perfectly competitive market, the firm is a price-taker. Oftentimes, it will trend down initially, as you have better specialization and some efficiencies. Then it might start trending up, as there are just coordination costs or other costs that make the marginal cost go up. There's going to be some market price, let's call this P sub m, some price in the market for the firm's products. The firm is going to have to find a way to make up for that. the good that they are producing, and there's many producers who are producing this good. And so they just have to be price-takers there. No matter how many units they produce, they're just going to be able to get that same price. And they're undifferentiated. And there's no barriers to entry. So they're going to have to compete with each other, and they're not going to get the same price, no matter how good they are. That's what's going to happen. market price. So a firm in a perfectly competitive market, that market price defines their marginal revenue curve. Their marginal revenue curves will essentially just be a horizontal line like this, and we've already studied this in previous videos. And we talked about that here, if this firm was trying to make more money in a very competitive market. We'll talk more about this in the next few days as we go through the rest of the year. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. to maximize its profit and if it was rational, it would produce the quantity where marginal cost is equal to marginal revenue. In an imperfectly competitive market, there's some differentiation amongst the various players who are competing, and so their market price is a function of quantity. If they just produce a bunch of their product, the price that they get in the market is the same as if they produce this quantity right over here. But now let's think about how things are a bit different for a firm in a competitive market. is likely to go down. So they will have their own firm-specific demand curve. Maybe it looks something like this. And we also saw in that video that that demand curve, essentially the price that they could get at any quantity, that that's not going to happen. So that is their demand curve and that's what they're going to have to work with. That's what's going to drive the price up or down. And they'll have to figure out how to meet that demand. going to be the same as the marginal revenue curve. So it's going to look something like this. If the demand curve is downward-sloping like that, themarginal revenue curve is likely to be even more downward- sloping. That would be the marginal Revenue Curve. Now in this situation, what would happen if the demand and marginal revenue curves were different? The marginal Revenue curve would look like the marginal Demand and Marginal Revenue Curve, which looks like the demand/marginal Revenue curve. be rational for the firm to do? Well, once again, it would want to produce a quantity where the marginal cost is equal to the marginal revenue. But you see something interesting here. If they produce at this quantity, notice the price that they can get in the market is much higher than that. And because we see a situation where price is greater than your marginal cost, it's not a good thing. It's a sign that something is not going to work out for a long time. versus in a perfectly competitive market where you see that price is equal to marginal cost, that that is the optimal quantity. This gap, the difference between the price and the marginal cost at this rational quantity for this firm in an imperfectly competitive market to produce, economists would refer to this as an inefficiency, inefficiency. Folks are willing to pay more than that marginal cost. But you still aren't going to be able to produce any more because it doesn't make sense from a marginal revenue point of view. to pay more than that marginal cost, but you still have no motivation to produce more. Because if you produce more, even though the price is higher, your marginal revenue is going to be below the marginal cost. So you would be taking a hit, so you would not be producing as much as you should have been. You would be producing less, and so you wouldn't be making as much money as you thought you should be. You wouldn't produce as much, and you would take a hit. in aggregate on those extra units. In the U.S., the average price of a unit is about $1.50. In Australia, it is around $2.00. In New Zealand, the average cost of a units is about £1.30. In other countries, the cost of the units is around £1 to £2.50, depending on the size of the unit. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/business/features/how-much-do-you-need-to-pay-for-a-unit-in-new- Zealand/story.html.