Ricardo CaballERO: Expectations play a huge role in economics. Caballero: It's all about the future, really, but also in the kind of issues we have discussed throughout the course. And so that's what I want to today, not only in asset pricing -- I mean, asset pricing-- obviously, it's all About the Future. And it's about expectations. It's about what we think the future is going to look like, and what expectations are going to be. what I want to do is give you a shortcut to think about the role of expectations in the kind of models we have already discussed. And so I'm going to do all that in the most basic model we have discussed, which is the IS-LM. That's what I want you to do, essentially, is I want You to Think about the Role of Expectations in the Kind of Models We Have Already discussed. It's a very simple way to do it, and it's very easy to understand. model. And I hope you'll get the gist of what expectations can do in economics. So this is going to be a very compressed version, adapted version, of chapters 15 and 16. But in terms of material mapping into the book, those are the relevant chapters. And the main idea is that expectations can be used as a model to help people make better decisions in the world of business and finance. And that's what we're going to try to do in this book. We'll try to make it a little bit more accessible. here is that the IS-LM model as we have described it up to now really overweights the present. And in practice, expectations about future conditions play a big role in the decision of all economic actors. We'll look at investors, asset pricing and so on. But it's also true of the public sector as well as the private sector. We will also look at the role of the European Central Bank in the future of the euro and the global economy. We hope to publish our findings in the next few weeks. consumers. It's also true of firms. I mean, if you think about firms, in investment decision, we made the function of the interest rate on our current output. But it's quite clear that the reason firms invest is not because of the current condition. It’s because they anticipate making profits, he says. He adds: ‘It's quite obvious that firms invest because they expect to make profits.’ ‘I don’t think we’ve seen the end of the crisis,’ he adds. ‘We’re not going to see the beginning of the recovery.” in the future. So it's all about real expectations. And even governments and foreigners, when they invest, do foreign direct investment, they go and invest in a country, it's a lot about expectations of what the country will do. I mean, political elections, for example, have huge political expectations. So I think it's very important to be realistic about what you can expect in the future, and that's what we're trying to do here in the U.S.," he says. impact on asset prices and so on precisely because they change what people think, for good or for bad, about future conditions. So expectations is just huge in economics. So we want to do things in two steps. The first, I'm going to revisit the consumption function and the investment. And the second, I'll revisit the investment function and how it relates to the economy as a whole. I'll do this in two parts: the consumption and investment part, and then the investment part. function, now taking into account expectations and motivate how you should really think about consumption and investment in a more realistic model than we have been discussing. And then I want to embed not the fully fleshed out consumption and Investment decisions, but the flavor of the role of thefunction.function, taking into consideration expectations and motivating how youshould really think About Consumption and Investing in a More realistic model. The full interview will be available on CNN.com on Monday, September 25. For more information, visit CNN.co.uk. future into the IS-LM model. And by then, you would have seen-- you will have seen all that I wanted to communicate, at least, in this set of lectures. So let's think about, first, consumption. And up to now, we assume that consumption depended only on disposable income, on current disposable income. But that's not really the way it works. And one of the first in formulating, more or less, formally how consumption decisions are really made is Milton Friedman. is not so much your current income, but what you expect to get on average during your lifetime. You don't want to be moving consumption up and down like crazy. Once you realize, more or less, what you'll get onAverage, then you should-- consumption should be related to income. If you're worried that you're spending too much, you're not spending enough. You're spending more than you're earning. You should be spending less than you are earning. If your consumption is too high or too low, you may not be spending as much as you should. to that concept. And in a sense, it's also by thinking in these terms, you're also drawing a big distinction between things that are temporary and that shouldn't matter a lot for your consumption decisions. "Things that are permanent, that clearly have a potential to have a much larger impact," he says. "Those are the ones that are more likely to have an impact on your life. That's the kind of thing you want to make sure you're paying attention to," he adds. impact on your consumption. Of course, you can have temporary things that are very large. I mean, you win the lottery, that's a huge temporary shock. But probably you're not going to spend the whole lottery right away. You're going to smooth it over your lifetime, in any event. And that's the way it should be, I think. I think it's a good way to look at the world. It's a great place to live, but it's not the best way to live. that actually relates to, more or less at the same time, Milton Friedman was at Chicago, Franco Modigliani at MIT. We will develop a life-cycle theory of consumption, which says, look, even at the level of an individual, the day-to-day income is not really what pins down the levels of consumption. That's what we're going to try to do with the economy in the next few years, if we can get it to that point. We'll see how that plays out in the coming years. consumption, because people know early in life that they have a lower income than they will have later on. So they will tend to spend and borrow more when they're young. Then, in the middle of their life cycle, before retirement, they panic, and you end up spending more than you need to, says the study. The study was published in the Journal of Economics and Sociology, published by the University of California, Los Angeles, and the London School of Economics, which is published by Simon & Schuster. tend to save more. So you don't consume all you have because you know there are many years ahead of you where income will be lower than your consumption needs. So there is also a sense of intertemporal smoothing of your consumption. You don't follow income second by second. You sort of try to stabilize consumption over time, more or less. And that means that you have to think more about your permanent income, what you'll get on average, rather than what you get in the short run. think, well, what really matters, then, is total wealth more than income. How wealthy you are will pin down more or less the consumption you have more than your current income. And there are two senses of wealth. One is financial wealth, all the assets you may have, you may be able to spend. The other is consumption wealth, which is all the money you have that you can spend on things you want to do with your life, such as travel, food and entertainment. expect to inherit or whatever, minus the debts you have. So very much as we discussed in the previous lecture in the context of asset pricing, the expected present discounted value of the cash flows of all the assets you have, that's your financial wealth. And that's important. You have to take that into account when making a decision to buy a house or a car or a house of any kind. It's important to take into account the fact that you have to make a decision when buying a house. more financial wealth, even if you have no income today, you will probably borrow against that wealth to the extent that you can. And probably the banks will be more willing to lend to you if they know that you have a lot of wealth. And so you're going to be more likely to borrow against your wealth in the future, he says. He adds: "You will probably be able to get away with a lot more than you would otherwise be able" The author is the author of the book "The Secret Life of Billionaires," published by Oxford University Press. fund the consumption, which is above your current income just because you have more financial wealth. The very rich seldom sell assets. They borrow against those assets to fund consumption. That's the way it works. And the very rich often have no income, [CHUCKLES] at least labor income. All the income comes from returns on assets. And again, they mostly borrow against that. But in any event, the point there is that what really brings out your consumption is your wealth, not your income. the current flow of income. And the other very important concept, which is a bigger thing for most individuals, is human wealth. I mean, this is huge for all of you here. It's obvious that your current income is a lot lower than what your income will be in the near future. And that's a big thing for people to keep in mind when they're trying to make a decision to buy a house or buy a car or a house. And it's a huge thing to make sure that you don't make the same decision twice. future. And so that's also a concept of expected present discounted value is you expect to earn a lot of income in the future. And therefore, it makes sense that, at this stage of your life, you borrow. Now, banks are a little a little more cautious about that than other banks, but it's still a good idea to borrow at this point in a person's life, says the chief executive of the British Bankers' Association. The BBA is the oldest bank in the UK and was set up in 1872. bit more reluctant of lending you against your human capital. It's easier to borrow against a house than against your future income. But even there, probably you're going to have sort of-- not going to be saving a lot at this time of year, he says. "I don't think it's a good idea to try and borrow against your financial assets," he adds. "It's a lot more difficult to get a loan against your personal assets than against financial assets" "I think it would be a mistake for people to try to borrow money against their future income," he says, "when they're not saving that much" your life because your income is a lot higher in the future. That we call human wealth. And total wealth is just a sum of financial wealth plus human wealth, he says. So at its most basic level-- and those are-- sorry, just to relate to things we did in the previous century, that's what we call financial wealth. That's what financial wealth is, and human wealth is what makes up total wealth. So that's the way we look at it, at least at its basic level. two lectures, those are two expected present discounted value. You don't know exactly how much income you're going to get. You get a sense of what somebody like you does in the future, more or less on average and so on. So you have a sense-- you have an idea of what the future is going to look like, and you can plan for it. And that's a good way to plan your life, and it's a great way to prepare for the future. have an expected cash flow, labor income flow in the future. You don't know what the interest rates are exactly. So you're going to guess, more or less, what the future interest rate is. And that gives you a sense of human wealth. And I know that many of these many of those are not very accurate, but they give you an idea of how much money you have, and how much you have to spend, and so on, in the long run. things you are not calculating every night, what your human wealth is, and then calculating-- consumes 5% of that or 3.5% of it. But you know, there are a lot of-- this is very behavioral. It's really ingrained in you. And you're probably more likely to spend more if you're not calculating it every night. But it's very behavioral, and there are ways to get around it, and it's not always easy, but it can be done. think that you're going to be doing well in the future than not. Maybe you're too busy now to spend a lot. But at some point, [CHUCKLES] when you're given the opportunity, that will make a difference. Traders, very successful traders-- they get a very low income. So essentially, they get an income that is very low, and they can't afford to buy a house. They can buy a car, and if they can afford it, they can buy an apartment. live out of the income that they get, they couldn't afford what they normally afford. But they spent a lot more than that income because they expect to get a big bonus and things like that. So in principle, your consumption should be in line with your income that comes in the future. That's the money that you're going to spend on the things that you want to do with your life, not just the things you've done with your money so far. It's a mistake to think that the money you're spending now is going to be spent on things that are going to happen in the near future. be something that is not proportional to your disposable income, but really proportional toyour wealth. And there are estimates of what that proportionality factor is. And that's what I said, it depends on the type of assets we're talking about. But it's about 0.03, that kind of thing, OK? That's the kind of number we're looking for. That's what we're trying to get at. We're not trying to say it's 0.1 or 0.2, we're just looking for the right number. A more realistic consumption function is something that depends on both things. For a variety of reasons, that many people have no savings. It's true this is a better economic concept than just putting income in there. But in reality, both things really matter. And that's what we're trying to get at here with the tax code. We want to make sure that people are able to get the full benefit of the taxcode, and that they don't have to live off the income that they get. And really, we call them hand-to-mouth. They live by the income they receive in every single period. Those people are not thinking about smoothing consumption over time. As I said before, most banks are not likely to lend you a lot against your expected income. They're consuming whatever income they get. And they're consuming it now, not later. They are not going to be able to afford it in the future. They will have to live off what they get right now. present discounted value of labor income. So you may be constrained in the short run. Your income-- you think about how wealthy you'll be, but you also think about your flows, the cash flow you're receiving. That's also part of your considerations. So in reality, it's a mixture of those. It's not just about how much money you have, but how much you have to spend to get it. It is about how you spend it, and how you use it. two things. When you look at the micro level at different individuals, the composition changes. The richer you are, the more this term matters, the less this one matters. That's, more or less, how it works. But on average, it looks on average that it looks like the richer person is the one who is most affected by the term. The poorer you are,. this term overwhelms that term. On average, the poorer person seems to be the person who is more affected by this term. like that. So we weren't wrong when we did IS-LM, having the consumption function as increasing in disposable income. But I always told you there is a lot of interesting stuff hidden in that little C0, in the-- in that autonomous component of consumption. Well, that-- lots of interesting things that -- lots of-- interesting things to come out of that. That's what we're trying to get at with the C0. We want to find out what's going on with that. has a lot to do with wealth, OK? And again, this term here is something that captures a lot of things that are permanent. So interpreted this way, the reason-- people during booms, even though human wealth may not change much over time, financial wealth typically changes in a boom. But it's also the case, in a Boom, wages are high. A lot of people tend to spend more. Even so, this captures a a lot the temporary component. When you're in a bust, it's likely that. you're going to consume more for any given level of wealth, OK? It's temporary, but that's what it is. What about investment? That's a decision by the firm. How much physical capital? I'm talking about physical investment, real investment, not financial investment. The decision also depend on current, but particularly current, economic conditions. It's not just about financial investment, it's also about the future of the country. It could be a long-term trend, or it could be short-term. on expected profits. And when you think about expected profits, you need to think about interest rate as well. We put the interest rate, as I said, OK, it's more expensive to borrow if the interest rates is high. True, but actually it matters a lot more than just that. It matters a much more than that, and that's what we're trying to get at here. We're talking about the long-term future of the company. We want to make sure that the company is well-positioned for the future. because it matters also through the expected present discounted value of your future cash flows. If the interest rates are very high, and they're expected to remain high, that means a project that gives you lots of return in the future, lots of cash flow in thefuture, may be a good investment for you. If they're not, you may not be able to afford to buy the property at the time you want to buy it. If you can, you can buy it at a much lower price and get a much better return. not be worth a lot simply because interest rates are very high. In that environment, investments that give you a return, a quick return, are worth more than things that have a pay-off in the very long run. So the discounting of the future cash flows is very high, and that's why you're buying shares in the first place. It's not a good time to be buying shares, but it's a better time to buy shares if you're a long-term investor. So the decision, for example, of buying a machine needs to look at the price of the machine right now and then at the expected present discounted value of the cash flows, OK? So let's think a bit more carefully about that decision. So suppose you buy a machine for, say, $1,000, and you want to buy it for $2,000. You need to decide how much you want the machine to cost, and how much it will save you in the long term. a price. Let's normalize that price to 1. The first thing you need to know is, well, how long will this machine last. And a reasonable assumption is, for most, it won't last long. For most people, it's a good bet that it's not going to last much longer than a few years or a few decades. It's a very, very good bet for most people that it isn't going toLast long enough to be worth the price it's being paid. machines, is some sort of geometric depreciation-- so meaning, it's not deterministic. It's more or less-- machines break down occasionally, but there is certain probability that they break down. We typically call that notation in economics-- we refer to that as delta. That's the depreciation probability. So if you think of it as a geometric depreciation, that's what we're talking about. We call it delta depreciation, and that's the probability that it will happen. in terms of expected value, if you buy a machine today, and you ask, how much of a machine I'll have next year, well, it's going to be a weighted average of 0 and 1 probably. But on average, it will be 1 minus delta. So as a machine, it'll be 1 plus delta, or 0 plus delta. That's how much a machine will be worth in the long run. It will be a lot more than what you pay for it today. depreciates, the probability of the machine breaking down over a year is 5%, then 1 minus delta is 0.95, say. What is the probability that the machine is still producing two years from now? Well, 1 minusDelta squared and so on and so forth. So that's the first thing. The second thing is that we need to find out how much the machine will cost to run in the future. We need to know how much it will cost us to run the machine in the first place. you know. I have this machine, and it's likely to give me cash flows over this many years and so on. And then I have to know how much expected profits I expect to get in each of those years. And I need also to know what are the. the expected profits that I'm going to make in each year of that period. I need to know. what are those profits I'm expected to make over that period, and how much are they likely to be. interest rates that are likely to prevail during the lifetime of the machine and so on. So at the end of the day, when I calculate, I do my little project, and I need to decide whether 1, which was the price of theMachine or not, is too expensive. So I have to decide if 1 is too much or not. And that's what I do. I calculate it. And then I decide if it's too expensive or not." The price of a machine is determined by a combination of factors, including the machine's age, weight and price of materials. or too cheap, I need to compare it with the expected present discounted value that I have for that machine. So here is an example. This is a machine that gives-- the first expected cash flow comes next year. I set it up today, and I generate profits by the end of the year or at the beginning of the next year, discounted by an interest rate that I know today. That's expected profits for the first year of the machine. I know the interest rate for one year. the cash flow that I expect for two years from now? Well, that's going to be-- that's expected cash flow. Or you can also assume that the machine sort of breaks down in little pieces every year. You get 0.95 of the machine in second year, 1 minus 1.05 squared two year from now and so on and so forth. But I also now, when I think about the cash flow in the second year,. and I don't know the interest rate for. the second year, so I need to have an expected interest rate here-- and so on, so forth, OK? If the machine lasts for many, many years, that's what I get. A question, by the way-- I'm saying, yeah, INeed to have expectations here and so forth. But the question is, how long will the machine last? And I'm going to have to answer that, too, because it's my job to answer the question. truth is that the guy that invests in the machine doesn't need to have that expectation because I could replace this for something that is known today. What would that be? I'm saying, when I calculate the expected cash flow. When I'm discounting the two-years-out cash flow, I'm going to going to go for something else. That's what I'm trying to do. I'm not trying to say that the machine is going to be perfect, but that it could be better. have an interest rate that I know, the one from time 0 to the end of the first year. That's what I wrote here. But I said, hm, but I don't know the interest rates that prevails from the end. of year one to the ends of year two. That was my point. But now I'm not sure. I'm thinking about it again. I think I'm going to have to wait and see what happens. I've got a lot of time to think about it. there is something in the market that I could look at and that I really know. What is that? AUDIENCE: Is it the [INAUDIBLE] RICARDO CABALLERO: Exactly. I could use 1 plus r2. These are one-year rates. R2t squared. So when you have the term structure, when you see all the term structures, you can see all of the possibilities. You can see that there is a lot of potential in this market. the interest rates, a firm deciding whether to invest or not has the interest rate it needs. It doesn't need to have expectations, form expectations about the interest rates. The market is doing it for them. Now, the guy may choose to be a trader and decide that it doesn't matter to him. He may decide that he doesn't want to invest in the U.S. because it's not a good place to start a business. He might choose to sell the company and make a profit. like the interest rate that the market is pricing in. But that's a different trade. It's not the investment decision of the firm. The firm will have to make a forecast about expected cash flows and so on, but that's it, from the machine and soon, OK? So obviously, obviously, it's not a good thing for the firm to have a high interest rate in the first place. But it's a very good thing that the firm has a very low interest rate. the larger this is, the more you're going to invest. So in principle, a better investment function-- remember, we wrote an investment function as investment, a function of output, current output, which we said is a proxy for sales. The more you invest the more machines you are going to buy and so on, OK? So in Principle, a Better Investment function is a better way to look at the economy. The larger the investment function, the better the return on investment. and then the interest rate. Well, a better concept is that one, which does depend on aggregate activity. It depends on many things, but not only today's, also the ones that you expect for the future, OK? And it depends on the interest rates, not just today's interest rate, though, though. And it's not just about today's rate. It's about the future rate, as well as the past rate, and it's about aggregate activity, too. also in the interest rate of the future. If I look at this expression, even if the interest. rate today doesn't change, but I expect the interest rates to change in the future, to go up, that will lower the value of my project. We had no space for that. It was a very difficult time for us. We lost a lot of time. We were in a state of crisis. We couldn't afford to lose any more time. So we had to find a solution. when we posted the initial investment function. But here we have that. And sorry, and this is an increasing function of that. The higher is V, the higher is the expected present discounted value of buying a machine given the price, the larger is the investment. Now, this is in this is a function of the price of the machine and the number of people who have bought it so far. The number of customers who have purchased a machine so far is the number who have paid for it. principle. In practice, current cash flows also matter a lot, OK? So in the same sense as in the case of the consumption function, we said, in principle, it's only wealth that matters. But in practice, there's lots of consumers that are financially constrained, they're hand-to-mouth and so on. So in that sense, the wealth factor is not as strong as it used to be, and it's not as important as it once was. current income also matters. But for firms, the same is true because-- and the main reason for that, really, is financial frictions. A firm may arrive with a great project to a bank, but the bank may decide that it doesn't trust as much as it should. The bank may also decide that the firm is not as good as it appears to be. The firm may also find that the bank doesn't want to take on as much risk as it thinks it does. much or is not as optimistic as the firm is and so on. So it may not borrow-- the firm may not be able to borrow as much as it would want given how optimistic that particular firm is on its own project. The bank may say, you know, I'm. I'm not asoptimistic as the company is. So the bank may not lend as much to the firm as they would want. So they may not get as much money as they'd like. going to be more conservative here since I'm lending you the money. And one way that firms use, actually, to get around financial constraints is simply by returning-- retaining their earnings, meaning they generate a cash flow, and they save. Firms save a lot, by the way. Companies like Apple and so on save an enormous amount in huge deposits, US treasuries. In the case of Apple, it's not to relax financial constraints, although it has something to do with being opportunistic, having the opportunity to buy things that are in distress. firms, especially smaller firms, have deposits and cash flow and so on mostly because, if they get a good opportunity, they may face financial constraints. So if current activity is high, sales are high, firms are going to be less likely to be financially constrained. And that's the reason current activity and sales are so high in the UK. If you're a small or medium-sized firm, you may have deposits or cash flow that you may need to pay out if you're not doing well. profits also end. Now, current profit is going to be an increasing function of output over capital that-- for any given level of capital, if output goes up, that's going to generate more profit. And so we can write our investment function a little bit like we had in the past, and that's what we're going to do in this case. We're not going to change the way we invest in the future, but we'll make sure that we get the most out of it. Investment here is increasing with respect to Vt, and it's increasing withrespect to Yt. Interest and then future output and future interest rates enter all through this term here. So that's a far far away from what we were talking about in earlier lectures. But now we put Vt here, Yt and the interest rate and-- interest and then Future output and Future Interest Rates. That's what we're talking about here. We're looking at the future of the U.S. economy. more realistic model. So you go back to IS-LM and put this type of consumption function and investment functions, and they're going to make a lot of sense. Again, the concept of something persistent-- persistent things should matter a lot more than temporary things. So naturally, if you expect more from the government, you're not going to get a lot, if not all, of what you think you're getting from it. That's the way it's going to be for a long time. profits to remain high for a very long period of time, that machine is going to be worth a lot more than if you only expect the machine to be very profitable for only one year. And so anything that is likely to be persistent is also likely to have a long-term value to the owner of that machine. And that's the key to the success of a business. It's not just about making money, it's also about being persistent, and it's about being able to make money for a long time. a much larger impact. There are important exceptions, but I'm not going to get into that now. And the same is true for interest rates. If interest rates go up today, and I expect them to remain high for a long time, that's going to affect a lot more the present value of profits. And therefore, it'sGoing to depress investment a much more. In fact, in fact, it will have a much bigger impact on investment than it would have on profits. central banks, much more than playing with the current interest rate, they play with your minds. That's what they do. They are always telling you stories for why interest rates will remain high, for why-- [CHUCKLES] they don't want-- they want-- to only control an interest rate that is an inflation-controlled rate. That is what they are trying to do here. They want to keep the interest rate at a level that is inflation-protected. They're trying to keep it that way. overnight interest rate, really. But they-- and with that, nobody cares about the overnight rate except for some traders out there. But since they want to influence aggregate demand, they need to convince you that this stuff will last for some time. That's why they try to make it seem like it's going to last for a long time. They want you to believe that this is going to be a long-term thing. They need to make you believe that it will last a while. time, because otherwise it would be irrelevant. If you want to reduce aggregate demand, you. want to convince firms and households and so on that the interest rate will remain high for a while. Otherwise, you're going to get very little effect out of that. One of the problems is that interest rates are too low for too long, and that's a big problem for the economy. It's very hard to get a long-term economic impact from low interest rates, and it's very difficult to get an impact on demand. The Fed is trying to cool the economy, but the loan rates have begun to decline already. And that's a problem for them. They would like you not to believe, bankers not to Believe that will happen. And they're trying to make you think that it won't happen. But it will. And it's going to happen. It's just a matter of when and how much and when and why and how fast and how long it happens. And the Fed doesn't want you to believe it. that's a big issue. So let's think about this IS-LM with expectations. What really we're after-- in the IS- LM model, remember, it's a model in which aggregate demand determines output. And that's what happens in the short run. And the biggest components of the economy are demand and supply. That's what we want to see in the long run. We want the economy to be more efficient and more productive. We don't want it to become more dependent on demand and less on supply. of aggregate demand, aside from the government, which is something that moves, more or less-- OK, with different behavioral functions. But the big drivers are consumption and investment. Those are at least the private sector drivers of aggregate demand,. Consumption and investment are the key drivers of the economy. The U.S. economy is expected to grow at a rate of about 2.5 percent this year, according to a recent report by the International Monetary Fund. That's up from about 1.7 percent in 2013. Human wealth is affected not only by current income, but future after labor income, future real interest rate. Future real dividends plus future realinterest rate affect the value of stocks. That's very important in the world of finance. That affects human wealth. It affects consumption. It's a very big effect. It has a huge impact on the economy. And it has a big impact on human wealth as well. It is a very, very big impact. It can have a huge effect on people's lives. financial wealth. Future nominal interest rate affect the price of bonds. For firms, future after tax profits affect expected present value. Future real interest rate affects also the suspected presentvalue. So there is a lot that says future to the future of financial wealth. The price of nominal bonds enter here, the price. of nominal Bonds. The value of a bond is the sum of the interest rate paid and the value of the bond's future value. The future value of bonds is the value. of the bonds' price. in this column here that enters into the consumption and investment decisions that we care about. That's what I showed you in the previous slides. So remember the basic IS-LM model. We wrote it this way. Output was determined by aggregate demand. And closed economy-- forget all that, fully sticky. It's a closed economy. It doesn't have to be open. It can be closed and open at the same time. And that's what we're trying to do in the U.S. prices. And we wrote consumption as these functions. So aggregate demand was increasing in output and government expenditure, decreasing in taxes, and decreasing on the interest rate. So a shortcut-- so what I want to do now is give you a shortcut to integrate these views of expectations or the views of expectation or the expectations of the market. And I'll show you how to do it in the next few minutes. And then I'll give you an example of how you can do it. concept of expectations into this very basic IS-LM model, OK? So think of now of aggregate demand rather than just being a function of current variables, be also a function. of the same variables, but in the future. So aggregate demand is a function, as before, of current output, and current output is the current demand for the future output. This is a very simple way of thinking about the future demand for goods and services, and how it will change over the next few years. current taxes, current interest rate, current expenditure, but also function-- and with the same signs-- of future output. So it's increasing in expected future output, decreasing in expectedfuture taxes. It's decreasing inexpected future interest rate. And it's increase in expectedFuture government expenditure, although I'm not going to say what it is. But it's also decreasing in future future government expenditure. So that's a good thing. It means we're getting closer to the end of this recession. play with this here because of something very specific that I'll discuss later on. So that's the shortcut, OK? The LM is going to be the same as before. So what I want you to think about now is a model that is like the one you had before with. That's the model that I'm going to show you now. It's going to look like this. It will look like the model I showed you before. It'll look like a model I'm showing you now with. I'll show you later. the same LM but now the IS is a little bit richer. It has more parameters-- these are parameters-- because I'm going to determine today's output, but it's going to be a function of more parameters. And all these parameters are essentially the same variables that we worry about today, and they're all the same in the same way. That's the way it's always been. It's just that now it's a little more sophisticated and more complex. And that's what we're going to have to deal with. but are the variables we expect of those-- are the values of respect for those variables in the future and, again, with the same sign. So if output-- so if taxes go up today, aggregate demand will decline, and output will decline. But if I expect future taxes to go, output will go, too. And so on and so on. And that's the way to look at it. And it's the same if you expect future demand to go up or down. up as well, then that's going to depress aggregate demand even more. That's the type of logic I want you to develop. So that's the way our model will look. So this is the IS in the same space I had before-- interest rate and output, current output. I'm trying to get it to work in that space, and that's what we're going to try to do in the next few months. We'll see how it works out in the coming months. to determine current output. But now I have lots of parameters that I didn't have before. I have a-- things that shift to the left. If taxes go up today, this IS will shift to a left. Do you think it will shift more or less than? Share your thoughts in the comments below or post a video on CNN iReport. Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter. Share your photos and videos on Instagram and Twitter at @cnnliving and @dailymotion. it did in lecture 3 or 4? So suppose we increase taxes by 10%. Will that reduce output more or less than when we had the static IS-LM model? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Depends on the expectation. RICARDO CABALLERO: OK, but I haven't moved. These are parameters from my curve. So I guess I'm going to have to change the way I think about it, and I'm not sure how to do it. I think it's going to be a little bit more complicated than that. don't get the right to move them. AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] less. RICARDO CABALLERO: Less, no? Less because now we said it's not only the present that matter. It's a combination of the present and the future. So if-- that means that anything that is just the present will matter less than anything that's just the future, right? Right, yes, that's what we're saying. We're saying that it's the future that matters. in the past. Otherwise, you see that? Suppose we had a two-period model, and I. give equal weight to the present and the future. Then I'm going to cut the effect of the present in half. That's-- I'm exaggerating there, but that's, more or less, the logic. So you correctly see that, don't you? That's the logic of the two- period model. And that's the way it's supposed to work. said, well, it depends on whether I expect the future taxes to change or not. Fine. That tells you there is a difference between changing temporarily the taxes and increasing taxes permanently. Permanently here means for the two periods. So what happens with this curve-- so we decided that increasing taxes was the right thing to do. So we decided to increase taxes for the next two years. And that's the way it's going to be for the rest of the time, too. taxes reduces this IS to the left by a smaller amount than in the past. What happens if you expect taxes to increase in the future? Which wealth goes down? Human wealth, in particular. Your human wealth will go down because you expect your disposable income to be taxed more. You will lose money if your human wealth is taxed more than it was before. You may also lose out if you have more money than you thought you did. You might also lose more money if you are more wealthy than you think you are. in the future. So that will also shift IS to the left. And that's the reason that if you have a permanent-- expected permanent increase in taxes today and next year, then that gets us back to the type of shift in the IS that we had when we had the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq in 2003. That's what's going to happen, and that's why you're going to see a shift in IS in the future if you're raising taxes. the static model. It's the sum of the two. So permanent changes will behave very similarly to the way the static model worked if they're permanent, OK? In a sense, that model was a very good summary permanent changes-- permanent changes in taxes, Permanent changes in interest. It was a good summary of permanent changes. But permanent changes are a different thing. They're a permanent change. They have to be made. They can't just be made in a way that's temporary. They need to be permanent. Government expenditure will move aggregate demand to the right. But will it do it by more or less? Well, think how government expenditure worked in the basic model, in the static model. It increased aggregate demand, and that then led to higher interest rates.rates and so on. Changing government expenditure, same idea-- it will also move aggregate Demand to the left. But it will do it in a different way to the way it did in the old model. And that's how it works in the simple model. a multiplier. And we got a lot more income and so on. Now, if we expect this government expenditure it to be temporary, that multiplier also will be a lot smaller because, yes, it will increase income, but people are not going to spend all their income today. That depends on how long it takes for the government to get its finances in order. That is what the government is trying to do. And it is working so far, but it is not clear if it will last. on whether they expect future income to also go up as well or not. And that's a reason that it's-- again, if you expect this government expenditure to go up permanently, and nothing else changes, [CHUCKLES] then you can expect income to going up in the future as well. And so that's why it's so important to have a plan in place to deal with the effects of future spending increases and future income increases. But it's also important to keep in mind that there's a long way to go before we get to that point. then you get more or less the same effect. Now, that's a tricky experiment because if you-- and it's very relevant for today. If this government expenditure goes up permanently, it's unlikely that the central bank will remain unmoved. And so you also have to start thinking, well, what will happen to the economy after that? It's a very, very difficult question. It's very difficult to answer. But I think the answer is that the economy will be better off. the central bank do? And that takes me to this variable here. Well, before I discuss this variable, actually, let me point out that it's not accidental that I made this curve a lot steeper than it used to look. I mean, this looks like a pretty pretty thing, right? Well, it's a little bit more complicated than that. It's a lot more complex than it first appears. And that's a good thing, because it means we can get to the bottom of it. steep IS curve, which is a way of saying that a given change in interest rate now has a very small effect on current output, OK? Much smaller than we had in the static model. And the reason is, again, this is permanent versus transitory. If you spec the interest rate, the interest will go up or down, depending on what the economy is doing. And that's what we're trying to do here. We're not trying to make a big difference to the economy, we're just trying to get it to work. rate to decline only for today, and that's it, that's not going to have a very large effect on consumption. It's not Going to Have a very Large effect on investment. For the interest rate decline to have an impact on consumption and investment, it has to be very long-term. For that to happen, it needs to happen for a very long time. It needs to be at least 10 years. It can't be just one or two years. That would be too long. It would have to be a very, very large impact. it has to affect the expected present discounted values in a meaningful way. And for that, you want those changes to be more or less permanent, persistent, that private agents think that this change in the interest rate will be significant. So if the-- so it's good to separate the two, but it's also good to make sure that the changes are permanent, that they're not just a one-off thing. And so that's what we're trying to do in the U.S. If the Fed cuts the interest rate but doesn't persuade anyone that this rate will remain low in the future, then it is going to get very small effect on output. However, if we convince people that there will be future changes, that the rates will remain lower for a long time, that means that this IS now will shift to the right. That's what we have here. So you have distinguish which is a movement-- when the Fed cut the interest rates, you get a small movement along the curve. But if the Fed persuades you that this is a long-lasting cut in interest rate, then the IS shifts to the left. And you recover the power of monetary policy. Alan Greenspan is known as one of the biggest central bankers that the US has, at least in recent memory. He went through a period which was called-- was known as the Greenspan conundrum. That was a famous episode in US monetary policy during the times of Alan Greenspan. He is now retired from the Federal Reserve and is living in New York City. He has a daughter and a son who are both in their early 20s and have been married for more than a decade. is, the economy was overheating. He kept hiking interest rates. But the loan rates kept coming down. So he couldn't cool off the economy. There was no way around that because they couldn't persuade the markets that this would be a long-lasting effect. The reason was a different one. It happens that, at the same time, you had China sending massive capital flows to the US. And so-- but the point is that the Fed had couldn't move the interest rates in the long run, and so it was very ineffective in terms of its monetary policy. So again, expectations mattered quite a bit. So you're not going to do a lot unless you persuade people that interest rate will be higher. So let's think about our-- well, this is what I was just discussing. So monetary policy-- I should have-- this-- so you've got to have expectations that it's going to be higher than it actually is. That's what we're trying to get to in the U.S. remain low for quite some time. And notice that there is here this-- everything comes into line because if the Fed convinced that the interest rate will be lower in the future as well, then you get the IS to shift to the right. If you convince the markets that-- and the markets and consumers, households, and so on-- that you're cutting interest rates and that, with that, you'll be successful in doing that, then the IS shifts to the left. But if interest rates will be low in the Future, that means output will be high in theFuture as well. creating a-- getting out of a recession, for example, in the future, that also increases human wealth, expected present constant value of cash flows, of profits, and so on and so forth. So again, for central banks, it's a big deal. It's a very important thing to do for the future of the economy, and it's very important for the central bank to do it, too, to keep the economy moving in the right direction, he says. a lot like-- it's mostly about expectations management. That's the business of a central bank, really. I don't know how many of you are soccer fans, but there was a famous story of Mervyn King. He was also one of the biggest central bankers that the UK has had, and he was a big influence on the Bank of England. It's a lot like that, really, and it's a big part of the job of the central bank in the UK. fairly recent. And he described-- he's British. It's "Lord" nowadays. He described good monetary policy very much like Maradona's goal scored against the UK, England, in some World Cup. And it's essentiallyMaradona picked the ball in his side of the field. And that's essentially what he did in the game. He said, "I don't remember which one. I don'tRemember which one." And he said, 'I'm not sure I want to remember that one.' essentially drew in a straight line to the goal and scored. But he persuaded everyone around to move away from his path, and that was a successful strategy. And central banks do a lot of that-- lots of talking. And, you know, at the end of the day, the. at the beginning of the year, the U.S. was in a much better position than it has been in a long time, and it was able to take advantage of that, too. true actions of moving the interest rate are the least important part of, really, a monetary policy strategy. Fiscal policy can be quite tricky here, actually. So we know that the fiscal contraction, a reduction in government expenditure-- if you just think about the basic IS-LM model, what happens? Well, well, that's a bit of a tricky one, to be honest with you. But it's a very important one. It's a key part of the overall strategy. it's a fiscal contraction. You reduce government expenditure, that will certainly reduce output. All the IS-LM, you reduce government spending, you shift IS to the left. And that reduces output. When you have expectations, things are a little trickier because it depends a lot of what you expect the central government to do. It's a Fiscal contraction, that's what it is. It is a contraction of government spending. And it is a reduction in output. It reduces government expenditure. Bank of Canada expects a lot on what the private sector will do in the future. If you have a fiscal contraction that leads to an anticipation of a big cut in interest rates, that may be a sign of things to come. The central bank will make a decision on interest rates in the near future. The Bank of Canada is the central bank of Canada. It has the power to cut interest rates or raise them if necessary. The bank is based in Toronto and has a large presence in the Toronto and Vancouver areas. expansionary. It can offset quite a bit of the fiscal contraction side. Most of the time when you have episodes of fiscal consolidation in environments that are not of very high distress, financial crisis, and so on, it typically sort of-- how successful that is depends a lot on the circumstances, he says. "How successful that's going to be depends on what the circumstances are," he adds. "It can be very successful if it's in an environment of very low distress" lot on whether people expect to be a sort of implicit deal between the central bank and the Treasury. If people expect that that fiscal contraction will come with much looser monetary policy conditions, then the fiscal contraction is not as contractionary as could be otherwise. And if, for some people, that's not the case, then it could be a lot more contractionary than people think it would be. It could be the case that it's a lot less contractionary if it's not linked to looser policy conditions. reason, the fiscal deficit, the perception of fiscal deficit,. was really dragging the economy down because people didn't know when there could be a financial crisis in the near future and so on. Then you can get a situation in which the contraction, fiscal contraction today, improves the. perception of the economy, says the IMF's chief economist. The U.S. economy is expected to grow by 0.3% this year, down from 0.4% in 2013, according to the IMF. stability of the country in the future, which in turn may increase expected future income and be expansionary. So most of the fiscal contractions are contractionary. But there are some famous episodes of what are called expansionary fiscal contraction. One of the most classic cases, best-known cases, is Ireland in Ireland in the 1980s and 1990s, when the economy was in a recession and the government was trying to shore up its finances. It was a very difficult time for the country, but the economy eventually recovered. the late '80s. Ireland had massive fiscal deficit. And all they talked about was fiscal deficits because they had very large fiscal deficits relative to GDP. And the economy was really sort of stagnating and going through cycles and so on. And it was all around this fiscal deficit and it was a very serious problem for the country at the time. It's still a serious problem today, and it's going to continue to be a problem for years to come, and that's what we're going to have to deal with. so on. So towards the late '80s, they began a delivery plan of fiscal consolidation. Fiscal consolidation means, essentially, reducing the deficit. And they were very successful, as you can see. But contrary to expectations, at least, output growth did not decline, actually. They finally sort of-- they had a -- they finally had a fiscal plan to work with, which was very successful. But it was not as successful as they had hoped. It was a very, very difficult time. very good period like that. So that's all-- it was all about expectations. Notice that unemployment, though, did go up. So despite the fact that you got more unemployment and so on, output began to grow because firms began to invest more, consumers became more optimistic. In fact, you see. you see the rise of the American economy in the 1980s and 1990s. It was a very, very good period of time for the U.S. economy and for the world. the house household savings rate declined dramatically. consumption and investment did that-- consumption, investment. People consume more, invest more because sort of everything looks a lot better. They have been struggling with this for very long. And they finally-- they had gotten that behind them. Now, this is a new challenge for them. This is a big test for them, and they are going to have to deal with it for the rest of their lives. It's going to be very, very difficult. example is abused by almost anyone that wants to cut taxes and things like that. But there are experiences. There is a whole spectrum of experiences. But in situations that are as extreme as this one, it clearly proved to be a mistake. It clearly proved that it was not the right thing to do. It was the wrong way to go. And it was a mistake for the government to do it, and it's a mistake that the government will have to live with for the rest of its life. to be very effective. So that's that. So let me take a stock. So the role of this lecture was to say something that I sort of should have said earlier on, but I would have been a bit confusing. So I decided not to talk too much about it. And that's why I'm not going to talk about it too much in this lecture. I don't want to make it too confusing for people. I just want to say that I'm happy with what I've done. But it's very important. Expectations plays play a central role in economics. In particular, expectations influence aggregate demand. And for us, this course was a lot about aggregate demand, except for the part on growth. Now, we did talk about expectations. But we did talks about expectations mostly in the context of aggregate supply. Remember, when we talk about the Phillips curve,. we did have expectations because wage setting was a function of expected prices and so on and so forth. So we didtalk about the role of expectations in aggregate supply in this course. very quickly. But I think a much bigger role is played-- of expectation is really on aggregate demand, and certainly on asset prices. But aggregate demand asset prices are connected because asset price is about wealth and the value of future cash flows, which are, more or less, the same. "I think a lot of people are surprised by how fast the economy is changing. It's a very rapid change, but it's not a very long-term thing," he says. "It's just a very, very fast thing that happens very quickly" drivers as for investment and consumption. Many times when you find episodes of fiscal, even sometimes monetary policy that are counterintuitive, it's entirely due to the expectations part. So this is case of fiscal consideration is not that the cutting in fiscal expenditure is the reason for the interest rate cut. And finally, I want to say that, many times when we find episodes. of fiscal policy that is counterintuitive it is because of the expectations on the part of the public, not because of any change in fiscal policy. was expansionary. That was not. contractionary. But it was overwhelmed or offset, more than offset, by the improvement in the outlook that you had. And that also happens with monetary policy. Countries that have high inflation problems and so on sometimes get-- and they have to go through a process that is not always easy, but it's worth it in the long run, says the IMF's chief economist, Mark Carney. The U.S. central bank is expected to announce a new round of quantitative easing later this year. dramatic tightenings and so on. Yes, most of them get very short-lived recession. But sometimes they are veryshort-lived recessions because eventually the reduction of the instability caused by high and unstable inflation sort of ends up dominating any direct contractionary effect of monetary policy, he says. He adds: "It's a very, very long time before we get out of this kind of situation" He adds that the U.S. has a long way to go before it is out of the doldrums.