The science of classical mechanics establishes an important principle of cause and effect. Im Deepto Chakrabarty and Peter Dourmashkin are the faculty members in charge of this course. The changes in a bodys motion are caused by the changes in the body's mass. The class is designed for first year undergraduates in MIT's Physics 8.01 program. The course is offered in English and in Spanish, with an emphasis on classical mechanics. For more information on the course, visit the MIT website. arise from the application of physical forces. Newton's Laws of Motion established the scientific principle of analyzing observed phenomenon through the use of clearly articulated mathematical models rather than through intuition. These concepts are so important to the modern branches of science and engineering that we require all of our understanding of them to be accurate and accurate. We need to be able to predict the outcome of a given experiment using a clear and clearly articulated model. We also need to understand the consequences of our actions, and how they can be used to predict future events. undergraduates at MIT to take classical mechanics regardless of whatever course they intend to specialize in. In many high school level physics courses, mechanics is taught as a set of formulas to memorize for a series of standard situations. Our course is different. Here, you will learn a set. of equations to be memorized in a variety of situations. We will also teach you how to use these equations in a range of situations, such as in a car crash or a car accident. We hope that this will help you in your future career. fundamental principles that you can use to apply to unfamiliar situations and analyze them rather than just situations that you studied previously. 8.01 assumes a strong background in high school level physics and mathematics. We introduce and make extensive use of calculus as needed, so a previous course in calculus may be needed for some of the material in this book. The book is published by Simon & Schuster, a division of Simon and Schuster Inc, and is available in hard copy and e-book versions. is not a prerequisite. However, it is a rigorous and technically challenging course aimed at MIT undergraduates. 8.01's OpenCourseWare site contains a coherent set of lessons that will take you through all the basic concepts of classical mechanics as well as a set of advanced topics including mass flow, simple flow and simple equations. The course is available in English, Spanish, French, German and Italian. For more information on the course, visit the OpenCourse Ware site or go to: http://www.opencourseware.com/. harmonic motion, and precessional motion. In each of these lessons, you will find a series of short lightboard videos that will help you understand concepts, mathematical derivations, and problems solving techniques. In addition, you'll find many other useful resources including an online textbook, many worked example problems, and MIT books and software. For more information on MIT books, visit MIT.edu/books and MIT.com/textbooks. for more information about MIT software, including software and software development tools, see MIT.org/software. level problem sets. Developing a command of mechanics is a powerful tool for understanding the world around us. Welcome to 8.01, the latest version of the Java programming language. We hope to see you in the next edition of Java 8, which is scheduled to be released later this year. For more information, visit the official Java 8 website or follow us on Twitter at @joshjenson and @jenniferjenson. For the latest Java 8 news, visit our news page.