The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open CourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. MICHAEL SHORT: OK. I think things are going to be OK. We're going to take a break. We'll be back in a few minutes with the next installment of the show. have been getting pretty derivy lately, so I wanted to shift gears to something a little bit more practical. So I started alluding to this hypothetical radiation source I might have right here, and things like if you have a source of known activity, which we calculated yesterday, and you have that source of activity, you can use that source to create a radiation source. So that's what we're going to try to do. We'll see how it works out in the next few days. have a detector of unknown efficiency, how do you know what the efficiency is? How do you. know what, let's say, your dose distance relationship is? And how do. you calculate all this stuff? So let's take the general situation that we're starting to work out. Let's say we have a detector that has unknown efficiency. How do we know what that efficiency is, and how do we work out how to calculate it? And so on and so on. a Geiger counter right here. That's our GM tube. And we have a point source that's emitting things in all directions. Let's go with the stuff from yesterday. It's now 0.52 microcurie. The question is, how many counts do you expect in this? It's a cobalt 60 source. We're looking for the source that emits the cobalt. We don't know where it's coming from, but it's emitting cobalt in a variety of ways. detector when it's a certain distance away? So I've actually laser-cut out a little Geiger counter jig from a previous class. And you guys can all do this too. Who here has been to the IDC before? A couple. The international design center-- so they've got a laser cutter that can cut a jig like this. And they can do it for you, too, if you want to try it. It's called a Geiger Counter Jig. you can sign up to use, which is where I did this. And it's set to just take a Geiger counter and put your sources at some fixed distance away. So you can discover the dose distance relationship with things. Speaking of, does anybody know what the relationship is between people and the environment? Do you know? If you do, please email us at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk or tweet her @jennifer_smith. She would love to hear from you. dose and distance or measured activity and distance? Yeah, Luke. AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] r cubed. MICHAEL SHORT: Close. It's, let's say, the measured activity would be proportional to 1 over r squared. Who knows where this comes from? I'll move the source a bit away to lessen the beeping. Yeah. It was a little bit of an accident, but it's not a big deal, I'm sure they'll figure it out. Well, the flux of particles coming out is just [INAUDIBLE] over the surface area of [INAudIBLE] and the [INA UDIBLE] is 4 pi r squared. MICHAEL SHORT: Yeah, exactly. If you were to draw a hypothetical sphere around the source right here, then you've got, let's say, a detector that's roughly 4 piR squared. That's roughly a 4,000-square-meter area. That would be a huge detector. rectangular with a fixed area. Let's say it's got a half length L and a half width W. Then the area-- I'm sorry, let's just say length L, width W-- would be just L times W. And actually, what Chris mentioned as the solid angle subtended by this detector right is the right angle. That's what's being subtended in this case. It's the angle that's being used to measure the distance from the detector to the ground. here-- in other words, at a certain distance r away, how much of this sphere-- how much does this detector take up? In other Words, how many of these gamma rays are going to go in a different direction than the detector, versus how many will go in the opposite direction. How much does the area of this spheres take up, and how much do the detectors take up that area of the sphere? And so on and so on, until we get to the answer to that question. The solid angle is just the surface area of whatever you've got over r squared. It's a pretty good approximation to the solid angle of something for very long distances, and it's probably the one that you'll see in the reading. So let's say on the x-axis, right here, this would be distance from the source to the detector in meters. And I've said that we've got.many we'll actually enter the detector. Good, that's up there. some sort of a detector that is 2.5 by 10 meters in size. That's an enormous detector. Let's actually switch it to the units right here. So this is roughly 10 centimeters long. So let's change our length to 0.1. And what do you think the width of this Geiger is? Let's change the length to 1.1 centimeters. And let's say the width is 1.5 centimeters. So the Geiger detector is about 1cm wide. counter is in meters? AUDIENCE: A centimeter MICHAEL SHORT: a centimeter. 0.01. We're going to have to change our axes so we can actually see the graph. So instead of looking all the way out to 15 meters away, let's look one meter away, maybe less. This whole thing is a mess. It's like we're trying to make a graph out of a piece of paper. We can't do it. We've got to change the axes. probably 50 centimeters. And we'll take a look there. And what we notice is that except for extremely short distances, this approximate formula for the solid angle-- or in other words, if I were to draw a sphere around the source that's the radius of the distance between the source and the viewer. And that's what we're going to look at in this episode of The Daily Discussion, starting at 10 a.m. ET on Monday. Back to the page you came from. and the detector, how much of that sphere's area does the detector take up? This approximate formula-- the blue curve-- is a pretty good approximation of the red curve until you get really, really close to 5 centimeters away, or about this distance right here. Does anyone know why this is the case? If so, please email us at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. We would love to hear from you about the reason for this. We are happy to provide an explanation. formula would break down. What happens as r goes to 0? What happens to our solid angle or our approximation? Can a detector actually take up infinity area on, well, anything? Never mind that unit, it goes to infinity, right? And what happens to the angle we use to define a solid angle? It goes to Infinity, right. And what does it mean to be in an infinity area? And can a detector be in infinity area at all? And so on. If you were to take this detector and bring the radius down to 0 so that the source and the detector, if not counting for the thickness of the plastic, were right upside each other, if that solid angle went to, well, infinity , then the count would go to infinity. Not quite. The count would still be infinity if the radius was reduced to 0. The image was taken from the Hubble Space Telescope's image of the Earth from a distance of 1,000 miles. The resolution of this image is about 1,500 square feet. should go to infinity, and it does not compute. Does anyone know how many-- first of all, who here has heard of solid angle before? So a little more than half of you. That's getting clicky. I'm going to turn that off. Solid angle is kind of the analog to infinity. It's like the inverse of the square root of the number one. It is the opposite of infinity. And it is like the square of the ratio of one to one. regular old angle, except in 3D. So instead of looking at things in radians, this has the unit of what's called steradians. 4pi is also the surface area of a unit sphere with radius of 1. So that's where this comes from. If something were to completely cover aUnit sphere-- like, if you were to, let's say, encase a light source in tin foil completely, and say, how much of that solid angle does the tin foil encase? the sphere or how much tin foil you had to use. So this pretty simple formula isn't the best approximation for it. And I'm not going to go through the derivation, because like I said, today is going to be a more practical nature. There is a more complex and more practical way to make a sphere, and I'm going to show you how to do it. I'll be back in a few days with the next part of the series, which will focus on the shape of the sphere. rigorous formula for the solid angle of something, let's say, in this case, a rectangle of length L and with W, from a certain distance r. And you can actually see that red curve right there. Once you know the formula, you can use it to calculate the angle of a sphere from a point in the air, or a point on a graph, for example. You can also use the formula to work out the angle between a sphere and a circle, or between a circle and a sphere. get to a few centimeters away, it's pretty close. Anyone want to guess what the maximum value of the red curve is? If I take this source and slam it right up next to the detector, how much of sphere is the detector subtending? AUDIENCE: 2pi MICHAEL SHORT: 2 pi-- half half half -- half the world. The answer is 2pi-- half of the world's surface area, or 2pi-half the size of the Earth. The result is a red curve with a radius of 2pi. At 0, the correct formula does give you 2pi steradians. Which is to say that half the gamma comes from the sphere. The correct formula at 0 is:   2pi Seradians + 2 pi Gamma +2 Pi Steradians, or 2p S G Sigma  + 2p Gsi Ssteradians = 2pSigma. The sphere is the whole of the source, not just one side. rays leaving the source would enter the detector. I didn't say anything about get counted yet. That's where the detector efficiency comes in. And that's something we're going to be measuring today, which is why I have my big bag of burnt bananas. These are the ashes of roughly 50 50 bananas. I don't know if you've ever seen one of these, but it's huge. It's the size of a football field. And it's in the middle of a forest. pounds of bananas charred to a crisp at about 250 Fahrenheit for 12 hours in most of the dorms and a couple of the frat houses. So last year, I had the students, everyone, take home about 50 pounds of bananas or 50 bananas-- I forget which one. It was a big deal for the students. I don't know if it's still going on, but it's been going on for a few years. It's a good memory for people to have. a lot. And we did some distributed labor. So everybody peeled the bananas, put them in the oven, baked them, separated off the tin foil, baked off as much water and sugar as possible to concentrate the potassium 40 in the banana. So there's a reason I've been using potassium 40 a lot, and it's the reason why I've used bananas a lot. It's a great way to get the potassium in a banana. It makes it very, very tasty, and a lot of people like it. 40 as a lot of examples in this class, because you're full of it. If you eat bananas-- which, I think most of you guys do-- you're intaking a fair bit of radioactive potassium, which is a positron emitter, and also it also it. That's pretty much the short answer of it, because it's a big part of our diet. But it's not the only reason we eat bananas. It's also a good way to get a good night's sleep. does electron capture and all that fun stuff. So today, what we're going to be doing is calculating the activity of one banana. But that's kind of a very difficult thing to do. So anyone know how radioactive one banana actually is in any units at all? Whatever it is, it's a good way to find out how radioactive a banana is in the first place. It's a great way to start a new project, I'm glad to have you on the team with me. One banana contains a minuscule but measurable amount of radioactivity. One of the ways to boost confidence on any sort of radiation measurement is to boost your signal strength. And because I don't want to count, I'm not going to count one banana. I'm just going to say that it's very, very,very, very little. That's all I've got for you today. I'll be back in a week or so with a new one. I hope you've had a good day. for the next seven years, we've concentrated the ashes of 50 pounds of bananas in here to boost your signal strength. This is going to boostyour count rate, which is the intro I want to give to statistics certainty and counting. So let's take one of the homework problems: How do you count a pound of bananas? We're going to try to do it for seven years. We'll let you know how it goes. It's going to be a lot of fun. We're not going to tell you what to do. as a motivating example. You guys, did anyone notice the extra credit problem on the homework? Let's start talking about how we'd go about that. That should motivate the rest of the day. So I'll pull up that problem set, number 4-- which, by the way, is due Thursday, not Wednesday. It's due on Thursday, and it's a problem set for extra credit. That's what we're going to focus on today. We're not going to get distracted by that. Tuesday, because we have no class on Tuesday. That was a surprise to me, but whatever. I'll still be here. We don't get holidays-- just you guys. So bonus question-- go do this. So we all know that smoking is a major source of radioactivity. And if you think about smoking, it's a good thing to smoke. It's good for your health. It is good for the environment. And it's great for the health of the people who smoke. It's not just the smoke that contains those radiation particles, it's got to be the cigarettes, cigars, and other smokables themselves. And so I was thinking, there's no better concentrated source of smoking radioactivity than a smoke shop. There's one out at [INAUDIBLE] at the end of the T.it, and it's one of the best places in the world to buy cigarettes. It's a great place to buy a pack of cigarettes, or a packet of cigars. There's probably some closer to campus. But I know there's a whole bunch that are T accessible. And so I was thinking it'd be neat for us to find out, how radioactive is it to work in a smoke shop? Because there's all these radon decay-- oh, yeah? You actually work there. You actually have to go to the smoke shop. You have to be in there to do your job. It's not just a job, it's a way of life. know. You have to be 21 to go into a smoke shop? MICHAEL SHORT: Are you serious? But you have to been 18 to smoke. AUDIENCE: Yeah. It's a Cambridge, Boston law. We may have to leave the city for this one. [LAUGHTER] What do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments below or email us at jennifer.smith@dailymail.co.uk. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. about Somerville? I think-- AUDIENCE: It's still-- you're not allowed to go into there either. It's all of Massachusetts now. Most of the Boston area is 21. But once you're in there, it's like town-to-town. It is still late-stage. It'm still like town to town, but once you get there, you can buy them. You can buy [INAUDIBLE] you can get them. They're not cheap, but they're available. leave Boston-- MICHAEL SHORT: It varies. AUDIENCE: Yeah. MICHAELSHORT: I don't think it is where I'm-- from Swampscott. But that's kind of up on the commuter rails. You don't want to go to Swampscatt. At any rate, I would think that, OK, it's Boston. It's a big city, but it's also a little bit of a backwater, too, because it's so far from Boston. probably a fairly radioactive place to work. But the question is, how long would you actually have to bring a detector in and count in order to be sure that there's any sort of measurable difference? And so, without deriving all of this stuff about binomial, Poisson, and normal statistics, the answer is not very long, it's probably not a lot of time. The answer is probably not much, but it could be a lot, and it would be interesting to find out. I'll say, that's in the reading for today. I want to show you some practical uses and applications of this stuff. Let's say you were to measure some count rate in some experiment. And we'll put this in units of counts per minute, which would be the number of counts in a minute. That's what we're going to use for today's reading. We'll show you how to do it in the next few days. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. divided by the counting time. That's about as simple as it gets. From Poisson statistics, you can say that the standard deviation of that count rate is actually just the square root of the count rate divided by time. And that's kind of the simple thing right here. But usually, but usually, it's not that simple. It's a lot more complicated than that, though, and a lot of people don't understand it. But it's a good starting point. in these sorts of experiments, if you want to know how much more radioactive is one place than another, you have to take a background count. So if I wanted to knowHow much activity that source was giving off, there is lots of background radiation that we'll be going. There is a lot of radiation in the background that we're going to be going through. That's what we're trying to find out about the source of the radioactive material that's in the room. It's a very complex process. over in about a month. I would have to sit here for quite a while and wait for the slow clicks of whatever background radiation is in the room to get enough of a count right going on. As you can imagine, the slower the count rate, the quicker the count. The slower the counts, the more accurate the count is. The faster the count, the better the count will be. The fastest count is the fastest. The slowest count rate is the slowest. The quickest count is to count the background radiation. the less certain you can be that the number that you're measuring is actually accurate. The idea here is that this standard deviation is a measure of confidence that your value is actually right. So the two things that you could do to decrease this standard deviations are to increase your confidence and to decrease the number of times you measure a value that you think it's right. The two things you could also do to increase the number you measure is to decrease your number by one or two points, depending on how you measure it. increase your counting time. Why is there a C on top? That doesn't look right. It actually is OK. Yeah, there we go. So by counting for longer you can decrease your standard deviation. This is going to take forever, it actually takes about 67 minutes, because we've already been counting for 67 minutes. It's OK, it's OK. We're going to count for a minute. We'll count again. It'll take a minute more. It will take a while to get back to normal. done this calculation, to get a 95% confidence on 5% uncertainty for this sort of background count. I mean, how many counts we have so far, like, 12? 14? Yeah, not very many. Then you've got to be able to subtract that count rate from whatever your source actually is. And that's how you get to the 95%. And then you have to get back to your source, and that's where you get the confidence. And so on and so on. And the way that you actually measure this is pretty straightforward. The way thatyou do error subtraction is not as straightforward. So let's say we're going to separate these two experiments into a background experiment, which we're actually going to do in an hour. When we want to count, we're not going to count for an hour and a half. We're just going to take an hour to do the background experiment. And then we'll do the count experiment in the next hour or so. these banana ashes, we're going to have to count radiation coming from the detector itself, which will account for cosmic rays, contamination in the detector, whatever else might have been spilled in there from previous samples. And we're also going to take some sort of gross count rate, which is going to account for whatever else is in there as well. It's going to be a lot of work, but we're looking forward to it. It will be a big step forward in our understanding of the universe. be our background plus the net count rate of our actual source. And that's what we're going for. It's just the gross count rate minus the background-- let's keep the symbols the same-- count rate. Does anyone know how to quantify the count rate? If so, email us at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk and we'll send you a copy of the data. We'll also share the results with you in a weekly Newsquiz. uncertainty of this net count rate? Do you just add the two? Well, in this case, we have to account for the fact that radiation emission from anything is a truly random process. So it's actually random. There is no correlation between when one particle leaves and the next particles. It's actually a very random process, and there's no way to predict what will happen in the future. So we don't know what the outcome will be. We just have to wait and see. going to leave. And because it's a truly random process, these errors in the background rate and the gross rate could add together or could subtract from each other. In other words, one might be a little higher than it should be, one may be a a little lower than it ought to be. It's a very, very random process. It could add or subtract from one another, and it's very difficult to predict what will happen in the future. It can be very unpredictable. "If you just add together the two standard deviations, you actually always get an overestimate of the true error," he says. "You're not accounting for the fact that these two experiments may have partially canceling errors" "In this case, that would be your worst case scenario, which is your worst-case scenario," he adds. "That's what we're trying to get at here. We're not trying to say what the error is," he concludes. "We're just trying to figure out what it should be." not your most likely scenario. What you actually want is to do what's called uncertainty in quadrature, where you actually add up the sum of the square roots of those errors. "It kind of looks like the magnitude of a vector, doesn't it? It kind of look exactly like the vector," he says. "That's what we're trying to get at here," he adds. "We're not trying to predict the future. We're just trying to figure out what's going to happen." magnitude of a vector. So in this way, you're accounting for the fact that more error in each experiment does increase the error on whatever net experiment you're doing, but not linearly. Because sometimes you have partially canceling errors. And with enough statistics, if you count for long enough or count for enough time, you can get a good idea of the magnitude of the vector you're trying to measure. If you have enough statistics you can see what the vector magnitude is. you count enough counts, then these things, on average, are going to add in quadrature, which will come out to-- and I want to make sure we don't have any typos, so I'll just keep the notes with me-- so you'd need the background count over the background time squared. You'd need to count enough times to get the total number of times the background counts add up to the total amount of time the background is added to the background. plus those. And so, now, I'd like to pose a question to you, the same one that's here in the problem set-- how long do you have to count in the smoke shop to be 95% percent sure? So let's say your count rate's 5% uncertain. There we go. And now, we'll go to the next set of questions. The next question is: How long does it take to get to 95% sure? The next round of questions is: What do you think the answer is? we're going to spend the rest of today's class taking apart that statement and getting at what it should be. So again, what we want to say is, how do you know that we're 95% confident of our count rate plus or minus 5% error? That's the main question for us. That's what we're trying to get to at the end of the day. We want to know how we get to that 95% confidence figure. We're looking for a better way to get there. today. Does anyone know how we'd start? Anyone get to the reading today? I see some smiles. OK. We'll start from scratch, then. All right, So who here has heard of a normal distribution before? A lot of you guys. Great. The idea here is that with enough counting statistics, with enough statistics, you can get a 'normal' distribution. That's what we're going to try to do today. We've got a lot of work to do, so let's get started. this very rare event binomial distribution approaches a normal distribution. 1 sigma gives you about 68% confidence in the distribution, according to the study. If you measure a certain count rate -- let's say this would be your mean count rate-- to limits of plus or minus 1 s Sigma or one standard deviation, you can say if you measure the count rate to a certain number of sigma or less, you have 68% confidence in the distribution. The study was published in the Journal of Applied Statistics. your result. If you go plus or minus 1 sigma away from your true average right here, you've filled in 68% of the area under this normal distribution. Similarly, if yougo plus 2 sigma or minus 2 s Sigma, you'll fill in the remaining 68% under the normal distribution right here. Yeah, I spelled it right. It's called a "normal distribution" and it's based on the standard deviation of the Earth's circumference. It takes place when the Earth is at an angle of about 2.5 degrees from the sun. it's around 95% confident. 3 sigma is getting towards 99 point-- what was the number, again-- I think it's 6.5%. Maybe it's more like 98.5% and then so on, and so on. There's actually societies called 6 sigma societies. And the way that they get their name is we're so confident of things we can predict them to 6 s Sigma, which is some 99 point a large number of nines percentage of the area under a normal distribution. So if I ask you, how long do you have to count to be 95% confidence in your result, you have to give an answer that will relate two times this standard deviation. And now we know the formula for standard deviation of this net counting experiment. So we can formulate our equation thusly. Let's say in order to be 95% confident, in other words, 2 sigma, that our counting rate is within 5% of the actual value. We put our error percentage here, and our true net count rate there. So this part right here tells us the 95% confidence. part right there is our count rate. So then we can substitute in our expression for sigma-- our uncertainty in quadrature-- and find out things like, well, it depends on what the information we're given is. Let's say before you go to the smoke shop, you take your Geiger counter, and you say, 'I'm going to smoke a cigarette.' And then you go and do it. And you find out that you're not going to do it, because you're going to have a smoke. and for an extremely long time you count the background counts somewhere. So let's say in this problem the known quantities-- we know our background count rate, because you can do that at your leisure at home. And when I did this, it came out to about 25 counts per person. And that's a very large number. That's a lot of people. It's a big problem, and we don't know how to solve it. So we're going to have to find a way to get around it. minute. And known is the background counting time. And when I did this, to get within 95% confidence of 5% error, I had to do this for 67 minutes. And now, all that's left is we want to relate our net count rate and our gross counting time, because it's the same thing. So this is actually how you decide how long you have to sit in the smoke shop to count in order to satisfy what we asked for-- 95%confidence that your count rate is 5%error. let's start substituting this out. That's not mine, so we can get rid of that. So we'll take that expression and substitute in everything we can. So 0.05 C n equals 2 sigma. And there's our sigma expression, which I'll rewrite right here. And we have see C b over C b. So C n over C n is C b, and C b is C n, and so on. And so on and so forth. t b squared plus C g over t g squared. What's next? How do we relate t g and C g? Well, let's start with the easy stuff, right? What can we cancel, or square, or whatever? Just somebody yell it out. AUDIENCE: Do we have numbers for these counts? Did you know how to do it? If so, please share it with us in the comments below or tweet us @CNNOpinion. We'd love to hear from you. We have numbers for C b and t b, but not C g and t g. We have not yet answered the question when you go into the smoke shop and talk to the owner, and he says, fine, you're going to sit here with the owner. So we have numbers. But not C b or t b. And we have no idea what C g or t g is. We don't know if it's a letter or a number or a letter of the alphabet. We just know it's not C. radiation detector. How long do you have to be here, looking all weird? You want to have an answer. And so if you get some initial estimate of C g, you can tell him this is my approximate t g, at which point he or she will say yes or no. You can also ask him how long does it take to get to the other side of the mountain? You can ask him this, too, if you want to get a better idea of how long it takes to get there. Divide by 2, divide by 2. We can square both sides. And there's a C n there. Square both sides, and we end up with 0.000625 C n squared. This equals C b over t b squared. Or 0.025. No.no, depending on how they're feeling. It could be a lot of things, but it could also be a very simple equation. Or a very complex one, too. It's up to the user to decide. plus C g over t g squared. There's lots of ways to go about it. I want to make sure I do the efficient one. Oh, I'm sorry those aren't squared. Because our standard deviations had the square root in them. There we go. That's more like it. What's next? I don't know. I think I'm going to have to go to the gym. I feel like I'm on a rollercoaster. I've never been on one before. We've got too many variables. Yeah? Audience: I think there's still a square value [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL SHORT: Isn't there still a what? AUDIENCE: Isn's there a squarevalue still under the [INAudIBLE]? MICHAEL Shorter: Because, in this case, the standard deviation is the square root of the count rate over the [inaudible] of the original count rate. The square root is the number of times a count rate is greater than its square root over time. the time. So the standard deviation squared is just count rate overtime time. Was there an earlier expression we have to correct? Yep. [LAUGHTER] That's where it came from. That's right, that's not. Because that's right. There we go. Good, tracing out that. OK. Now that everything is corrected, we can move on to the next question. The question is: What is the average length of time it takes for a person to go from 0 to 100? here, what's next? We've got too many variables. Yeah? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] the standard deviation have units of [INAudIBLE]? MICHAEL SHORT: Not quite, because there's a count rate in here. So the units of standard deviation, if this is square root of count rate over time, which is the same as [inaudible] Yeah? The standard deviation is a measure of the deviation from the mean or standard deviation. number of counts times time over time, right? MICHAEL SHORT: Yeah. Because again, a count rate is a number over-- where'd it go. AUDIENCE: Number over time squared. That doesn't sound right though. Let's see. Hold on a sec. Although the number of counts is the same as the time it took to get there. That's the way to do it. It's the same way to get to the end of the world. It doesn't matter how you get to it. standard deviation has got to have the same units as the count rate itself, because they're additive, right? Because they usually express some count rate plus or minus either sigma or 2 sigma. So standard deviations are expressed in counts per sigma, so they've got to be the same count rate. The standard deviation is then expressed in sigma per count rate, or sigma/count rate. It's called a "standard deviation" or "standard error" for the sake of clarity. minute if your counts are expressed in counts per minute. OK, cool. So we've got too many variables, but it's easy to get rid of one of them, either C n or C g. Do you a question? AUDIENCE: No, I was just going to say [INAUDIBLE].. MICHAEL SHORT: Great. Great. So, we're going to go with C n and C g for the rest of the time. OK. We're done. So we'll take out our C n, and we'll stick in a C g minus C b. And we're trying to isolate t g as a function of C g or vice versa. So we'll have 0.000625 C gminus C b squared. Then I'm going to subtract C b over t b from both sides. Minus C bover t b equals C g over t g. And do I have to go through the rest of the math with you guys? out the expression, which I want to show you guys here. Back to smoke shop counting time. That number right there is just a more exact part-- a bit of 2 Sigma. Instead of 0.05, we had 0.01. Instead, we have 0.02. Instead,. we had 2 Sigma, which is the same as 0.1. We have a new way to count the number of people in a smoke shop, and we can use that to count people in smoke shops. something much, much closer. So what I want us to look at is this graph right here. We've got a nice relation now between the count rate and counts per minute. Well, it was the gross count rate. and the required counting time to get to that 5% uncertainty. Well,. Well, well, we've got to get closer to the 5% level. We're getting closer to that level. But we're not there yet. We have a long way to go before we get there. there's a couple of interesting bits about this equation. What are some of the features you notice? Yeah. The count rate is extremely low for [INAUDIBLE].. MICHAEL SHORT: Yes. You're absolutely right on. If the count rate was extremely low, it's going to take an infinite amount of time. If it was extremely high, it wouldn't take that long. It would take a very long time. It's a very complex equation, but it's very easy to understand. some level. So if we have that expression right there-- so let me just actually get it all the way out so we can see. Because I want to show you some of the math-related implications for this. If we had our counting time-- what do we have-- C? C. C. A C. D. E C. E. D C. F. A F. E F. G. A. G+. C.C. D E. E, F. F, G, G. g over 0.025 C g minus C b squared, minus Cb over t b, at what point is this equation undefined? Yeah, Sean. AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] question [INAudIBLE],, using the second one after the [INA UDIBLE].. MICHAEL SHORT: That's right. So like Sean said, for the condition where 0.054 C g is greater than 0.050 C g, that's the point where the equation becomes undefined. minus C b-- let's just call it C net squared minus equals C b over t b, this equation is actually undefined. Which means that if your C b and t b -- let's say if the uncertainty from your background counting rate experiment is such that you can never get t b over C b -- you can't solve the equation for t b. If t b and C b are equal to each other, then the equation is true. If they are not, then it's not true. the total uncertainty down to let's say 5% error with 95% confidence, you can't actually run that experiment. Because these uncertainties are added in quadrature, if you're trying to reduce sigma down to a value below that already, how can you do that? You can't have a negative standard deviation, you have to have a positive standard deviation. It's not possible to do that with a negative sigma, it's impossible to do it with a positive sigma. "Even if you count for 67 minutes at 25 counts per minute, like we can now out in the air, that might not be enough to discern the activity of the smoke shop, or the source, or. right? So what this actually means is that when you're designing this experiment, even if you're counting for 67 Minutes at 25 Counts per Minute, like you can now, that may not be sufficient.right? Right?" "Right?" "right?" "Yes," he says. "That's what it actually means." whatever you happen to be looking at to 95% confidence within 5% error. And so let's actually look at that on the graph. If we keep on scrolling up just by adding stuff to the y-axis, eventually we see that it gets all straight. And right here, at about 49, it's at about 95%. And so we can see that the graph is getting more and more straight as we scroll up. It's getting to the point where it's almost like a straight line. counts a minute, suspiciously close to the background counts, you'll never actually be able to get within this confidence and error interval. So there's always some trade-offs you can make in your experiment. Let's see-- there it is. So sometimes, do you necessarily have to be 95% confident of your results? Let me know in the comments below. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. The Daily Discussion. Back To The page you were from. result? Depends on what you're doing. Or do you necessarily have to get within 5% error? That's probably the one you can start to sacrifice first. So usually, you want to be confident of whatever result you're saying and be confident that you're giving acceptable bounds. So you can remain confident of what you are saying and give an acceptable amount of data to the audience. You can also be confident you are giving an acceptable number of data points to the public. at 95% confidence, which means-- where did part go-- which means keep your 2 Sigma, but you can then increase your allowable percent error. So if you can't get within 5% error-- and I believe the homework doesn't actually say that for a reason-- yeah, we don't tell what error. We don't have to tell you what error it is. We just have to know where part of it went. That's what 2 Sigma is for. It's a way to find out where part goes. to choose. The more error you allow, the shorter time you have to count for. But we do say try to get a 95% confidence. So then the question is, for a reasonable counting time, to what error can you get within 95%confidence? And I want to show you how to get to that level of confidence by using this chart. It's a very simple chart, but it shows you what to look for and how to do it. For more information, go to: www.cnn.com/science. graphically how some of that stuff interplay with each other. Let's say you were to increase your counting time, which we can do here with a slider. So for the same background counting rate, if you increase the counting time,. what happens to the uncertainty on your background experiment? Does it increase or decrease as a result of the change in the background count rate? We can see how this works with the slider. We can also see how it works with a different type of count rate. it go up, down, or nothing? AUDIENCE: It goes down. MICHAEL SHORT: It's going to go down. Count for longer-- the uncertainty goes down, he says. So we were at 67 minutes. And now, notice, as you increase, the uncertainty increases, he adds. "I'm going to have to change the bounds here to something more reasonable," Short says. "We're going to be able to count for longer," he says, "and the uncertainty will go down" your counting time, even though you haven't changed the counting rate, it then takes less time to distinguish whatever your source is. So if you doubled your background count time from 67 minutes to 134, then you can measure count rates as low as 134 minutes. Count for more time in the background, you have to count for less time in order to get to the uncertainty and confidence you want to get from the experiment. So let's count forLessTime in the Background: Count for less Time in The Background. Count For LessTime In The Background: count for more Time In TheBackground: Count For less Time In the Background. 42 counts per minute gross. So when you start going into the smoke shop, you can, let's say, count for a few minutes and get some very crude estimate of the counting rate. You can then decide how long you have to let your background accumulate so you can distinguish the different types of smoke. So you can get a rough estimate of how long it will take you to smoke a cigarette in a smoke shop. That would be about 20 minutes or so. That's a pretty good estimate. activity in the smoke shop to within some confidence and some error. Yes. It's definitely location dependent. So we will get into background counts and background counts in the next episode of the show. We will also look at the background outside of the shop, instead of the inside, to see if it's as much of a factor as the inside. The next episode will focus on the background in the case of a smoke shop. The episode will be available on CNN.com on Monday, November 14. sources of background radiation in about a month. It depends on your elevation to say how much of the atmosphere is protecting you from cosmic rays. So in New Hampshire, the background count's quite a bit higher, because of the elevation. It definitely depends on location, and the amount of radiation you're exposed to will depend on where you are in the U.S. and how high you're located in the sky. But to give you a quick flash-forward, it depends on you elevation. Conway granite, named after Conway, New Hampshire, is pretty rich in radium ore. There's a lot of granite deposits, and granite can be upwards of 52 parts per million radium. Oh, is that where you're from? AUDIENCE: No. My last name is Conway. MICHAEL SHORT: Oh, there you are, my name is Michael Short, and I'm from New Hampshire. I'm sorry, I was trying to ask you a question about Conway granite. You can use background counts as a radiation altimeter. One of my graduate students actually built a Geiger counter interface to an Arduino, where you could actually tell what the height you were flying at is by the amount of background radiation increase. It's also neat. OK. [LAUGHTER] Yeah. It’s also neat, because you can use Background counts as an altimeter, and you can tell if you’re flying at a certain height. You can do that with an Arduino. So certainly it's going to depend where you are, right? But you want to make sure that you're in an area, to answer Sean's question, representative of where the smoke shop is. So you can't go into the reactor, and drop this in the core, and say, I'm doing a smoke shop. You can't do that. You have to be in the right place at the right time to do it. It's very, very difficult to do this. background count. That's not a valid experiment. So yeah, you'd want to be, I don't know, same block. That would be a pretty good. And then go in there and see, can you measure any sort of increase, get a crude estimate of your C g-- your gross count rate? That's what you want to try and do, I think. I'm not sure if it's possible, but that's what we're trying to try to do. Use this formula right here to estimate how much time you'd have to wait. So for example, let's shrink our y-axis down a little and be more optimistic than we probably should. Let's say you go in there and you get a count rate of 100 counts per minute. That's a wait time of about two minutes. That is a wait rate of about one minute and a half. It could be longer or it could be shorter, depending on how long you're in there. would do that would surprise me. You'd only have to count for an extra 28 minutes to nail that net count rate with 95% confidence to 5% error. Let's say now, what happens if we increase the allowable percent error? So let's say 10% error would be acceptable. We just take that number and double it. Then, all of a sudden, you don't have tocount for nearly as long. If you're willing to accept 10%error, you're going to get a better score. it goes down to seven minutes and 18 seconds. So do you guys see the general interplay between confidence, percent error, counting time, and counting rate? Who here is built an NSE Geiger counter before? Awesome. So this is definitely a try-it-at-home kids kind of thing. If you want to try it out for yourself, you can go to the NSE website and buy a Geiger Counter for $99.99. You can also buy one for $49.99 from the N SE website. find out is something radioactive, this is what you can actually use to answer the question, is it discernibly radioactive to within some limit of error or limit of confidence? That's what we're going to be doing here with a much,much, much more sensitive detector. So the only thing we'll be doing is trying to find out if it's radioactive or not. We'll be using a very, very sensitive detector to try and find out what it is. It will be a lot more sensitive than the one we have now. missing from our complete picture of going from the activity of a source, which we've shown you how to count, to dealing with the solid angle, which is just a simple formula, is now the efficiency of this detector. Out of the number of sources we count, we count only a small fraction of the activity. The rest of the time, we deal with statistics and uncertainty. We count the angle of the source, and then we count the distance from the source to the detector. We then count the activity from the detector to the source. radiation quanta or whatever that enter the detector, how many interact, and how many leave out the other side? That's we're going to be spending most of the next month on when we do ion, photon, electron, and neutron interactions with matter. So we'll find out-- what's the probability per quanta of interacting with matter? And that's what we'll be trying to find out over the next few months. We'll be doing a lot of research on that. unit length that each one undergoes an interaction, what kind of interactions do they undergo, and then we'll complete this actual picture. So you can take a source of, let's say, unknown activity, put it a known distance away from a known detector with a known efficiency, and back out. And then you can get a picture of the interaction between the two sources and each other. And you can see how they interact with each other, and how they react to one another. what the activity of that source is with accuracy. That's what you're going to start doing on this homework as well for the banana lab. The only thing you don't know is the activity. of this bag of bananas. But we'regoing to give you all the information, like the. activity of this source. With accuracy, we'll show you how to get the most out of your bananas. We'll also show you what to do with the bananas after you've eaten them. efficiency of the detector and the geometry of the detectors. You're going to be able to measure the number of potassium 40 counts that the detector picks up. So by taking-- let's see where we have some space left. We had a little bit here. It's going to range from 0 to 1, probably much closer to 0, and also dividing by, let's say, your solid angle over 4 pi to account for how many of the emitted potassium. We have some room left. 40 gamma rays actually get into the detector and dividing by 2 gamma rays per disintegration-- I think that's what we had last time. We've been using cobalt 60 as an example. So remember, we had two gamma rays emitted per cobalt 50 disintegration. Or was that cobalt 70? Or was it cobalt 80? I don't know. I think it was cobalt 75 or 80. I'm not sure. I just know it was more than one. on average. Then you can get to the actual activity of the source. Once you know the activity of this bag of bananas, you can then divide by either the mass of one banana, or the number of bananas. That's what we're going to do here. We'll show you how to do it in the video below. Click here to watch the full video on CNN.com's YouTube channel, or click here for the video on the CNN iReport channel, which is open to the public. to spend the rest of today doing. So since it's getting on five out of five of, do you guys have any questions about what we covered today or what we're about to go do? AUDIENCE: You said that for solid angle you wouldn't do this. MICHAEL SHORT: Yep. And now we're going to go to the studio and see what we can find out about what's coming up on the next episode of "This Is Life with Michael Short" The next episode will be on Monday, November 14. So for solid angle, it's [INAUDIBLE] to the surface area over y squared. And in this situation, does solid angle over 4 pi mean that you can only have a maximum of half of the sphere? MICHAEL SHORT: Not necessarily. Let's say you were to encase your detector in an envelope. You could only have half of that envelope if you had a full-size detector. That would mean you could only use half of your detector at a time. infinite medium of radiation material. Then you could subtend 4 pi. So if your solid angle is 4 pi, then that would equal-ish the area over r squared of your area. So the idea here is that if you captured every single gamma ray, your solid angles would be 4 pi and 4 pi respectively. If you captured all gamma rays, then you would have a solid angle of 4 pi which would equal to 4 pi or 4 pi per square centimetre. So that would be the solid angle for a gamma ray. thing. But this is actually not that good of an approximation when you put a source very, very up close to a detector. So there are actual formulas for solid angle. The real formula for a solid angle, you actually end up having to do a surface integral of the surface. of the detector. It's a very complex process, but you can get a good idea of what it's like to be near a detector, and it's not that easy to work out how to do it. the sine, which accounts for the fact that the object that you have might be, let's say, tilted towards or away from the detector, times some differential d phi d theta of this unit sphere. So you'll have to integrate to say how many of these little dphi d. theta there are in the universe. It's not known how many there are, but it's likely to be in the hundreds or thousands of millions of trillions. It could also be in billions or even billions. thetas are actually subtended by your detector. And the value of that actual surface integral gives you the real solid angle. That's the super simple one if you just know the area of something and you know that you're kind of far away. But again, whenever possible, use the exact exact angle. It's the most accurate way to get the best view of the object you're trying to photograph. For more information on how to get a better view of an object, visit the National Geographic website. formula. MICHAEL SHORT: That accounts for the fact that if you remember the decay diagram for cobalt 60, that's the two gammas per second. Sean. AUDIENCE: You said that that expression is a true statement [INAUDIBLE] per second, right? MICHAEL Shorts: That's right. Sean, any other questions? Yeah, Sean. So any other Questions? Sean, if you have any, please send them to me at jennifer.smith@mailonline.com. how does that decay? By beta emission. It goes to one energy level, and it tends to go down by two gamma decays to nickel 60. So each time it gives off a gamma ray to one level and a gamma rays to another level. So in this case, one gamma ray, one beta emission, one nickel 60 decays. That's how it gets to the nickel 60 level. And then it goes down to nickel 50. And so on and so on, until it reaches nickel 100. becquerel of cobalt 60 would give off two gamma rays per second. activity is measured in disintegrations, not in number of gamma rays emitted. Dose-- you'd actually care about how many gamma rays you absorb. But activity is how many atoms are disintegrating per second, and that's the difference here. It's just twoGamma rays per atom. So in this case, it's like twoGammas per atom, or better yet, twoGamas per disintegration. per disintegration. So you've got to know what material you're looking at in order to know how many gamma or how many betas or more that you're going to get. Who here has heard of this uncertainty in quadrature before? There's a couple folks. OK. Yeah. The idea is to get a better idea of how much gamma you're getting per disintegration, and how much betas you'll get. So that's what we're trying to do here. here is that, again, if you just add the errors up, you're probably overestimating the error and selling yourself short. In that case, if there's no questions, let's go do this. So follow me to the counting lab. OK. So this is my counting lab, and these are the errors that I'm trying to correct. These are the mistakes that I want to correct, and I'm hoping that you can help me do it. If you have any questions, please call Michael Ames at 1-800-273-8255. Three high-purity germanium detectors. Have you explained any detectors? MICHAEL SHORT: Just the Geiger counter we were playing around with today. Well, here. Down in here there's a little high- purity germium crystal with a high-Purity Germanium detector in it. No, we haven't. MICHAEL AMES: OK. DOWN IN HERE there's. a little High Purity Germium Crystal with a High-P purity Germania Detector in It. a couple thousand volts across it. When a gamma ray goes into it, it makes some electron hole pairs. So you collect the current from the current of the gamma ray. And basically, you get more electron Hole pairs the more energy of the Gamma you have. And that's how you get the electrons in a nuclear reactor. It's a very, very complex process, but it's very simple. It just takes a couple of thousand volts to generate the electrons. And the electrons are then used to create the nucleus. that, and you get a little pulse of current, and the height of the pulse tells you how many hole pairs you had, and then back it up to what the energy or your gamma was. That works fine if you collect all of the gamma energy. You don't always need to collect all the energy, of course, and it's not always possible to get all of it in one go. It's better to start with a small fraction of the energy that you need, and work your way up. quite do that. Anyway, so that's how-- You all can scooch up. There's not a whole lot to see in there. MICHAEL SHORT: It's worth a look. If you've never seen it. You can't really see the crystal. It's just an aluminum cylinder in. There is no crystal in it; it's just a cylinder in the middle of the room. There are no lights in it, but there is a light in the center. there. The black part is just a carbon fiber window, because you don't want to cut off the low energy gamma. So it's got a really thin carbon fibers window on it. What's with the hundreds of pounds of copper around the side? MICHAEL AMES: What's With the Hundreds of pounds Of Copper Around The Side? Michael Short: What’s With The Hundreds of Pounds Of copper Around The side? Michael Shorter: What is with the Hundreds Of Pounds of Copper Around the Side? hundreds of pounds of copper on the side? There's not hundreds ofpound of copper. These guys are lead. MICHAEL SHORT: Ah-hah! MICHAEL AMES: Which does two things-- it shields the detectors from the activity out here, from you guys, from the activities coming out of here -- and it shields them from the copper. MIC Michael Short: Ah,hah. These are lead detectors. This is a lead detector. It's not a copper detector. There is no copper in it. because sometimes I'm counting very low activity samples-- and it also, if I'm count something that has a lot of activity, it shields us from that activity. So it kind of goes both ways. The reason there's copper is if you get a high energy gamma ray into some lead, it's copper. It's a way to shield us from the gamma rays that are in the lead. It also protects us from some of the radioactivity that is in the uranium and the thorium. it makes x-rays. And it makes a very nice 75 keV-- do you guys know keV? Good. So it's a really, really nice 75keV x-ray that interferes with trying to count things around 75 keVs. Because you're getting all these x- rays. It's a very, very nice thing to be able to do. It makes you feel better. It gives you a little bit of a boost to your confidence. It helps you get through the day. coming out of lead. So you line it with copper, which makes a lower energy x-ray and filters out the lead x-rays. So anyway, so this is I've got two germanium detectors. That ones also germium, but it's a well detector. So it's got a little one-centimeter hole in it. So that's what this detector is for. It's a detector for a well. It has a hole in so it's for a detector. you can stick a sample right in the germanium. They're hooked up through a little electronic box and go into the computer over there that does all the peak height analysis. Oh, yeah, liquid nitrogen [INAUDIBLE].. Thanks for pointing. Yeah, you cool the electronics and everything down so it cuts so it cut the sample. You can stick it in the liquid nitrogen and it cuts the sample, and then it goes into a computer that analyses it. It's a very precise process. out the thermal noise. Because you're looking for really tiny little signals here, so you cool everything down. And that way, it's not too noisy. These guys are OK warming up. It doesn't destroy the detector. The old detectors you had to keep cold all the time. And if they did, it would be a big problem for them. They would have to keep it cold for a long time. But these guys are fine. They don't need to be kept cold. They just need to warm up. warmed up, then they were just paperweights. So this is just the counting lab. I've got an actual sample counting in here right now. We'll take a look at the spectrum in a minute. Your bananas are going to go here. And let's see if we can smash it down. We're going to try to get it to go down. And we'll see what happens when we get it down to the right size. And then we'll try and get it back to normal size. Yeah. Because it would be nice if I can close the lid. MICHAEL SHORT: Well, almost. Michael AMES: Almost. Here, one you guys do this. Smash that down until it fits in there. Although, don't break the bag. Oh! OK, we'll get another. We'll get one more. We're going to get another one. We've got another one coming up. We have another one in the works. It's going to be a great one. bag. AUDIENCE: Oh, did I break it? MICHAEL AMES: It's just banana ash. We'll find another bag. It's OK. You know, I'm all about making mistakes. It'll throw some duct tape on it, and it'll be fine. It will be OK. It won't be broken. It just has banana ash on it. It doesn't need to be broken, it just needs to be fixed. It was just a little bit of banana ash, that's all. Michael Ames: Where else do you think we got potassium 40 in the room? AUDIENCE: In us. MICHAEL AMES: Yeah, right. So when you do the banana count, we frequently take a spectrum on this with the lid closed, and we always see potassium 40. There's potassium 40 everywhere. So after we get the count of the bananas, we'll take a background count. You'll want to subtract the two signals. You're fine. Be fine.be fine. so ahead of me. OK, I think that's all-- Is this going to fit now? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL AMES: OK. I've got this thing-- I'veGot a whole bunch of little spacers if I'm counting something that's hot. And by hot, I mean radioactive hot. I'll space it out a little further. If you've got something that is very radioactive, I'll just space it away from the detector. We just got to close the lid. swamps out the electronics. MICHAEL SHORT: We did just go for a solid angle too, today. Is there anything else I want to say in here? No, let's move this way. This is the spectrum I'm collecting on MIT 1. Right now, I don't know-- Right now,. I don’t know what to do with MIT 1, but I’m going to take a break and come back with a different set of questions. What do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments. how long has that been going? Half a day-- less than that. Anyway, so this is a sample of quartz that was irradiated next to the reactor. You guys are going to do shorts in like a month-- did you bring your samples? MICHAEL SHORT: We're getting them. MICHAEL AMES: OK, good. The reason we're running it is the people who are looking at this quartz want to run a test on it. The test will take place in the graphite region of the reactors. it for 80 hours, and we'd like to know if there are any impurities in it that'll cause grief-- meaning a lot of activity when it comes out. So we run it for a short period. I think this ran six hours. And it's just a little tiny piece. And we're like, 'Oh my God, what is going to happen?' And it was just a tiny piece, and it was going to go into the ocean. And then it went into the sea. so I can look at the gamma spectrum coming out of this. So you can see, there's a whole mess of peaks in here. This one-- you see that? You see that lovely, little peak right there? Can you all see that?" "Yeah, OK. So that's the full spectrum. Yeah, OK," he says. "That's the whole spectrum" "That is the whole gamma spectrum," he adds. "And that is the full gamma spectrum. That is the entire gamma spectrum" That's the peak. That's a tungsten 187 peak. So I did put up one little thing right behind you. Have you all seen the chart of the nuclides? This thing? MICHAEL SHORT: every day. MICHAEL AMES: Every day! Good. I've got one of these on every wall in every lab. I have one of them on every room in the lab. Every room. Every day. It's on the wall. I don't know why. in office and a little handbook Yeah. So the tungsten 186 activates into Tungsten 187. So if you've looked at the chart of the nuclides, you can tell that there's all the sort of parameters you would need to calculate how much activation you'd get based on neutron flux, and that's what we're trying to do here. So we're going to try and get to a point where we can do that. We're not there yet, but we're getting closer. The 28.43, that's the abundance of that isotope. And so that's how likely you'll get from 186 to 187. The half-life-- 23.9 hours. So with all of that-- oh, and underneath, the sigma gamma 38. That's the cross section for thermal neutrons. It's a very, very rare isotope, but it can be found in very small amounts in the Earth's atmosphere, and it's very rare in the environment. the 23.9, you've got what the gammas are-- 685, 479. it's got a whole mess of gammas. So that's a bunch of the gamma in here for that. So you could, knowing how big that peak is, what the efficiency of the detector is for collecting that peak in that. It could be used for something like that in the future. It would be interesting to see how that would work out. It's a very interesting question. geometry, the half-life, the cross set-- that whole mess of parameters-- back-calculate how much tungsten is in the sample. So that's kind of how NAA works, which I assume you've explained. MICHAEL SHORT: Actually, the whole idea behind doing those short NAA activations is to get a better sense of what's going on in the system. MIC MICHAEL AMES: OK. We have. MIC Michael Shorts: We've explained that. is these guys are going to calculate what's in their samples. MICHAEL SHORT: Once we get the date. But that's not how I do NAA. We're doing a simplified version. No, no, no. So there's two NAA versions. There's two different NAA methods. There are two different ways to do it. There is two different way to do the NAA version of NAA, and there is two ways to handle the N AA version. things that you could do. One of the things you can do is you take all those nuclear parameters and you calculate it just from the peak height. The other way that everybody who does NAA-- almost everybody who did NAA -- is you run a standard material. Any of you could take that and do it, and it would be very similar to a nuclear explosion. It would be the same thing, but it would take a lot less time. It's a very simple thing to do. guys chemists at any point in your life? You all took some chemistry at some point? OK. So you've run a standard, which means a material that how much tungsten is in it or how much a whole mess of other things are. So I run a bunch of different different things, and that's what I do. I'm a chemist. I've been a chemist all my life. I don't know why I'm doing this, but I'm going to do it. standards. So along with this piece of quartz, I ran a standard, irradiated it at the same time. And by comparing the peak heights and doing all the decay corrections and the weight corrections, then I calculate how much tungsten is in the sample. I'll count the quartz and then I will count the standard. And then I'll compare the two and see how much is in each one. That's how I calculate the amount of tungststen in each sample. is in my sample. So I don't actually use the cross sections, or the flux, or any of that other stuff-- all of those parameters disappear. Notably, the detector efficiency disappears out of the equation, because that's the parameter that you usually have the funniest idea about. And so you don't have to worry about the flux or cross sections or anything like that. You just have to be able to look at the sample and see what's in it. That's what I do. reduce the uncertainty in your concentration by doing this sort of comparative method with a standard. That all make sense? OK. So when we run shorts, I guess, in a month, we'll take whatever your samples are. I've had feedback about, oh, God, you don't want to run that many shorts. That's OK, we're going to do that in the next month or so. We'll see how it goes. We've got a lot of work to do. samples. But we'll figure out how many samples we'll run. MICHAEL SHORT: It's one per person. [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL AMES: That's a lot of shorts. In pairs, right? MICHAEL ShORT: Yeah. So I'll show you how the shorts get run. So when we run your shorts, we will run your. shorts, and we'll also run your other shorts. When we run the shorts, the shorts will be run in pairs. samples and we'll run standards. Or, if you feel like it, you can do the other method, depending on what exercise-- MICHAEL SHORT: The other method. You don't want to do the standard. MICHAEL AMES: You're going to be doing the other way. You're doing the comparative method. The other way is the standard method. That's what we're doing. The standard method is what we'll be doing. We're doing it in a controlled environment. We'll do it in the lab. method? MICHAEL SHORT: Oh, no, no no. We're drilling comprehension, not [INAUDIBLE].. MICHAEL AMES: Not practical? Oh. MICHAEL Shorts: What happens if the computer break down? MIC Michael AMes: Well, if theComputer goes down, you can't get any data anyway. MIC Michael Shorter: Oh. Oh, [INAudIBLE]. MIC Michael Ames: I can do it. I can get it. comparative one on an envelope. Anyway-- well, we'll run standards or not, depending on how you guys are feeling. So that's that. Oh, right. Let's count your bananas. So this is detector 2. We did an energy calibration earlier today. So actually, I've got a couple of little button sources. We'll run standard tests later this week or early next week. If you have any questions or concerns, please contact us at jennifer.smith@mailonline.com. Have you seen the button sources? Yeah. So that's just a couple of cobalt 60 lines and a cesium 137 line down in here. And I know where those energies are, so that just gets used to calibrate the detectors. MICHAEL SHORT: We were playing around one of those cobalt60 lines, and that's where we were going with it. We were going to use it as a source of energy for some of the other elements in the system. 60 buttons today in class. We mentioned the two gammas per disintegration, and there they are. They're kind of small there because my buttons are probably 30 years old. MICHAEL SHORT: Oh, I got some fresh ones. MIC Michael AMES: There you go. There you are. There they are, you're ready. You've got your 60 buttons. You're ready to go. You can do it. You'll be fine. You just have to wait and see. AMES: So anyway, we cleared that out. And we're not going to see anything a while. Where are we? Oh here. We're going to let this count until 14-- anyway, your banana peak will end up out in here. So it'll take a while, so it'll be a while before we get to see it. It's going to be a long time before we see it, but we'll get to it. We'll see you in a few minutes. Tuesday. Because, why not? And I don't feel like coming in over the weekend and turning it off. So yeah. So this is just picking up all the gammas coming out of the bananas, and everything else that happens to get through the [INAUDIBLE],, and all the contamination on the floor. And I'm just going to keep doing it until the end of the week, because I'm tired of doing it. And it's just a little bit of fun. inside of that. And we just let it count. And then you guys can calculate how much potassium 40 is in your ashes. You'll need to do the background subtraction. I will give you-- MICHAEL SHORT: Do you have background spectra? MICHAEL AMES: Yeah. We collect background Spectra once a week. It's a good way to measure the amount of potassium 40 that's in your body. It can be used to determine how much is in a person's ashes. month or so. So I'll give you a background spectra. I will provide the efficiency for this geometry, which is pretty poorly defined, because I've got a program that'll do that. And I can't give you the program, and it's a pain in the neck to run anyway. If we've been in the same room for a month or so, we've probably been through a lot of the same things. We've probably even been through the same place for a few months. got a really well-defined geometry that's not a big bag, usually I try to count sort of point sources. So I've got an efficiency standard that I can use that I know what the disintegrations in that are at a lot of energies, and I use that to do an analysis of the bag. It's a really good way to get a sense of what's going on in the bag, and how it's going to disintegrate. I use it to do my analysis of what I'm looking at. efficiency calibration, usually. But I don't have an efficiency standard that's that big. It's just a point source. And I think that's the practical NAA. From this end, did that all makes sense? I want you guys to nod, not him to nod. Yeah. I want to see if that makes sense. Yeah, I think it does. It does. I'm not sure if it makes sense, but it does to me. I think I'm going to go with it. any questions for Mike on what you've just heard? Well-timed, because we were just talking about this stuff all week. For neutron activation, that's kind of a real common part of the chart. So there's the manganese, iron, cobalt, nickel. One of the things-- what you'd like to know about neutron activation is to go to a neutron lab and see how it works. You can go to neutronlab.org for more information on neutron activation. like, usually when you're doing NAA, is you want a nice thermal neutron spectrum. You know what thermal neutron spectra means? Real slow neutrons. And they'll just give you sort of an n gamma reaction. So on that chart, iron 58 to iron 59, that's a nice n Gamma reaction. And that's the one I use to analyze for iron. If you're near the reactor, you're also getting some fast neutrons, which can give you an n p reaction. iron 59. If you've got iron, you've always got a little cobalt floating around-- you maybe need to do a correction. So in practical terms, when you're running NAA, you really want to avoid having all these fast reactions. There's usually an 'I don't know what I'm doing' reaction. You don't want to know what you're doing. You want to be able to do something about it. You can't do anything about it if you don't have the answers. energy threshold for the fast reactions, like 1 meV or so. Sound familiar from the cube equation? MICHAEL AMES: Yeah, OK. The place where we do the irradiations is very thermal. It's got a very low, fast spectrum. So I don't usually have to worry about that. I've been doing this for 30 years. I'm very proud of what I've done, and I'm looking forward to doing more of it in the future. I think it's a very exciting time for me. There's a couple of times I actually use the fast n p reaction. I try not to have to measure nickel, because it's pain in the neck. And I need to put the rabbits into where I've got a fast flux in the reactor. Which, well, they've got some spots for that. And since there's not a good reaction n gamma from Cobalt 57, cobalt 57 isn't around usually. So that's how I measure nickel,. using n p Reaction. But sometimes people want to know nickel. And we talked a little about what we've run in here for types of samples. MICHAEL SHORT: Well, why don't you tell us? MICHAEL AMES: OK, OK. So back 15, 20, 25 years ago, we did a ton of environmental samples in this area. We did a lot of environmental testing in the early '80s and early '90s. We're still doing it today, and we're doing it now. "We had a whole three grad students, myself included, who did atmospheric particulate matter, rain water, snow, we even did some fog collection, which is kind of fun," she says. "It was all for trace elements in those kind of environmental samples-- also also for traces of other elements in the environment," she adds. "And it was all a lot of fun. It was a really fun experience for me." For more information on the project, go to www.lab.org. lake sediments. Other analytical methods have gotten a lot better, and so they've kind of caught up to NAA, and you don't need a reactor to run those. So the environmental side of this has kind of quieted down a lot. But it's still useful for a bunch of things. It's still a good tool for a lot of things, but it's not as useful as it used to be, he says. It doesn't have to be a nuclear reactor to do what it does. And so I do some work here now. I also work in the NCORE group. So that's a lot of my time, rather than just this lab. Practical things-- let's go take a look at a couple other labs. You're not on wheels? You don't have a steady cam? MICHAEL. MICHAEL: No, I'm not. I'm just going to sit here and talk to you for a while. I'll be back in a few minutes. Shorter: What's the weirdest thing you've ever been asked to count? Ames: I don't know-- brain tissue. Shorter: I got a question. AmES: OK. You've got a questions. Shorts: What is the strangest thing that has happened to you so far? AMES: Brain tissue. SHORT: That's already activated, or?AMES: No, that's not activated. Shorters: What has been the most unusual thing you have ever counted? Fish samples that we actually did the fresh fish samples. And you want to kind of homogenize those. And we had this kind of titanium blender-- you remember the Bass-O-Matic? We had this titanium blender that we dropped the fish in, and you completely homogenized the fish. And then you then you had to do the same thing with the fish samples that you did with the samples you had already done, and then you did the same with the new samples. took a little sample of it, and freeze dried it, then analyzed it for mercury. MICHAEL SHORT: [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL AMES: Yeah, right. Because, I mean guys saw, the rabbits are only this big, and the samples I want are only that big. And so to get a representative fish, to take a sample, you have to freeze it. You have to take it and freeze it and then analyze it. And that's what we did. you want to kind of make a fish smoothie and then take a sample out of that. We did have a guy who came to me and was promising we were going to do this giant study using fingernails and toenails for nutritional analysis. He was working with a group of people who were trying to do it. But we decided not to go through with it because it would have been a waste of time and it would not have been as effective as we thought it would be. that looks at zinc deficiencies, and fingernails and toenails will give you a good record of how much zinc you've had over the last week, or month, or whatever-- depend where you cut the nails. And so I was going to get a couple of hundred African children's toenail. That looks to be a good indicator of zinc deficiencies. That is a good way to see if you need more zinc in your body or if you're deficient in it. didn't happen. But I did analyze my own toenails. Well, if you went to somebody who was a little suspicious of you, asking for toenail is a lot easier than asking for a blood sample. Because people would give up toenailed-- it's not a big deal. Have you ever seen toen nails? If so, I'd love to hear about it. I've never seen them, but I've heard about them. I'd like to know what they look like. Woburn had arsenic and chromium contamination. There used to be a lab-- I forget which building it was in-- that did a ton of research there. It was a big old superfund site. One of the sites was in Woburn, Massachusetts, where the movie Civil Action was filmed. The movie was based on the book Civil Action, which was about the same time as the real-life civil rights movement. In the movie, Civil Action is based on a true story about a civil rights activist in Massachusetts. the things we did in this lab was we collected baby hair samples from people's scrapbooks. So we had baby hair going back 50-60 years-- dated, because everybody knew how old their kid was. We analyzed the hair samples for arsenic and chromium, and then we plotted out where we wanted to go with the lab. The lab is now in a new building in New York City, and it will be open to the public for the rest of the year and into next year. they were, when the sample was taken, and how close they were to some contaminated wells. And because we did a fairly short of radiation, after a while the activities died down and we gave the samples back. And we found that it didn't correlate with the well water or anything like that. It was just a very small amount of radiation that was present in the samples. It didn't have to do with any of the other activities that were going on at the time. It just happened to be there. the time when the contamination was the worst, which made people happy in retrospect, that the contamination from that area didn't get into the well water. That was in the mid-90s or so. Anyway, that was one of my samples. And the hair is a pain in the neck to look at, but it's worth it in the long run. It's a good reminder of what could have happened to us if we hadn't done what we did in the '80s and '90s. work with. So I hope none of you give me hair samples. I won't run them. So let's go down the hall, this way. You all got to follow. And so this is just a fine powder. And it's fly ash from a coal-fired power plant. Fly ash means the same thing as fly ash, which is a type of ash that is found in the ground. It's a very fine powder, and it's very hard to work with. ash that goes up the smokestack, as opposed to bottom ash which is what falls down. NIST is really good at this-- take hundreds of kilograms of fly ash, just homogenize it, sieve it, send it out to a lot of labs to analyze. And so, they collect a whole hundreds of kilos of flyAsh. And they homogenized it and sieved it and sent it to NIST to analyze it. And that's what they do. all the data. This ash is characterized for about 20 elements or so. So when I run my samples, if I were to run your samples with standards, I'd run a little bit of this, 5, 6, 7 milligrams. And I know what the concentrations are in this. And so this ash is characterization for about20 elements orso. So if you want to know what your ash is made of, you need to go to the lab and take a sample. And so that's how I do the comparative method. And so I got this. And they all look the same. And this is some soil from Montana next to a mine, so it's nicely contaminated with some metals. This is my IAEA mercury and hair standard. But again, it's just a test. It's just the way I do it. I don't know why I'm doing it, but I'm just doing it. And I think it's a good idea. a little powder. And this is kind of what everybody uses for standards. And you just kind of have a whole collection of them. And depending on what elements you're looking for, you try to mix and match them. So you cover what you want without having to run five. And that's kind of the way to do it. It's a little bit of a different way of doing it, but it's the same thing. And it's a lot of fun to do. or six of them. This is my hot lab, or one of my hot labs. You guys, last week, or whatever it was, I came by-- so this is the rabbit. Those you who weren't there, these are called rabbits because it's the little thing that runs through the pneumatic system. It's called a rabbit because that's what it looks like when it comes out of the machine. It looks like a little rabbit, but it's a big rabbit. tube. When you're sitting at the control panel, there's a button, I think it's to the left, and it says insert rabbit. And that's what this is referring to. There's a spot in the basement in the reactor where the rabbit is inserted. You guys are doing [INAUDIBLE] later today? Yeah. For longer radiations there's an insert rabbit button in the bottom of the reactor. That's where they insert the rabbit into the tube. It's called the 'insert rabbit' button. they can get these, and they send them into the irradiation location. For short irradiations, like what you guys are going to be doing in a month, I send them in from here. That's OK-- I just don't want to bump into that thing. So this is one end of the spectrum of what we can do with these. We're going to use them for a month or two, and then we'll move on to the next stage of the process. the pneumatic system. And so I can put a couple of samples in here. I stick it in that little tube there, call the control room and say, OK, turn a bunch of knobs, and switches, and whatnot. And it goes schwoonk, and in about 15 seconds it's next to you. It's a very, very simple system, and it works very well, he says. He says, "I can put it in a little tube here and it's right next to me. It doesn't take long." the reactor to the core of the reactor in the graphite. I usually run shorts. I'll usually irradiate for about 10 minutes. We usually let the sample sit in the reactor for a little while. So the very short half-life stuff decays away, and then it comes back out here. It's a very, very small part of the whole thing, but it's a big part of our history. We're very proud of what we've done and we're going to continue to do. And the thing just kind of shoots out there and bounces into here. And then pop open the rabbit, and in that hood, pull the samples out. I usually try to repackage the samples. So this is partly why I asked for stuff that's one or two good solid pieces. That's one of the reasons why I wanted to do this project. I just wanted to try to make something that was a little bit different, a little more interesting, a bit more interesting. Because then I can take it out of whatever it was irradiated, put it in a clean bag or vial, and that way we don't have to do a blank subtraction for the sample. Does that make sense? Because, otherwise, if I take a little vial and irradiate it, and then I take it and put it into a clean vial. That way I don't need to do that subtraction. Do you know what I mean by that? If you do, let me know. count it, I'll also have whatever elements are in the vial on the thing. For when I'm running standards-- and this is when if we're not running standards you don't have to worry about this-- that powdered standard stuff, I never get that out of a bag. Because you'd never get it out of the bag. You'd never be able to do it. I don't know why I do it, but I just don't. I'm not sure why. get all of it out, and I'd have contamination everywhere if I started cutting open those bags. So I do have to do a bag correction for those. So when I do when an irradiation, I always irradiate a few empty bags, and then you do a correction for them. That's what I do with the irradiation. I irradiate the empty bags and then I do a corrections for those, and that's how I get rid of the contamination. I don't want to do that with all of the bags. Because the bags have got aluminum, and antimony, and a bunch of things in them. And so then I take a couple of samples, I throw them in a lead pig. So I've got a whole bunch of these floating around-- and I run it down the hall, and throw it. And then I throw it in a pool of water, and it's like, 'Oh my God, this is a really good pool' And then it gets really murky, and then it's all over the place. it on a detector, and we count it. When we're doing shorts, I'll irradiate two samples at a time, because I have two detectors. I usually do a 10-minute irradiation for shorts. I'll do a fairly quick count-- five minutes-- right after I get the sample down there, and that's looking for what I'm looking for. When I used to have four detectors, I ran for samples at one time. So you irradiate it, repackage it, count it and then come down here. stuff with half-lifes under 10 minutes. The shortest half-life I look for is for aluminum. It's 2 and 1/4 minutes. But things usually have a lot of aluminum in them, so I see aluminum pretty well. For shorts, I'll count all the way up to about sodium, which is almost. Almost. For short-term use, don't buy anything that's too short or too long. Don't buy things that are too long or too short. 15 hour half-life. Longer stuff, I'll do a longer irradiation to count. There's a little overlap on my shorts and longs. That helps me do QA on things. And if I run two standards, I will check the concentrations from one standard to the other. That's another little QA thing. What do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments below or on Twitter @CNNOpinion. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Michael Ames: "It's pretty straightforward" Michael Short: "What sort of things are you going to be bringing in?" "What do we got?" "Questions" "What question do you guys have? MICHAEL AMES: Questions. MICHAEL SHORT: Now that you know how this done, what questions do you have?" "I don't have any," says Michael Ames. "I just want to know what questions you have." "What questions do we have?" asks Michael Short. middle Bronze age pottery shirts. There is a lot of archeology that NAA got used for that a lot. I don't think we ever did it here. Fred Frey, who's a professor, retired now, from EAPs-- Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary-- he did a lot for NAA. He did a a lot on Bronze Age pottery. He was a professor at NAA for a long time. He's retired now. He does a lot with NAA now. of geological samples. One of the things NAA is really good for is rare earth elements, which are hard to measure by other methods. I can get very low limits on that. And by picking out various rare earths, I can also get very high limits on the amount of uranium in the Earth's crust. And I forget where it was that they did all the archeology, but I think it was in the 1970s or 1980s. It was probably in the U.S. earths and the ratios, it can help identify where things are from in the world. MICHAEL SHORT: Can I use a bird as a sample? MICHAEL AMES: If you give me a little, tiny piece of it. AUDIENCE: Like, like, a bird? Michael: I mean, you know-- I AudIENCE: OK. MIC Michael: You know what I'm talking about? Michael Short: Yeah, I'm sure you do. I'm sorry, I was trying to be funny. how small [INAUDIBLE]?? MICHAEL AMES: Well, see, that's the rabbit. So it's definitely got to fit in there. The thing I really like-- excuse me, where's my vials? I used to have some smaller ones up here. But that should definitely fit in one of those. It's a good one. I like it a lot. I think it's a great way to start a new year. I'm looking forward to it. Like, see that guy. MICHAEL AMES: My usual description of what size sample I like is if it's a piece that you would pick up with a pair of tweezers. So not too small to pick up-- to be able to find. So no powders. And you could be a lot of things, but not too many things to be a little bit of a nuisance, too much of a problem. And that's what I'm looking for in a sample. maybe get it with your fingers. But 20 milligrams, 50 milligraphic, 100 milligram is just in the right ballpark. MICHAEL SHORT: What else are you guys thinking of bringing? MICHAEL AMES: Doesn't matter. We'll look at what comes in, and-- yeah, I might veto some things or not. It doesn't matter what we bring. It's just a good idea to bring something that's a little bit different than what's already on the market. But we'll see. We'll see what we got. MICHAEL SHORT: OK. AUDIENCE: What are those little bricks for? MICHAEL AMES: Well, we got bricks everywhere. So when I get the sample out of there, I do the repackaging in here. And so this is just shielding between the samples I'm working with. We're going to try some new things. We've got a lot of new things to try out, so we're just going to have to see. working on and myself. I don't have my dosimeter on now, but I usually have got the symmetry and a ring badge. And then it kind of comes over here, and this is where the heat sealer is. So I can heat seal it here and then I'll have a finished product. I can't wait to show you what I've been working on. I've got a lot of work to do, but it's going to be fun to see how far I've come. pig over here. These are just painted lead bricks. And you know, these have been here longer than I have. And sometimes things just are somewhere, and you never move them. These, I think, are older than me too. This is just one of the things that have been going on for a long, long time, and it's not going to change any time soon. It's just a little bit of history that's going to stay the way it is for a while. NAA.lab has been doing NAA since the '70s, I think. Anybody else? AUDIENCE: Is there a single brick that I could just hold to see how heavy it is? MICHAEL AMES: The full size bricks-- like, that size, 2 inches by 4 inches, by 8 inches, weighs about 25 pounds. The full-size bricks are about 2.5 inches by 2 inches and 4 inches by 6 inches. That's the size of a football. There's usually a bunch of them floating around. Here, you want this game? That one's not quite full size. Anybody else want to toss it? No, OK. [LAUGHTER] When people ask me-- because I work in the reactor, as well as in the nuclear power plant, I'm always asked about the lead detectors. They're heavy, they're lead. That's what they're made out of. It's a big, heavy, heavy thing. well-- they say, is there anything dangerous in the reactor? The dangerous thing is dropping lead bricks on your feet. So I've got steel toast. If I miss the toe, I'd probably break my-- I don't want to think about it. And they move much bigger things in the reactors. They move much larger things in them than I do. I'm not sure I want to know what they do in there. I've been in there a long time, but I've never seen anything like it. Have you toured the reactor yet? Audience: [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL AMES: So there's that giant crane there, and they move five-ton pieces a shielding. And that's the other dangerous thing in there, dropping really big things. We've never dropped anything that big. I think somebody dropped a steel plate on their face. I don't think we've ever dropped anything like that. We're very proud of what we've done at the plant. foot once. That was about the worst of it. You know, like, like a four-foot, half-inch steel-- boom. MICHAEL SHORT: That's what happened to my foot. OK, good. And people trip and fall off ladders. And it's the usual industrial accidents. [INAUDIBLE] cut off your toe. [INTERPOSING] cut of your toe once. [LAUGHTER] [INAudIBLE] cutting of your foot once. Michael Ames has been working at the nuclear power plant for more than 20 years. He says he's broken a few bones, but not here. "I'll see you guys in a month or something and have fun running the reactor," he says to the audience. "Thanks a ton, Mike. Thanks a ton," the audience responds. "Have fun running it," he adds. "It's a great place to work" "I've broken a lot of bones," he admits. "But not here." Well, good day, folks. You guys are here to do an experiment on the reactor. It's in two parts. The first is raising reactor power using a low worth absorber called a regulating rod. And then the second part will be lowering reactor. And that's what we're going to be doing today. That's the first part of the experiment. The second part is the lowering of reactor power. And we'll be doing that in the next few days. We'll be showing you how to do it. power using a high worth absorber. And the high worthabsorber, things will moved much faster. And we don't want to run into a chance if you accidentally going too high, so that's why we use a low worth absorbers on the way up and a highworth absorber on. the way down. We don't use the same absorber for both trips, so we use one for the first trip and the other for the second. We also use different absorbers for different parts of the journey. the way down. And I just want to show you the controls. With me today is Tim. To actually do this experiment, we need two licensed people in here, one at least has a senior reactor operator. Both Tim and I are both senior licenses, so we have that covered. And we have a lot of fun with it. We're having a great time. It's going to be a great experiment. I can't wait to see what the results will be. I'm looking forward to it. The only way you can actually do these manipulations are if you're in my training program-- I'm the training supervisor for the facility. And the program you guys are in fits that definition. So I just want to make sure that you get the training that you need to be able to do these kinds of manipulations in a safe way. And I want you to do it in a way that's safe for your safety and for the safety of the facility as a whole. And that's what I'm looking for. to show you some of the controls of the reactor. First, we have our shim blade controller. This basically moves one of six shim blades at a time. The one that's selected has a slide on it. And we can change which one's selected with the shimBlade selector switch. We can also change which of the six blades is selected using the ShimBladeSelector switch. The reactor is powered by a combination of electricity and water. It can also be used to power a variety of other devices. This switch here is a regulating rod. This one will allow you to move the regulating rod up and down. Our blades our fixed speed, meaning they can only move at the exact same rate at all times. Moving the shim blade in an upward direction or the regulating rods or the regulate rod in an downward direction will move the blade in the opposite direction. The blades can only be moved at one speed at a time, so move them at the same speed all the time to avoid hitting each other. in upwards direction, take an underhand grip and pull up or twist upwards until it stops. If you want the blade to stop just release it. It's spring-loaded and will go back to the neutral position and stop moving. Moving it just a little bit doesn't move anything. You have to move all the way until it stopped, and then the absorber will move in the outward direction. Once again, let go. It'll snap back up. It will move back to its neutral position. and stop the motion of the blade or the regulating rod. The experiment we're doing is basically change reactor power by half a megawatt. And we're currently at 500 kilowatts. We're going bring the reactor up to 1 megawatts and then bring it back down to 500 kilowsatts. So before before the experiment we were at 1 megawatts. Now we're at 1.5 megawatts and we're going to bring it up to 2 megawatts before we go back down again. we can do this, you have to log into our log book as a trainee on console. We'll show you the proper way to make the entries. As you make those entries, you'll go ahead and then do the actual movement itself. Sp the first one is going to be, the first movement is the most difficult. The second one is, the most easy is the second movement, the third is the fourth. The fourth is the fifth, the sixth, the seventh, the eighth and the ninth. using a regular rod to move the reactor power up. We have about nine different instruments that tell us what the reactors power is at all times. But the ones we're going to be paying attention to are channel seven 7 and channel 9. These two are the ones that we'll be paying most attention to in the next few days. They are the two channels that we will be focusing on the most in the coming days and weeks. It's the channel 7 and the channel 9 that will be the most important. channels are what we used to basically tell us what the wrecked power is. Channel 7 is what we control our automatic control at. If you watch the regulating rod, you'll see it move up and down on its own. That's because it's changing power based on what it sees channel 7 is doing. So if channel 7 sees that the power level's going too low, it'll cause the regulating Rod to drive outwards to increase the amount of neutrons making the reactor power go up. power level is based on a chart that we create. So it's not showing you megawatts, or kilowatts, or anything like that, it's showing you a current coming from a chamber. And that current is then converted into megawatts and so forth. So right now, we're at 500 kilowatt, 8.5. We're not talking about megawatts. We are talking about watts. And we're talking about volts. And so on and so on. microamps, on this channel. And that's 8.5 microamps equals 550 kilowatts. You're going to be bringing a record up to 1. Megawatt and since it's linear, it'll be double that. Now, you want to be careful when you raise reactor power. So when you start to add power, don't be too quick to add too much power. It's a very, very dangerous thing to try to do that to a nuclear reactor. to the reactor by raising a regulating rod. You don't want to keep raising it until you reach your value, because you have to actually stop the power increase as well. So we have two rules that we have to follow-- one, at the power level we're at, we have a limit on how much power we can increase. And the second is that we can't increase too much power at the same time as we're raising the regulating rod, because that's a violation of the law. period-- the reactor period. The reactor period is amount of time it takes reactor power to increase. At the power level we're at, we're not allowed to go shorter than a 100-second period. So here is one of three periods meters-- one here, one here and one here. Which is selectable between two? It's selectable here. It's one of two meters, which is selectability between two, and it's the one on the left. It says, 'The reactor period' on the right. different meters. So as you're pulling up the regulating rod, one of the things you have to watch is to make sure that the reactor period doesn't go shorter than a 100-second period. If it does, you have. to stop pulling blades. The other thing we have to watches for is that the power goes out for a period of time, which can be as long as a minute or more. If that happens, we need to go back to the control room and restart the reactor. is to make sure that the power level, channel 9, doesn't exceed where you're going to. Not only not exceed, but we also want to made sure that you can actually control the reactor. It's called feasibility of control. And what that means is when you get to about 80% of the power, that's when you're in trouble. And that's what we're trying to do here. We want to get to that point where we're in control of the whole thing. of the power level you're going to-- since we're going up to 1 megawatt, that's about 800 kilowatts-- you want to be able to drive the absorber in and hold the absorbers in. You'll drive the regulating rod inwards. And watch that channel nine value. It'll slow until it actually goes into operation. It's a very, very complex system. It takes a long time to get it to work. But once it does, it's a miracle. starts to go down again. Once it reaches that value and you see it going down, you now know that you could control the reactor and keep it from going away-- rack power increasing continuously. So what we're going to do is have you when you reach 80% of the reactor's power, you can control it from that point. That's when we'll start to see the power going down again, and we'll be able to control it. We'll have to wait until then to see what happens. power level you're going to go to, which happens to be 800 kilowatts. You'll start increasing or lengthening the period by driving the absorber back in the regulating rod. And you'll keep holding it in until you see the number not only stop increasing, but actually go down a little. It's a very, very complex process, but it can be done with a lot of practice, and it's very safe, says the company's chief engineer, Mark Boulden. As soon as you see it going down a little bit and go of the regulating rod, You haven't stopped the power at this time, you've just decreased how fast it's going up. And then the power level will sill go up, but a much slower rate than it did before.bit.ly/2iS7qE. Click here for more information on how to control your car with a remote control. For more information about how to use a remote controlled car, visit www.controlyourcar.com. was before. Once it reaches the power level you want to stop at, the 1 megawatt, keep driving the regulating rod in. Once you're at that power level, you're going to make an entry in a log book that basically says you've reached that level. And once it reaches that level, it's time to turn off the engine and go back to the beginning of the power line, when it was at 0.5 megawatts. And that's when it's safe to turn it off again. made it to the power level you're going to. And then we'll go down in power. So once again, you make an entry in a log book that says I'm going to lower ranked power to 500 kilowatts, and then this time we'll use a shim blade. The shimBlade is the most powerful blade in the world at the moment. It's the only blade that has the potential to be as powerful as the Tesla Model S. It has a maximum power of 1,000 kilowatt-hours. is worth a lot more than a regulating rod-- about 10 times the regulating rod, so things will happen much faster. So you'll be able to drive this in and reactor power will change much faster than before. Same thing-- as you get closer to the power level you start to see changes in the reactor power as you drive the device into the reactor. It's a very exciting time for nuclear power, and I'm looking forward to seeing what the future has in store for us. At 500 kilowatts, you don't want to undershoot and go too low. Start driving or shim blade out to slow down how quickly the power level is going down. And once you get back to the place where you started it, we'll be able to get back up to full power. We'll be back in touch to let you know how it went on the road in the U.S. and around the world. Back to Mail Online home.back to the page you came from. use a regulating rod to fine tune it to keep the reactor power where would want it to be. There'll be another logbook entry, and your time on the console will be completed. So with us today we actually have two MIT students who are actually in my training program, and they'll be on hand to talk to you about the project. We'll be back next week for a look at the next phase of the project, which will involve the creation of a new reactor in the future. and they've actually done a lot of these manipulations already. FRANK WARMSLEY: Ladies first. Let's go. AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. It's been so long since I've done one. FRank Warmsley: I'll take that. If, at any time, you don't feel comfortable doing something, let me know and I'll do it for you. If you're not comfortable, don't do it. Let me know, and we'll do another one. "We'll ask you just to take your hands off the console, and we'll take care of doing whatever is necessary to keep the reactor safe," he says. "We're a factor of 10 lower than where we would automatically scram at so. So it would be very difficult," he adds. If you see something you think should be changed, please let so.us know. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Back To The page you were from. for you to get to someplace where it would cause a problem without us being able to stop it. I don't know if you want to move or anything, but the supervisor normally sits kind of right in your way so that they can keep eye on what's happening. The supervisor would sit right next to you so they could keep an eye on you if you were to get out of line. You could get in trouble if you got out of control of your chair. You would be in trouble with the supervisor. Are we doing doing any announcing for these? FRANK WARMSLEY: You can go ahead and make the announcement that we're starting power manipulations, and then the last person will make an announcement thatwe're done with power manipulation. AUDIENCE: Commencing power Manipulations. FRANKWARSLEY: Right now, the right now, we're going to start power manipurations. The last person is going to be the person who announces that we are done withpower manipulations. reactor is on autocontrol. And when we do these manipulations, the reactor operator is going to take manual control. That'll cause an alarm to come in. And this will only happen for the first time. So one of the things she's going to do after she makes her logbook entry-- AUDIENCE: Are we filling this out? FRANK WARMSLEY: No, we'll do that at the end-- is she'll take Manual control of the reactor, an alarm will come in on console, and she'll answer it. manual control until the final participant has done their manipulations. AUDIENCE: All right. I hope to get to 1 megawatt at 17.11 [INAUDIBLE].. FRANK WARMSLEY: OK. Now, she's pulling out the red rod all the way. You see the red rods number going up? That's what I'm doing. That's how I'm going to do it. I'm just going to pull it all the time. I don't want to stop. I just want to keep going. The period is getting shorter. It's no longer at infinity. It is getting closer to 100 second. And channel 7 and channel 9 are increasing in value. Another way you can see it is we have a display on the front the operator. Those three displays, two of them are just for the operator and the other two are for the audience. That's how you see the change in the period. The period is no longer in infinity, it's getting close to 100 seconds. And the channel 7 or channel 9 is increasing invalue. for evaluation only. We don't actually use those to control the reactor. They're based on a system that hasn't been approved yet. But we're testing them to see how well they work. So you can see that the power level on the far left is going up. The middle one is going down. The far right is going back up. And the far bottom is going to go back down. It's a control system that's not yet approved. We're testing it to see if it works. is showing what the actual power level-- we started at 500 kilowatts. It's already up to 630 kilow Watts and increasing. And the period that was at infinity is now around 160 seconds. So she's watching, and she sees the 800 kilowatt value here on channel 7 or channel 9, and that's what she's looking at on the TV. That's what the power level is, and it's going up and up. And that's how we're going to show it to you. she's started to driving the regulating ride. So she's slowing down how quick the power increases going. And you see the period lengthening. It's no longer at 150-160 seconds. It’s going closer to infinity again. She's proving that she could stop the reactor power if she continued driving in. So, she's proving to the world that she can stop the reactors power. If she continues to drive in, she'll be able to stop the power at any time. this regulating rod. She's closing in on the 1 megawatt. One of the things the note is that when she started, the [INAUDIBLE] was around 0300, 0310, and she's almost right back to there. When you raise reactor power, you basically open the door to the rest of the world. It's a very, very dangerous thing to try and do that to a power plant. It can be very dangerous. It is a very dangerous time to do that. up a valve and let more neutrons in. And when you get to the place where you want to be, you basically close that valve again. So you basically add reactivity and then stop that reactivity addition by bringing the absorbers back to about where they started from. We're in the midst of a nuclear test at the University of California, San Diego. The test is part of a larger program to test the next generation of nuclear weapons. The next part of the show will be broadcast on Monday, November 14. at 17.1 FRANK WARMSLEY: We're at 1 megawatt? AUDIENCE: Yeah. So once again, she has experience. She's been doing startups and power manipulations for a while. When the rest of you sit down here, we'll guide you through those-- the power-manipulation questions. We'll be back next week with a look at the next episode of "This Is Life with Lisa Ling" at 9 p.m. ET. log book entries that she's making and so forth. xenon is a poison that builds into the reactor while we operate. It's a poison in that it absorbs the data that's coming from the reactor. It could change the way we operate the reactor in the future. It is one of the things that could. change the reactor's design. It can change how the reactor operates. It has the potential to change the entire design of the reactor, which is a very, very complex system. neutrons not leading to fission. One is direct from fission and the other is decay. That's the way it's produced. The way it goes away is basically absorbing a neutron and decaying to another isotope. It has two ways of being made and two ways to have it removed. It's produced by fission, and it's also produced by decay. It can also be made by other ways, such as by neutron capture. It is produced in a nuclear reactor in the UK. The reactor is half a megawatt at 8.56 microamps. Most of the xenon from burn up is absorbed by neutrons being absorbed by the reactor. The reactor uses a 6-inch shim blade to cut down on the amount of xenon it takes to burn up. The nuclear power station is located in a former coal mine in West Virginia. The plant is now run by a private company, West Virginia Power, which has a contract with the federal government to run the plant. fission process. The fact that we don't have the reactor at a very high power means that the amount of xenon in the core isn't being removed. So we actually start-- the power would actually want to go down on it's own. So you would have to do a lot of work to remove the xenon from the core before it could be used in a nuclear power plant. It would take a long time to remove all of the Xenon from a nuclear reactor. of re-shims. And for a while, that's a very large amount of reactivity that has to be compensated for. For this experiment, though, we actually shut down the reactor yesterday and we started up early this morning. So it's not a big factor as it normally would be after doing re- shims. It's not as much of a problem as it usually would be, but it's still a very big problem for us to deal with, and we're still working on it. one of these lowering reactor power. I think we'll be able to get at least one more person. So once again, she's lowering reactorPower. You can see on the screen. Do you want to have her do a re-shim now? Or do you want me to? FRANK WARMSLEY: No. I want to get her to do it now. She's lowered reactor power once again. She can't do it right now, so I'm getting her to get it done now. period meter, she's at a negative period, and the reactor power is decreasing. She's driving the absorber out again to slow down how quickly the power level is going down. And when she's done, the shim blade will end up about at the same point. When she's finished, she'll be at about 500 kilowatts. She'll then drive the shimm blade out again, and it'll end up at about the same level. She will then drive it out again and it will go back to its original position. where it started, the 13.42 inches out of the bottom of the core. It might not make it all the way back up to [INAUDIBLE]. FRANK WARMSLEY: It'll be close. Compensate with the reg rod if you need to. 30.8. OK. And that's the end of the exercise. We'll be back in a few minutes with the results of the test. We hope to see you on "Larry King Live" next week.