MIT open courseware offers highquality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu all right folks so last week last week was the first day of MIT Open Courseware 2015. We are happy to have you back on our campus with all the latest news and updates. We hope to see you back next week for the second week in a row. Back to the page you came from. we uh looked at the we first saw our first magic formula which you've probably forgotten because it was a wonderful weekend so I'll remind you and um then from there we will uh resolve the spider problem and then uh we're going to solve uh we's going to look. We first saw the magic formula and then we looked for the spider. We found the spider and then looked for a way to get rid of it. We looked at a number of different ways to do it. And then we found the right way to kill it. at uh uh something called the super magic formula these are not official names I made them up or it's please please never ever say these in public okay but uh it's a useful formula okay um so last week we looked at as I said first of all we. We looked at what we called the "super magic formula" which is a formula that can be applied to a variety of situations. We also looked at how to use the formula to help people who are struggling with mental health issues. looked at uh um angular velocity for the first time for theFirst time and in fact everything before I mention angle of velocity you know. The Machinery I provided you is powerful enough to do what I did before I even mention angle  of velocity for the first time in the video. In the video, we look at the speed of the ball as it travels through the air. We also look at it as the velocity of the air as the ball travels through it.  angular velocity is a kind of a madeup concept that just simplifies the math and it's kind of intuitive stuff is rotating Theta Dot multiplied by you know the Le lever arm right gives you a velocity.to solve pretty much any kinematics problem because it's based purely on Geometry. The concept is based on the fact that angular velocity can be calculated by multiplying a number by a number of other factors such as the angle of rotation of the body. It's a very intuitive concept. but you can see how it kind of slaughtered into place so we introduced the angle of velocity like this. We said um we said the angles of velocity of in fact I'll fill that in later on a b and I wrote it as this so help me write. So we introduced an angle of velocities like this and we said that the angle was the speed of the projectile. And then we said it was the velocity of the object. And so on and so on until we got to the right angle. this what is the English statement here it is the angular of velocity frame B with respect to frame a right okay so we saw that for the first time now a little bit on the low of angular velocity that you've seen in previous classes but we we Plunge. This is the first part of a two-part series on the evolution of the human body. The second part of the series will focus on the development of the body and how it reacts to the environment. The third and final part of this series will look at how the body adapts to a new environment. The velocity of the frame doesn't mean anything unless I give you a reference point. If a frame's rotating some point different points will have different velocities. Good points of accelerations frames have angular accelerations okay so just to talk a little bit more about angular velocity why is angular of velocity a vector a cross product uh I guess well I guess you could look at it that that's how it works. I'm sorry it's a crossProduct.in anymore um the first thing is can of Point have an angular velocity now can a point have a velocity yes can a frame have a Velocity kind of no. way but I want something even more kind of in you know just very basic hand wavy more basic yeah magit Direction okay and why does it have magnitude and Direction back there oh that's I was to say but why you know how is rotation and an you know.way but he wants something more basic. "I want something morebasic" he says. "That's what I'm looking for. That's what's on my mind. I'm just trying to figure out how to do it" obviously rotation is how can you add rotations what's up with that you know it You' seen this in Cloud yeah huh and that's right and why is that say again okay that'sright but let me ask you something if I said look I'm standing at this right I'm. I'm looking at you right now and I'm like, "What is this?" and you say, "Oh, it's rotation" and you're like "Oh my God, what is rotation?" and it's like "I don't know what to say" and then you say it again. going to rotate about my vertical axis and then do this my hands up here right but if I rotate my hand first and oh that did the same thing but you know what I mean angles don't add up right if I change the order in which I add. If I add my hands first and then add them in a different order, they don't look the same. I don't know how to do it right, but I can do it with my hands in a certain order. angles they don't add up right so if I said 45° up and I'm going to trade 45° my arms up here right why is the angle adding up here a has something changed over the weekend if I turn 45° anyway. clockwise and counterclockwise means yeah there's a plus minus two angles right but you know where. If you add up angles they shouldn’t add up. something happened this weekend and all my angles are adding up yep. well look should vectors add upright angles don'tadd up right. I'm going with this yeah. I'll just tell you the low the simple thing is angles don't add up but infinite decimal angles do add up. I'm assuming you did this in physics okay so if I rotate about one axis a. If I rotate  about one axis  a. If I rotate about one axis a. if I rotate about one axis a, if I  rotate  about one axis  if I  Rotate  if I Rotate. I Rotate if I Rotate If I rotate. certain amount 30° and then rotate about another axis 30° right if I reverse the sequence they don't add up but if I rotate about one axis like a tenth of a degree and then rotated about anotheraxis a tenth, a degree. and then Ireverse the sequence it adds up. If I rotate. about oneaxis like a ten of adegree and then rotating about another. axis a tenth-of a degree, it will add up to a certain amount of 30°. If it doesn't, it won't and I'll have to go back and try again. actually come pretty close all right so it turns out that infini dismal angles do add up so while in general rotation about different angles right it doesn't different axes doesn't add up infinis dismal rotations do. Because angle of velocity is D Theta by DT right and it's angle of Velocity is D theta byDT right. And it's.actually comepretty close allright so itturns out thatinfini dismal angle doAdd up so it doesn’t different angles doesn'tAdd up in general rotations right it's not. a vector if because it is about some direction and there's a d Theta here it turns out that angle of velocity is in fact a vector in the sense that there is an axis the angle is above that axis and if you you know have another angle of.a vector, it is a vector as well. Theta is a sign of a vector, which means the angle of a direction is above the direction it is going in. It is also a sign that the direction is moving in a certain way. velocity you add them up they do add up so the map does work out you understand am I making sense or not making sense any questions about this anyone yeah angles don't add up what I mean by anglesDon'tAddUp is that if I said um rotate rotate, if I say um rotate, rotate then rotate. If I say rotate and rotate, then rotate and so on. If you add all of these things up, the map works out. If it doesn't work out, you're not making any sense at all. a rigid body right take this rigid body body and we we have two rotations one is about this direction right I was I was a little quick because I assumed you seen it before but I'm noticing that you haven't seen this before perhaps they don't talk to you. I was going to ask you if you had ever seen this body before but you said you had never seen this one before so I'm going to show it to you again. It's a little bit different. about this in physics anymore so maybe let me take a step back and describe it in more detail. Let's take this rigid body right this is a z Direction let's call that X Y and Z so let's say I'm going to rotate it about Z 90° and then rotate it again to get the shape of the body. We can see that the body has a rigid body and a rigid z Direction. The rigid body is a body that has a Z Direction and a Y Direction. I'm going to rotate it about x x is this right so it ends up like this so remember this it was facing you right I started like this z x so it's facing you now instead I if I said rotated about X first and then rotated about Z instead I would have said rotate about X then rotate about Z. I started with X then rotated it about Z so it was now facing you. I rotated it like X first then rotated to Z then rotated back to X. I rotate it again so it is facing you again. you understand so if I just took Theta as a Theta with this vector and I said apply these two rotations well depending on the sequence in which you added the rotation vectors up you end up with a different position right but vectors don't have the problem when you apply them well. You end up in a different place right. You don't get the same result if you don't apply the rotations in the right order. You get a different result depending on which order you applied them in. add two vectors it doesn't matter what sequence you add them in right if I have two vectors whether I do this or whether I write this first and do this the net Vector is the same you get it so if I'm going to treat angles like vectors they they are treated like vectors. If I have a vector and an angle and I add them together, the net vector is also the same so I can use both vectors in the same way. The net Vector of a vector is the vector of the angle it is in. should add up correct regardless of sequence they must give the same result but they don't. It turns out that here if I take a very tiny rotation not 90° but like. 1° then the sequences do actually add up okay and this is the sort of thing that happens. It's not a perfect solution but it's better than what I thought it was going to be and it's a step in the right direction. I hope it helps you out too. If you have any questions, please post them in the comments below. of thing you need to kind of walk around with a book you know and people will think you're nuts but you know do that and you'll see that the angles kind do add up you get it. So that's why when you take small angles they doadd up, that's the reason why you need a book to do it. You need to have a book so that you can do it, you know, so you can see what you're doing, you can understand it, so that's what you do.  angle of velocity is a measure of the rate of change of angle so it's a d Theta. angular of velocity does add up so you can treat it. It's a very tiny angle get it in a moment of time right in a verytiny moment ofTime so it adds up. Theta is the ratio of the angle to the speed of the movement of the object. It is also known as the angle of change in angle or angle of the change of velocity. It can be used to measure the speed and angle of an object in space and time. it as a vector in the math works out in the answer to Sam's comment okay so what that means is and this is what I wanted to tell you if I have one frame a another frame B and another frame C so let's say this is frame a. It's a vector. It means that if I'm in a frame a and I have two frames B and two frames C, I'm going to be in frame B. If I have a frame C and a frame A, that's frame A. That's frame C. So that's what it means. right and um I'm frame B I'm going to rotate okay and as I rotate uh this this this thing which is frame C which is moving in my on me right then a Omega B is my my my angle of velocity right what's the direction this way that's the fra that's frame a I'm framing B. A Omega C is equal to a Omega b + B Omega C and this is what I wanted to tell you and the beauty of this is that if you can identify between two frames and angular of velocity. right then and between two other frames and you can create a sequence of frames. You can calculate the angle of velocity of the final frame so if you look like look at a like a a um like a really complex system a gimbal assembly for example right you can see what the angle is of the last frame. Right you can also see the speed of the frame and how it relates to the frame before it is shown in the frame.right you can view the speed and angle of the first frame in a sequence. can always find little joints right mechanical engineering is full of these you know one Dee Freedom joints we call them hinges for example right. We call them you know axes and you can always add up the angle of velocities and the net angle of velocity is the angle. You can alwaysAdd up the angles of velocity and you know how to work out the speed of the vehicle. You know one of the ways to work this out is to look at the speed and angle of the car and then add it up. of velocity of the final frame with respect to the first frame and that's a very beautiful thing. With this we can take really complex situations and break them down to Pairs and analyze the behavior of each of them add them up and you can get the behavior. of each other. It is a very complex thing which means that we can break it down to the smallest level possible. It's a really beautiful thing to be able to do that. It means that you can take very complex situations ... and analyze them in this way. the final you know in terms of that initial frame get it and W so we introduced the the velocity and then the next thing we did last last in the last class was I revealed to you this magic formula I said if you have a vector let's call it W and then get the velocity of the frame. The final frame is called W and the velocity is called the velocity. The first frame is the initial frame and the second is the velocity, and the third is the final frame. it n and you want to take its derivative with respect to the frame a now if you the way we did it was we would rewrite in in terms of the basis vectors of frame a right. A1 A2 a lot of math lot of derivatives. It's a very, very complex system. It takes a long time to get it right. It is a very complex set of equations. It can be very difficult to understand. It has a lot to do with the way that we think about space and time. We have to think about it in a different way. that's how we did it uh but and actually it was Andrew asked he said isn't there a nice way to kind of simplify the derivatives here it is if it turns out it's more convenient to take the derivative of that Vector in b then you can do this. That's how they did it. It was Andrew who asked for a way to simplify the derivative. that's how it was done. It's a little bit different than the way we usually do it but it's the same principle. but you need this correction term which is very beautiful done okay so this was the magic formula that I introduced in the last class. How would we go about proving this anybody yeah do the math how would we do theMath how wouldWe prove this here's what. Here's what you need to do to prove this. Do you know how to do this? If so, please share your story with CNN iReport. If you have a story to share, please email it to iReport@cnn.com. we'll do let's prove it let's consider a frame a by the way you notice I will always show frames with this little circle a saying that it's a frame and with a little wiggly line pointing to it. I willalways do that if I don't stop me and if you stop me I'll always do that. We'll do it. Let's prove that we can do this. We're going to do it! We'll prove it. We've done it! Let's do it!" make sure I do it okay let's say there's a frame B so frame a for example could be the TR the projector frame B could be a transparency sliding on the projector got it now you can always assume if I have a capital A that that little A1 and A1 will be in the frame A1 frame B frame B. Got it now? Let's go to the next frame. The next frame will be the frame B and the frame a frame A frame A. The last frame B is the frame C frame C. The final frame A will be a frame D frame D. The first frame A is a frame E frame E. little A2 are the basis vectors okay or the unit vectors you can always assume that little B1 and little B2 are basis Vector vectors in b. I'm going to stop writing it because it just clutters up the diagram now let's assume I have a vector let's call it B1. Little B1 is the basis vector in b and little A2 is the base vector in B. Little A1 and Little B2 can also be called the unit vector in a. n and that's that it's given to us for some reason naturally for example maybe it's fixed in frame B. Maybe it's a spider walking you know away from the center of frame B which is the frisbe whatever. Let's assume that you have a vector written in terms of a vector.n. and that’s what we’re trying to do here. We're trying to get the shape of a spider in the frame of frame A. We’ll try to get it to look like a spider on frame B in the same way. frame B's unit basis vectors let's let's assume n is equal to sum U1 which is not a constant time B1 + U2 * B2 now what I'm trying to prove is this formula how would I go about doing it someone wake up everyone's asleep wake up wake up. I'm going to try to prove this formula. I'll be back in a few minutes with a better idea of how to do it. I don't know how to prove it, but I'll try. yeah let's Express exactly we're going to express B so here's what we're looking for. We are looking for a d by DT of N and look n is expressed in terms of B1 and B2 that's really not nice. We need expressed in Terms of A1 and A2 to do what we need to do. We're looking to express the word 'N' in the form of a 'd' or a 'n' by a 'dot' or 'dot', for example. it old way the long way right so the way you would do it is convert it to an A1 and A2 representation. Can you please look at your notes and tell me what B1 is in terms of A1 or A2 quick look atyour notes say it again. It's the same thing as saying it again, it's just a different way of saying it. It is the same way as saying "it's a little bit bigger than A1" or "a little bit smaller than A2" or something like that. is it plus or minus so B1 is cosine Theta A1 is that right everyone in agreement okay good excellent plus U2 sin it's actually minus sin TheTA A1 plus cosine theta A2 all vectors. okay I need to sorry sorry okay yes um I'm going to finish that down. I'm sorry sorry sorry. I was just going to say that it's minus sin theta Theta Thea Thea A2. I didn't mean to make it sound like that. here so will you please expand it for me what does that come out to be this is the left hand side of that formula right and we'll do the right hand side separately and show that the two are the same I'm trying to prove it to you right. Here's the left side of the formula. Here is the right side. Here are the left and right hand sides of the same formula. We'll do them separately to show that they're the same. We're going to do the same thing on the other side. so I'm not you know I'm doing just very boring stuff but we need to do it just establish it. What is uh d by a d by DT of U1 cosine Theta it is U1 do cosine theta right minus U Theta do. So that's what I'm trying to do. I'm just trying to establish it what is uhd by ad byDT of U 1 cosinetheta. That's what's going on here. So, that's why it's so interesting to me. U1 do cosine Theta U2 do sin Theta no it doesn't simplify right. Below what do I get mhm Theta one here this should be a Theta dot right yeah okay so these are the terms um any simplification does anyone anything cancel out here I should shouldn't I so is this one or two one what is this this one one 2 okay is this correct okay and does it simplify U1 docosineTheta U1dosinTheta. This is the left hand side you want U1 dot okay now is there some scope for a to rewrite this in terms of B1 and B2 is U what is U1.and so this is the this is. the left-hand-side you want to write on the right-hand side. This is the right hand side of the page that you are going to be writing on. And so this. is the. this is what the left side of this page looks like when you are writing on it. do A1 what is A1 cosine theta plus A2 sin Theta huh B1 uhuh so this is U1 do B1 what else this is B2 plus U1 Theta do B2plus U2 do B 2 minus or plus huh okay so that's the left hand side up there okay any questions any questions? If you have any questions, please feel free to email me at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. I would like to hear from you. about this you you can even ask me Sanjay why are you doing this go ahead you can ask me that thank you. I'm doing this because I want to show you that that magic formula is simply a compaction of a lot of math that's it okay so I'm. Sanjay: "I'm doing it to show that the world is not as simple as we think it is. It's not just a set of rules that you have to follow to get to the top" going to write it out Brute Force take derivatives using geometry that you understand and show you that you get that formula and it really works. So that when you use it you don't feel uncertain that's it okay so this is the left hand side up there now let's go to the right hand side. Now let's try it out on the left side. Let's see how it works. Now we're going to try it on the right-hand side. It's going to be a little bit different. compute the right hand side up there what would the so the right side would be to take U1 B1 plus U2 B2 and take the derivative with respect to to frame B right yes maybe right so tell me what it comes out to be. What's the first word that comes out of your brain when you think of a word? What is the first thing that comes to your mind when you try to think of it? What do you come up with? Tell me what comes to you. term on the right hand side mhm B2 let's see if these terms show up there do they aha yes this shows up this showsUp so this matches this matches right so now let's take a Omega B what is a Omega A folks quick Theta dot it's a Theta A. Term on the left hand side of the page is called a B2 term.term. term on theright hand side is known as a B3 term. term is a B4 term and term for a B5 term. a vector B3 isn't it the. A3 why is it the B3 they're the same. What if they're not the same hm well here's the deal by the definition of angle of velocity if you can define an angle of. velocity between two frames there's got to be one axis. If you can't define it then you're not looking at the right angle. So you're looking at a different axis. So that's what we're trying to do here. that's aligned get it okay so that right hand side term and we're going to use B3 instead of A3 just because our Math's going to be simplifi simplified right. Theta do B3 cross product with u 1 + B1 U1. That's aligned. that's aligned and we'll use B2 instead of B3 next time. That'll be Theta. That will be the next time we do it. We'll be using B2 next time and using B3. sorry B1 + U2 B2 sorry right and if you do the math does it come out to be these two terms yes or no yes. so if youDo the math there I'm not doing it because I want you guys to stay awake in class I don't want.sorry B2 + U1 + B2 B1 B1 U1 B2 U1 U2 U3 U3 B3 U4 B4 B5 B6 B7 B8 B9 B9 to just blindly copy down the notes here right so it all works out okay I will never ask you to prove something like this in an exam right this is almost like a solved example. I want you to understand that it all worked out that's it and if. you don't understand that, then don't do it. If you can't understand what I'm saying, then I'm not going to tell you what to do. If. you can understand that I'm telling you to do it, then you're going to obey me. I'm going to show you how it works. you're confused that is fantastic because that's a symptom of something else and I'd like to surface it and help you figure it out any confusion about this anything. yes claudo right clauda what's your name oh sorry go over how you got that last term in there again say say "claudo" and then go over it again. You're confused. That is fantastic. That's a sign that you're confused and I'm here to help you with it. it again just go over how you got that last term this term so I took so look what's the magic formula it is the left hand side is this is equal to b d by DT of n right in the B frame plus this correction term right so so it's equal to a d by b d and DT is a d plus a correction term. It's equal. to a n by n and the correction term is a n plus a b d plus the b d is a DT. It is equal. the first term here was BD by DT of n the second term is simply that this guy make sense John you convinced no no no are you convinced uh convinced enough okay anybody else you've totally got to get this Andrew yeah you had a rotating and Des okay okay. The first term wasBD by DT byDT of n. The second term wasDT by BD of n, and the third term isBD by Des. The fourth term is BD by Des, the fifth term is DT by BD, the sixth term is Des. let's do that so let's imagine I'm spinning a basketball on my finger I could never do that but let's just imagine I am doing it right. I'm standing at this and spinning a Basketball on my Finger. The room the world the Earth is a frame the basketball is another. I can't do it right but I can try. I'll show you how I do it when I'm done. I want you to try it with me. You can do it with your whole body. frame the kind of the U you know you guys need to be like uh Neo in Matrix have you seen that movie right it's very very important if you understand Matrix algebra you need to see Matrix all right so go see Matrix and you know how Neil kind of feels about Matrix? Neil feels the same way about Matrix. Neil feels that Matrix is a very important part of his life and that he needs to be a part of it. Neil: Matrix is very important to my life and I need to make sure I get to see it as much as possible. of you know he when he's totally you know after Lawrence fishburns you know kind of trained him Etc. He goes down and he can see he stops seeing buildings and he sees these characters you know flowing instead of the building right he sees right through all of the the the "Fantastic Four" films. "The Godfather" is out now on Blu-Ray and DVD. Click here for more information on The Godfather: A Biography of Lawrence Fishburns. video game right so similarly so what others see is a is a basketball spinning. What you see once you're done with the scores is you will see an embedded V embedded in the frame. You know with its AR you know pointy arrows sticking out of the basketball get it. Video game is similar to a basketball game. It is a spinning video game. You will see a V embedded into the frame you know with your AR youknow pointy arrow sticking out the basketball. Video games are similar to basketball games. You can kind of do this Freeze Frame where you frame you freeze it.and you would see it spinning. But one of the axes which is the one one pointing up ain't sping right. It remains vertical got it? You can see it right but it's not sping. It's not spinning right. You can do a Freeze Frame to see if it's sping or not. It is sping, it's just not spinning. It doesn't look like it's spinning. then a second you freeze it again you measure the angle and that's Delta Theta over Delta time so you get angular of speed and this this the vertical axis is frozen get it. So you get that the angular velocity of the basketball is upwards is my hand waving. Then a second later you measure it again to get the angle of speed. Then you get the speed of the ball over the distance of the angle. Then the speed over distance is the speed at which the ball is moving. can are you following me here can you see it right anyone not see it I'll it's basically all I'm saying is that here's me this is my finger right here's the basketball okay my hand here'sThe basketball it's spinning. What you guys should see is these embedded vectors. Can you see them? Can you follow me here? Can't you see they're embedded vectors? can you follow us here? Are you following us? Are we following you? Can we follow you? basis vectors sticking out so you'll only see kind of the surface you know sticking out right and then you see these two rotating like that right but that guy stationary. So in your mind there's an angle of velocity that that basketball has with respect to the ground.basis vector sticking out. You'll only seen kind of. the surface sticking outright and thenyou see thesetwo rotating like. that right. But that guy is stationary and so in your. mind there is an angle. of velocity. that that Basketball has withrespect to the. ground. got it now if I was spinning it this way which I couldn't because of gravity but let's say that you know it was at a different angle. You can always introduce a frame on the earth such that you knows everything lines up right you just want to pick up the ball and spin it. It's a bit of an art form, but it's a good way to get the feel for the ball. It just takes a little bit of time to get used to the feel of it. a frame and be done with it okay any more questions about this very important hey let me ask you another question when I say frame is rotating with this is this is a tough one so let us say there is a frame rotating with respect to another frame. This is a very important part of what we are trying to do. We want to make sure that we are doing the right thing when we are moving a frame. We don't want to move a frame to the side of a frame and not the other side. is it rotating about a point or let me put it differently is there such a thing as angle of velocity about a points. When a frame rotates on another frame for an instant with respect to that other frame there might be a point that does not move get it that is called the instantaneous Center of rotation. But that but the angle of Velocity is in about that point it's the angles of velocity of the frame. The instantaneous Center might move and you know withrespect to another frame that's translating it might be. some other point right get it so look if I do this if I'm spinning it you know the center is staying stationary so that is the instantaneous Center of rotation but this Frame there's no kind of special point because with respect to someone who's flying overhead with a plane. The center of rotation is not the instantaneous center of the frame. The instantaneous center is the center of a plane's rotation. The Center of the Frame is the point at which a plane is flying overhead. It's not a special point for a plane flying overhead, it's just the point of rotation. constant velocity the instantaneous cental rotation is going to be some other point the frame has an angular of velocity it's not an angular velocity about a point get it so you need to dispel that if you if you have that confusion try and think about it there is no such thing as an angular Velocity about a points it is anangular velocity of the frame period end of story just so happens that with respect to some other frame there might be a point which is instantaneously not in motion and that's the instantaneous Central rotation. that's just a special thing just a the ey picks that up but that's not fundamental okay so that's angle of velocity so here's what I'm going to do now I'mGoing to solve uh our old problem Spidey spider the spider on the Frisbee using um your claudo right yeah okay using frames uh using angle of Velocity so the problem was we have the ground we have a spider I'm sorry the spider is some distance away from the center we. call that point Q now and I want to make another editorial comment here we call this length L. We said this distance is U and thisdistance is V. This is very informal I'll formalize this later on how many times we call a point Q. We call a distance U and a distance V. We called a distance L and a length V. And we called a length Q. And a length L is a distance that is longer than a distance. And so on and so on. degrees assume 2D right assume this it's like a hockey puck it's sliding around the ground how many degrees of freedom does the um does the U frisbee have two dimensions in two Dimensions? I have a Frisbee and it's you know I'm I'm throwing it in a flat on. I'm going to try and get it to go in two directions. I have to get it in two dimensions. I've got to get the ball in two different places. a flat plane right how many degrees of freedom does it have three okay how many. degrees offreedom does the insect have in the same plane in thesame plane what was that can it depend on which frame you're looking at well I'm just asking you how many degree of freedom do you have in a flat plane and a plane in a different plane? I'm trying to figure out how to answer that question, I think. I don't know how to say it. I just want to get it out of my system. degrees of fedom does an insect have on a plane treat is a point okay it's a treat like a DOT it's only two right but yet we characterize this situation with three parameters okay and the parameters are the positions of the center of the frisbe right and the points of the insect's antennae right and left. We characterize the situation with 3 parameters okay. And the 3 parameters are: 1. the position of the antennae in the air, 2. the distance between them, and 3. the angle at which the antenna is pointing. distance of the spider and the angle of theSpider from the center of the Frisbee right and assuming the spider is only moving in a straight line. Then we just need a distance right so what we're doing is we're saying. We're saying that the spider should be moving at a distance of at least a few feet away from the frisbee. If it's not moving at that distance then the spider must be moving away in a different direction. The spider should then be at an angle of about 30 degrees or more from the Fr isbee. those are the three parameters that change in our geometry and with those three parameters we're going to capture the blocation of the spider but we're using three parameters but in the end the SP spider is only going to have two degrees of freedom right but that's okay because that's what we're trying to do. Those three parameters are: 1, 2, 3. The 3rd is the position of the spidey and the 4th is the angle of its head. The 5th and 6th are the angles of its body and the 7th and 8th are its legs. when you get the velocity of the spider it'll have only two components when get the acceleration only have two components so it'll work itself out. The three parameters are u v and L the way we're doing our geometry we're saying the the spider. We're saying that the spider will have a velocity and acceleration of u v. and L. We'll show you how to do it in the video below. Click here to watch the full video in its entirety. The full video will be available in full in the next few days. look this is just in formal okay I'll formalize this ston right uh actually that's right we're using four thank you we're use fourThank you I forgot about Theta thank you Ted right using four parameters right but in the end that insect can go right or left or right or right. Theta is a form of theta, which is the study of the movement of the body. It's a study of how the body moves in a way that allows it to change direction. up or down in the black on the Blackboard right so it has only two degrees of freedom the insect but we're using four parameters to capture this whole system. The reason is that we need to capture the location of the spider but we also need to figure out where the spider is. We're using the four parameters in order to capture these whole system and the reason for this is because we want to be able to see the whole system at once. We want to see it all at once and see it from all angles. out where the frisbee is so that we can do the math with respect to the Frisbee Etc right so we're capturing it in terms of these parameters. I just want to say this leave it for the time being we'll come back and I'll you know in the context of the context. We'll be back in a week or so with a new set of questions. We're looking forward to hearing from you. We've got a lot of questions for you. of Dynamics it'll become more clear when we talk about degrees of freedom and parameters and things like that it'll all become more. clear but I just want to say this the parameters are the things that change okay so how do I use the the magic formula to find out what it is that I'm looking for? It's the parameters that change, that's what we're looking for. We're looking to find the parameters of Dynamics.of Dynamics. It'll be more clear later on in the show when we go into more detail about the parameters. the the acceleration the velocity and acceleration of the of the insect anybody how do I begin write down the yeah always begin by writing down the position Vector. so r o s is equal to U A1 Plus V A2 plus L B1 L is the distance of the Insect. the the acceleration is the velocity the insect is at when it is flying. the velocity is the acceleration. is the speed the insect travels at. the distance it travels is the length of the distance the Insect travels at the speed of flight. spider from the center of the fris oh oh I call it Q sorry sorry I'm sorry q h say it again ah let me ask you when I write a position Vector does it need a reference frame doesn't the only thing where I can get away without writing. Q sorrysorry I'msorry Q sorrySorry sorry I're sorry Q sorry Sorry Sorry Sorry Q Sorry sorry Q Sorry Sorry I'm Sorry QSorry Sorry I am sorry QSorry I amsorry I amSorry I'mSorry. a a uh reference frame is when I write a vector at a vector is just you know the frame when the frame is implicit in the basis vectors get it? I don't need to say it's with respect to a or withrespect to a. A frame is a reference frame that's implicit in a vector's basis vectors. It's the frame I use when I'm writing a vector, not the one I'm using to write it in the first place. I'm not using a frame to write a a vector in the same way as I do a a a frame. B it's just a mishmash of little vectors that are all defined in terms of parameters it's it's an important question you need to understand this. This actually encapsulates the geometry of this entire problem right because if I CH change U1 the whole thing is going to move move move. It's just one of many ways to look at a problem that is very difficult to solve. It is a very difficult problem to solve because it is very complex. It has to be solved in a very specific way. to the right if I change U uh V uh sorry if I changed uh sorry U the frisbe is moving to the rightif I change V. Theta the whole thing is rotating because it'll change B1 right if i change Theta. The frisbee is moving up right if  I change Theta. If I change B1, the Frisbee will move to the left. If I change the Frisbee, it will move up to theright. change L the spider's running away from the Frisbee okay by the way if you if you ever end up in video game games writing video games Graphics Etc this is it this is how you do Graphics it's the geometry of points right so imagine you were writing a video game where you had a spider running around a frisbee right and maybe you you know and the frisbees is you know flying about and you want to write a videogame where you want. to put a I don't a bigger spider. spider towards the middle whatever right the geometry would be this the this is how you would do it get it so think video games kinematics is video games actually okay and when you change the parameters things change parametrically that's also called parametric design okay okay so how do you do it? You can do it by changing the parameters. You can make it look like a video game. You could do it like a movie. It would look like this. It's a little bit like a game. we solve the problem now I want both the velocity and acceleration of the spider quick H take the derivatives right so the velocity of theSpider is a v oh Q. I call it Q Vector so a being a derivative I need a frame is equal to a Q Vector. I want a frame to have a velocity that is the same as the acceleration. I need the velocity to be equal to the acceleration so a frame has a velocity of Q Vector and an acceleration of Q. This is the solution to the problem of how to measure a spider. d by DT of this Vector which is now these two guys no problem I can write them as U1 Dot A1 Plus U uh sorry V Dot A2 not U1 not U2 but U do V Dot right plus now I need I have this kind of mismatched.d byDT of this vector which isnow these two men no problem. I can writing them as  U1 Dot  A1 Plus U uh sorry  V Dot  U1  U2  UUh sorry U1 U2 UUhSorry U1 U2 UUh sorry V Dot A2 UUUhSorry V Dots A2 U1U2 U uhSorry V Dot A D Dot A U UU1 U1 Plus. term where I'm taking the derivative respect to a but I have this Vector expressed in terms of the B1 basis Vector right before I would convert it all to a one and do the math today now with this with the magic formula we can rewrite this as what we want it to look like. We can rewrite it as what it would look like if it were written as a function of a B1 Vector and a B2 basis Vector. And we can do the same thing with a B3 basis Vector as well. so um first of all L is a scalar so there are a couple of routes we can go here okay and I just want to give you the routes one thing we could do is we could say l do a by DT B1 plus B1 you know we know we can do that. So there are some routes that we could go here and we could try and do some of them. We could do one of them where we go by DTB1 plus DTB2 plus B2 and one where we do it by DTD1 plusDTB3. can kind of do it that way but the simple way to do it is to simp well you know it doesn't matter we can just write this as B. Take the whole term d by DT of lb1 plus what quick hm I'm hearing a hesitant murmur not the lb1 part of the word d. The word d is the abbreviation for d/d/d, or d/e, d/f, f/e or f/f. The d word is also used to refer to the letter "d" or "e" yeah I was mumbling something a moment ago I'll tell you what I mean what I was trying to say uh cross lb1 what is a Omega B so we can rewrite a Omega b as Theta dot B3 and so this whole thing comes down to I'm going to change the name of the Omega b to Thetadot B3. That's what I'm trying to do. I'm changing the name from the Omega B to the Theta Dot B3 because that's what it means to me. write the answer here to save a Blackboard. What's the what's the answer what is avq what which is the answer we got before as well right now what I was mumbling I started mumbling in the middle of the class I do that often I also drool that's okay. What is avQ what? What's avq? What is Avq? Avq is an abbreviation for the word avq, which is an acronym for avq. avq is the abbreviation we used to say "avq" um what I was trying to say here was you can go a couple of ways with this right you can say l is a scaler and pull it out and just apply this whole thing to you know do by CH by by by uh uh use the chain rule. You can go one of a number of ways to get the same result. I'm going to try to give you a few examples of what I think you can do with it. I'll let you know how it goes. or you can just treat the whole thing like one vector get it and they're both okay they'll both come out with the same answer that's okay okay because L is a scaler. L is doesn't care what a reference frame is B1 is a vector it cares which reference frame you take its derivative in L doesn't you understand so you can do this by by by Parts I'm Sorry by Chain Rule and say l dot you know um L dob1 + L A. by DT of B1 whichever way you do it the answer will come out to be the same just go naturally understand the the basics go naturally it'll work itself out is my point. All the rules apply okay all right so now we want to calculate the acceleration now. Now we're going to do the acceleration. We're doing the acceleration, we're doing it now. Let's do it. Now, let's do the speed. And now, we'll do it again. We'll go to the top. we want to do the acceleration plus you how do we do this come on say it again yep take the derivative again so we're going to go so we'll go. I'll just write it all out and we'll do it neatly. We'll do the derivative of this guy right I'lljust write all of this out. We want to go. We've got to go now. We have to go on. We're going on now. I'm going to take it to the next level. this time d by DT of u. A1 Plus v. A2 plus L dob1 plus Theta do L B2. that's why we Tak the derivative of the first two terms are easy. It's going to be uble do A1 plus vble dot A2plus what do we do now come come. That's what we're going to call it. We're not going to say it's a new word. We'll just call it a new name. on someone back there huh magic formula right and so the magic formula the way it will come out is this is going to break down to two terms. The first term is it's going to be b d by DT sorry it'sGoing to be two terms the first term the first. It will be bd by DT and then it will be d byDT. It'll be a two-term term. It's not going to just be a 'b' and a 'd' It will have two terms in it. term is b d by DT of B1 of l. B1 plus a Omega B I'm going to stop writing a OmegaB I'll just call it lb3 to save our soul sorry theta. B3 cross l dob1 so these are the two terms from this guy and what do I do with the next term I repeat it. Theta do L B2 plus a omega B which is the B3Cross theta B3. L B1 is that complete have I missed any terms? on purpose by mistake you never know with me with me I think it's correct okay and that is U do a1+ v. A2 plus this is going to be easy now it's going to been L double do B1 and this isGoing to be what B2 Plus this is now. I think I'm doing it right. I don't think I've ever done this before. I'm going to try to do it again. I hope I've done it right this time. I'll try again. we need to do this guy by by in the using the chain rule right because the two terms you have to take the derivative of right say it again. I'm sorry oh l dot here yeah so here what do we have we get th. lb2 L do B2. We need to use the chain rules to get the right word. We can't use the word 'right' without using the 'chain rule' which means we have to use a derivative of the word right. We must use the ' chain rule' to get right. so by the way you notice this term showed up twice right that'll become so anyway we'll remember that plus what is this and let's summarize this and you have to admit wasn't the math M simple simpler than the first long way right because we used a trick we used. So anyway we're going to do the math. We're doing the math, we're doing it. We've done the math and we've got the answer. So we'll do it again. We'll do the same thing again. compacted the math recognizing the magic formula right and it was all initiated by Andrew. Andrew who asked the question why don't you do it right for which he gave up his watch AJ I'm going to show the videos now okay just to kind of break them on monotonous prob. Compacted theMath.com video. Compactor the math.com Video. Compacting the math recognizes themagic formula right. Comparing the math to the math was a challenge for Andrew. Compaling the math recognized the magic Formula right. start with the um Med go round and then the other one right so this is it I'll tell you when to start uh which on this one right okay I'llTell you whento start in a second right so these are all the terms they're going to be. Start with the Med go go round. Then the other round. And then the third. And the fourth. And so on and so on until you've gone through all of them. And you've got them all figured out. there should be one two three did we miss anything oh we missed something for sure yeah okay um help me remind me what these terms are what is this guy translation acceleration what is. this guy spidey's acceleration with respect to the Frisbee what is  this guy yes and what is this guy's acceleration with respect to the frisbee. What is this person's speed with respect to the Frisbee? What is this guy's speed with  respect to the Frisbees? you'll notice with coris these two terms always show up in different places and they add up just and it becomes two right what is this guy cental what's this guy it's called Oiler whatever okay if you as I said if one of you invents a new term if you're a coris fan you'll notice that the two terms are always shown up in the same places. You'll notice they're always in different parts of the same place and they always add up to two. we'll name it after you okay and and so far I've used these words coris and all that I kind of called them out without telling you a lot more about them right so what we're going to do now is take a break in the following way I'm going to go back to the beginning of the show. We're going back to where we started. We'll be back in a few minutes. We've got a lot of things to talk about, but we're not going to say them right now. to pull down the uh the uh screen I'm going to show you some videos showing you the coris force. When I'm when you're done with these videos um you will a totally understand what the cholis not effect sorry not force cholis acceleration is and B have a headache. I'll be back in a few minutes with a video on how to use your phone's camera to take a picture of your phone in the car. I'm back. I hope you've enjoyed the video. all right and then we're going to go back and do the super magic formula where we actually lay these things out. We'll derive a very general formula for something moving on something that's moving get it no seriously. It's going to be a general formula you see. We're not going to get into it too much. We don't want to get too into it. We just want to show you what we're capable of. We want you to see what we can do. We hope you'll join us. all the formula that you have so far are for something moving on a frame right but now we're going to kind of but this frisbee is something moving. on something that's already moving so we'regoing to come up with a general formula for that and for the lack of a lack of frisbees in the world. We're not going to get into that right now. We just want to make sure that we get the frisbees in the right place. We don't want to miss out on the fun. of a better term because it doesn't doesn't have a name I named it the super magic formula as a code word in this class so it turns out that several people have done research uh and I mean not like hard C technical research but research involving merar rounds. It turns out to be a really good way to learn about the world around you. It's a really great way to get to know people and learn about different cultures and different ways of looking at the world. It really is a very interesting way of learning. bowling balls billiard stables and a lot of Courage on um the use of on demonstrating um the Coriolis effect and these videos if we can get them going are actually very very interesting okay and what you'll see by the way here okay just one second a before I give you a look at some of the things we've been working on for the last few weeks. We're going to try and get these videos going as soon as we can. If we can, we'll show you how to do it. set it up right I just want to set it up so these are four kids they're sitting on a Mero round and then someone comes and starts spinning the Mero around right. There are two cameras there's one camera outside that is attached to the Earth looking down so it's a bit of a challenge to get it to work. It's a lot of work but it's worth it, I think. I've had a great time doing it so far. I'm looking forward to the next few weeks. what you see from about is what really happens in in inertial frame right which is things want to go straight but the kid in the m go around sees something different. G volume turned up to an observer above the merry go around the path of the ball appears to be different to the way it really is. The ball appears in a different way to what it actually is in the frame of view of the observer. The game is played on a merry go round in the middle of a football field. straight isn't it straight to someone sitting on it the ball appears to curve to the left this exemplifies the Corola Force. An observer on the rotating Earth the path of an object appears to be deflected and this is a result of the Earth's rotation get it kind of the way it looks. The Corola force can also be seen on the surface of the moon. It can be seen in the shape of a circle or a pentagon on the moon's surface. It is also seen on Earth's surface in the form of a star. got it kind of all right let's do the other one all right so this is to this one I discovered uh I think last night and um there are two dudes who went to a high school and they put a bilard a pool table a bilar table on. Got it all right? Let's do this one allright. So I discovered this one last night. I discovered it last night, and um I think it was last night or the night before. There are two dude who went. to aHigh School. They put a Bilard a Pool table a Pool Table on. top of the mound okay and then they did some experiments and these are very committed people. I must say was obviously also a cold day and I just thought I'd put it up just to show you the power of human Innovation go ahead but these these dudes are very, very committed. It's a very cold day but they're very committed and they're going to do it. I'm proud to be part of this team and I hope you're proud of them as well. I love you all. totally into it so they don't stop but the real the funny thing is that the kids actually can't see all this because they're below the level of the pool table so they're like jumping off you know okay so let me explain what's going on here so it turns out to be a really funny thing. The kids actually couldn't see it because they were below thelevel of the Pool table. So it turns into a really fun, funny thing to watch. The children are like, "Oh my God, they're jumping off the table" out and then we're going to do the super magic formula in about a minute right it turns out that with respect to someone standing in space and not rotating with the planet earth right so if you're standing above the North Pole and you're looking down at the Earth. If you are standing above that North Pole you're not looking down on the Earth right so you can't see the Earth from there. So if you are in space you are not looking at the earth from space. You are looking at it from above it. rotating it's like a mer around right a particle of air which is moving for one reason or another with respect to me it's going to move in a straight line. But to people sitting on the earth because they kind of move rotating away they're going to see it. It's like an image of the Earth rotating around the sun. It is like a picture of the sun moving around the Earth. It can be seen by anyone sitting on it and it can also be seen from space. kind of Swing Away get it and what happens with things like hurricanes and we'll show you I'll show some videos later if we have time is so now you're you're on the North Pole right you're sitting in the North pole and this is the Earth this is. Kind of Swing away get it. Get it and we will show you what it's like to be on the Earth and what it looks like to live on the surface of the Earth. We'll be back in a few days. the North Pole okay you're looking down a particle when it's let's say there's a low pressure right. Let's say this's aLow pressure region here low pressure so when all the particles start rushing towards it because it's low pressure. Right but they think they're going in a straight. The particles think they are going to go straight. But they are rushing towards a region of low pressure because they think it's a straight path. The North Pole is a low-pressure region. It's a very low pressure region. line but meanwhile the uh this guy right is attached to the Earth kind of it's moving with the Earth so with respect to us the particle kind of vears off to the right get it and then it collapses into a spin this way. That's why hurricanes and hurricanes and that's why Hurricane Katrina hit the U.S. in 2005. "It's a particle that's attached to a planet and it's going to get hit the planet. It's not going to hit us, but it will get hit us," he says. tornadoes and stuff like that that's why it spins in a certain direction in the north on in the Northern hemosphere. The southern emisphere spins the other way right because the particles going to rush in and then they Veer to the right. Then they get sucked in. That's why the north spins the way it does because it's in the northern hemisphere and the southern one spins in the southern hemisphere. It's because of the particles that are going in and the way they rush in. in this kind of rotation so you've probably heard about uh about sinks right about about uh toilet bowls and stuff like that and how you know water rotates in One Direction or not in the northern hemisphere. Another Direction on the southern hemisphere is that right is that valid? That's what we're trying to figure out. So we're going to try and figure out how to get it to work in this way. We'll let you know when we've got it figured out in the next few days. yes or no why not yeah it's turns out that in that scale in fact there is a Coriolis effect. But the slight deviation angle is so slight it's like a fractions of a degree per meter at that scale that it doesn't build up enough to really impact the world. Yes or no. Why not? Because it's so small. It's so tiny it's only a fraction of adegree per meter. It doesn't really have an impact on the world at all. direction in which the vortex takes place okay the vortex is created far more by asymmetries in the sink or by rotation that was created earlier that can of remained right okay the angle of momentum which we'll cover later on the class. It stays for a long time. It's a very strong vortex. It is very strong. It has a very long life. It can last for a very, very long time if it's not disturbed too much. It doesn't move very fast but it does move very slowly. and it influences things to go in one way or the other so it sinks you in fact you can construct a really large sink and you know apparently you can show it but it's very hard to do it. It's very difficult to kind of isolate environmental factors so it's hard to sort of isolate them from each other. So it's a very difficult thing to do but you know you can do it but you can't do it very well. So you can build a sink but it can't be as large as you think. sinks not a valid example but a valid one. The Coriolis effect is when something is moving that is translating with respect to frame which is itself. We'll now formalize it when things are moving that are translating withrespect to frame. This is a good example of what the Corioli effect is. We will formalize the effect when we'll formalize what it is when it is happening in a frame. We're going to look at the effect in this example of this guy. rotating other words there's a Theta Dot and an l dot term get it then there is a deflection in the B2 Direction in the way we've written it now. I'll give you the general formula and you know B2 what it is ETC it become more clear any questions any questions? If you have any questions about the formula, please contact us on 020 3615 9091 or e-mail jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. about coris by the way in the last class I told you this anecdote I said that artilleries artillery guns right in the 1700s 1800s um they would have to compensate for directionality because of the coris effect. But I made one mistake it turns out that when the Coro effect was discovered or when someone formulated it coris right the range of guns wasn't high enough for that that to have been you know really valid so it is true that in artillery you need to correct for the cori effect. that wasn't the reason the corus effect was discovered so I take it back right but there it is also true that in the in World War I when the British when a British Fleet near Faulkland ran into a German Fleet they spend they shot 1,000 shells uh taking a shot at the German Fleet. That was the reason for the Corus effect. That wasn't why the coru effect was found. that was the cause of the corrus effect. that wasn't reason the Coru Effect was discovered. the Coriolis effect of the northern hemisphere well they were in the Southern Hemisphere and missed and then 60 shells um they actually use the right correction and they nailed the German Fleet and they won that battle. So it's certainly true that by this you know by by the by the Coriolan effect. It's certainlyTrue that. by this. by by. the by-the-Coriolis Effect of the Northern Hemisphere well. they were. in the southern hemisphere and missed. and then60 shells um. they actually used the right corrections and they nails the German fleet and they win that battle so it'sCertainly true that. time World War I came along the range of these guns was high enough that the coriolus effect was relevant but I take back my earlier statement that was the uh uh motivation I don't I believe not any questions about this anyone any comments like the video you want. "I don't believe there was any question about it. I believe there were no questions about it," he said. "There was no question that it was relevant," he added. "It was relevant when World War II came along" "Why don't we just watch YouTube videos all day it'll be fun right all right what I'm going to derive now is a general formula for something that is moving with respect to something else which is also moving and this," he says. "This" is a YouTube video that shows how a company is moving in relation to another company that's moving in a similar way. "And this" is the formula for a company moving in the same direction as another thing that's also moving," he adds. is a very common thing a ship is moving and someone's moving on the ship a spaceship is moving. What is the force that the astronaut feels you know or what force must the astronaut exert in order to move. What force must an astronaut exert to move on the spa on the spaceship? What force does an astronaut have to exert to make a person move on a spa on a spaceship? How do you move a person on a spacewalk? What is your movement like? What forces do you have to have to move to make someone move? in a straight line with respect to a spaceship or a space shuttle or something given that this space shuttle itself isn't moving in a straight lines that's the question we seek to answer. "What we're going to do is basically generalize the Frisbee problem and the way we're doing it," he says. "We're basically trying to solve the problem of how do we get to the moon in the first place?" he adds. "It's a big challenge for us. It's a very big challenge" going to do it is like this we will Define as usual and you'll find this all repetitive because really it's all the same stuff over and over again. Just getting more and more compacted with more insights kind of teased out of it right and we're pretty much done. We'll Define it as usual, that's what we're going to do. It's all going to be the same. We're Defining as usual. That's the way we do it. with kinematics once we finish this concept it's beautiful and now by the way this kinematic that I've done is completely 3D right you can do any 3D system with this stuff. The way that we're doingkinematics is called the can's method of kinematically Kane K an. Kane K and I have been working on this concept for about a year. We hope to finish the concept in the next few months and show it off to the world. We're working on a number of other projects as well. is a professor at Stanford he I think he's still there retired um and uh kan's method is used uh to analyze the Dynamics of robots complex robots and Space Systems. So anyone who works in you know complex Aero Astro space system things like space shuttles with robots moving should use Kan's method to help them understand the complex robots they are working with. The method can be used to help you understand complex robots, robots and space systems. For more information on Kan's methods, visit his website. around Etc they use this method they use the symbology a b and all that right very few undergraduate courses on the planet uh learn teach the mechanisms that you've learned and understood right this is it that's all there is to on the kinematic side now Kan also has also has this method. Around Etc. they use these method they using the symbologist a b. and allThat right veryFew undergraduate courses in the planet. uh learn Teach the Mechanisms that you have learned and understanding right this. is it. a way of doing Dynamics which I won't tell you I'll do the Newtonian approach uh but you certainly on the kinematic side you've got it okay. So the problem we seek to solve now is a your frame a a I'm actually trying to derive a general formula that that will help us with the problem of how to get the most out of a video camera. I'll tell you what I'm trying to do, but I'm not going to tell you how to do it. captures what we did for the frisbe you have a frame B and what we're going to say is frame B is hurtling through space and SP frame a is our ground reference frame okay. In frame B let's assume that this is point what did I call it and in frame B we are going to assume that we are hurtling towards a point in space. We are in the middle of a leap of faith and we are trying to figure out how to get to that point. to my notes p and this is point Q so I'm just generalizing it earlier put that you know the spider was going along uh the B1 basis Vector right. So now there is a a point here and that point Q is moving it's. To my notes P and this are point Q and this was point Q earlier. to my notesP and this were point Q was moving point Q. to point P was moving Point Q. To point Q it was moving the point Q which is point B. moving with both with respect to a and withrespect to B but we want to express the acceleration the velocity and acceleration of Point Q with. respect to frame a is assuming that it's more convenient to naturally denote it in terms of frame B get it like I'm. moving with both. Moving with. both with Respect to A and with Respect To B is assuming. that it is more convenient for us to denote the acceleration of a point in frame B than in frame a. Get it like. I'm moving. walking in a spaceship I can measure my distance to the back of the spaceship right but I really want to calculate my acceleration with respect to the Earth okay so that's what we're trying to do now okay so this is R PQ and we'll call this point O. We're going to try to do this for a few seconds and then we'll see how it goes. We'll call it R O and we're doing this for the next few seconds. That's the first part of the experiment. The second part is the acceleration. and this is R op okay and what we seek is the acceleration with respect to a of Point Q sorry the velocity and the acceleration of a frame a this is what we sought. It's just a generalization of stuff you've done now several times several times okay so so this is the way we look at it. And we seek to get the same thing with the frame a. And this is how we do it with Point Q. And it's the same way with frame A. And so on. let's write it out so what's how do we begin we're looking for these two guys how do I begin position Vector always yes correct r oq now I'm going to compact things and go a little fast okay is equal to expand it for me I'mgoing to have. I'm. going to have a little bit of fun with this one. Let's see if we can do it. We're going to start with this. We'll see how it goes from here. We've got to go from there. to well I'm just trying to calculate our avq which is the derivative of this and what do I do H I'm actually leaving it a little unstructured because I want you to say something the answer I was looking for was what is the derivatives of R Op clodo. I was actually trying to find out what the derivative is of R op clodo, which is what I was trying to figure out. The answer was that it's a function of ROp clodo and R Op Op. with respect to a what do we call that say again it is yes it is if I take the derivative of this it is right plus the derivative, this so in fact if you want I'll expand it I'll write it in smaller steps so you you you. If you want to see the full transcript of this interview, please visit CNN.com/Larry King Live. Click here to watch the full interview with Larry King Live at 9 p.m. ET on Monday, July 16. can follow it right right I've just written it out right and what I'm saying is this term you will recall is what I just wrote it and what do I do here apply the magic formula right and I can write this as b d by DT of rpq. Can follow the formula right? Can you do it right? If you can, you can do it. Can you write it as bd byDT of rPq? If not, you're not doing it right. If you are, you need to change it. plus a Omega B cross rpq right just applying the magic formula and the reason I'm doing that is I'm going to reduce it so to a simple form which is a VQ is equal to a VP plus b VQ. isn't this B VQ plus a omega B cross RpQ right just application of themagic formula? I'm not going to tell you how to do it. I'm just going to make it easier for you to understand what I'm saying. This is the velocity version of the magic formula and I'm sure you'll admit that I did nothing particularly profound in deriving this okay and then that handout the typed handout that you you hopefully downloaded and read from the web you will see this EXP expand it.rpq so this is the Velocity Version of the Magic Formula and I am sure you will admit thatI did nothingparticularly profound in Deriving this.rPq so  this is theVelocity Version of The Magic formula and  I am sure you'll admit that I did nothing particularly profound. out for you okay so that means that if you have a frame a which is stationary for example. you have something's moving on frame B then the velocity of that thing on. frame B is simply the velocities of things on frame A and B. The velocity of a point on a frame A is the same as the velocity on a point in frame B. If a point is stationary on frame a and something is moving on Frame B then it's the same on both frames. If something is stationary in a frame B and moving in frame A, it's moving in B. respect to frame a velocity of that thing with respect to frame B and Omega R Omega time R basically a Omega B cross rpq makes sense right questions it's obvious nothing profound okay now so this we've done I'm going to do this now so if I want the answer I'll give it to you now. I'll tell you what the answer is. The answer is that it's nothing profound. It's just a way to get a better look at the speed of a thing. acceleration of Point Q with respect to frame a what do I do yeah just take the Der of that one that is equal to a d by D t a VP plus ad by DT of bvp right bvq I'm sorry plus a dby DT of a frame a. A frame a is a series of words that begin with the letter "Q" and end with the word "q" A frame is a set of words starting with the letters "Q," "Q", "A," "A" and "B" and ending with "C" Omega B cross rpq right I just wrote it out again you know boringly I I strive to be boring at some level if I'm doing anything that's not boring that means I'm making a leap that is not uh grounded yeah did I miss something yep yeah yeah P. O.C. P.S. I'm sorry I didn't make it to the end of the show. I was trying to get to the bottom of it. I just wanted to make sure I got it right. just so you know thank you AJ that Point p is a point fixed in frame B you understand very important so space shuttle astronaut cting on Space Shuttle. Find one point on the space shuttle for example the instrument panel that figures out you know where the space Shuttle is. Just so youknow thank you A.J. that Point P is a points fixed in Frame B you understanding very important. Find One point on The Space Shuttle by clicking on the image below and going to the bottom of the page. is that's Point P get it so rpq is that vector okay okay so now let's do this how do we expand this what is this term come on yep what do I do here guys magic formula so that you know I line these two guys up right plus plus plus. Is that a vector or is that a point? Is that Point P or Point Q? Is it Point Q or Point R or Point P? Is Point Q Point P Point Q P Point P P P or P Q P P? Are Point P and Point Q both Point P points? what what plus so that's these these thesethese these these two terms correspond to this guy what next what do I do with this guy same thing okay absolutely the same thing it's correct precisely okay. Same thing okay don't worry it's all going to work out this is perfectly cure. What do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments below or email them to iReport@dailymail.co.uk. Follow us on Twitter @dailymailonline and @MailOnlinePictures. I didn't do anything wrong here I don't think anyway I do anythingwrong I just took this whole thing and I just applied the magic formula right yes anyone feel queasy about it no it's perfectly reasonable okay all right so now let's expand it what is this guy. What is it about this guy? What is the secret to his success? What's his secret? What does he have to do to make people like him? What do you think he has to do with it? What are his secrets? yeah ah very good B where's this guy well it's just that it is what it is you will recognize it as anyone recognize what this guy is it's half of the corus effect the coru effect is actually two terms that come together right and it'll become two eventually.yeah ahvery good B. where's the guy? well it is just that you'll recognize it you will. recognize it. It's half the corius effect. It is half the Coru effect. The corus Effect is actually a combination of two terms. so we need to look for another of these guys keep an eye open all right okay what do we do here folks tell me claudo leave it as it is no we don't want to leave it. We want to expand it out take the derivatives. We need to find a new owner for this place. We don't just want to keep it the way it is, we want to make it better. We're going to make this a better place for people to live and work and raise their families. away y what's your name yeah what's his name sry Jeremy yeah what did you say a yeah but it's a vector you're on the right track though can you do it using the chain rule why not let's do that okay let'sDo this b d by DT of DT of.away y  "What's Your Name?" "Jeremy" "What is your name?" "away y" "Jeremy, what is the name of your character?" "I'm Jeremy." "Jeremy," "Jeremy", "Jeremy". "Jeremy. What is your character's name?""away y". " Jeremy, what's Your Character's Name?""Jeremy, What is the Name of Your Character?" "awaysy" a Omega B right cross rpq okay I have a caveat when I finish this I'll come back to it what I'm doing it is is fine plus a Omega B cross b d by DT of rpQ so that's these two guys make sense. plus what about this could could this could be okay? I'm not sure what's going on here but I'm going to go with it. I'll be back to you in a few minutes to explain what I've done. I do there I just just leave it as it is don't worry okay yeah okay I can't change the order did I changed the order yeah. I'm sorry aha we'll come to that let's come to. I just want you to know that I love you very much and that I'm very proud of you. I don't want to see you disappointed in me. I want to know you're happy and that you're proud of me. Do you love me? If so, I'm happy to meet you. If you're not, then I'm not happy with you. that okay hold that thought if it's zero it'll go away okay so just let's not expand it yet so um and this term is just this term all right okay a good right okay. A is kind of my guardian angel if I make typos or he catches me. That okay. That's a good. A good right. okay a is kind Of my guardian Angel if I made typos. That is a good thing. that's a bad thing. That means I'm a bad person. a just a PhD student is getting his PhD in U in wiress sensing oh oh sorry sorry sorry Simone I'll be out in a minute one more minute excuse huh just one minute sorry thanks Andrew next time set your watch 3 minutes fast like mine okay so folks okay so people are getting their PhD in University in Wress sensing. Andrew is a student at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. He is currently working on a PhD on the psychology of the human body. He also works as a freelance writer and editor. I'm going to write out the super magic formula actually this is it okay the supermagic formula is this and I'll name the terms and we'll finish it next time a acceleration of Q is equal to the acceleration of. Is equal to an acceleration of or more than two times the speed of a car. Isequal to or greater than a car's speed of two hundred miles per hour or more. The acceleration of is greater than two hundred or more times the velocity of the car. Point P which is the fix point plus b a Q Plus ahuh what is this guy Alpha huh do I skip which term do Iskip we'll come back to this okay this guy shows up as this guy this is also right plus what q q q Q Plus. Point P is a point that is a combination of two points, one of which is called the "fix point" and the other is known as the "Q Plus" point. The fix point is the combination of the "P" and "Q" points. yeah sorry and plus this thing okay we'll end now because Professor Socrates needs to take over this is it this is correct acceleration of P acceleration of Q with respect to B Oiler coris centripedal and you know why it doesn't go to zero because I'm not taking a zero.yeah sorry. okay we're going to end now. yeah sorry and Plus this thingOkay we'll ended now. Yeah sorry. Okay we'llend now.Yeah sorry. We'll endnow. Omega B cross a omeg B I'm taking a Omega B cross this whole term which is at 90° to a omega B got it. Omeg B is a cross between a Omega A and an Omega B. Omega B is an abbreviation of Omega A. Omega A is a abbreviation for Omega B, which is a sub-type of Omega B in the Omega B family. Omega B is also known as a cross of the Omega A with the Omega C.