The following content is provided under a Creative Commons License. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation, or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open CourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. started? So, today-- well, before I get started-started-- so, let me open up to questions. Do y'all have questions from the last lecture, where we finished off angular momentum? Or really anything up to the last exam? Yeah? AUDIENCE: So, what exactly happens with the half l states? PROFESSOR: Ha, Ha, that's a good question. That's a great question. So, let's see what happens with that. ha, ha! What happens with the half l states? OK, great question! So, we're gonna talk about that in some detail in a couple of weeks, but let me give you a quick preview. So, remember that when we studied the commutation relations, Lx, Ly is i h bar Lz? Well, that's what happens with a half l state. That's what we're going to talk about in the next few weeks. It's a big deal. . Without using the representation in terms of. derivatives, with respect to a coordinate, without using the representations, in. terms of translations and rotations along the sphere, right?. When we just used the commutation relations, and nothing else, what we found was that the states corresponding to these guys, came. out of the commutations relations, came out. out. of the space-time-time relations. Out of the time-space-space relations, out came the states. in a tower, with either one state-- corresponding to little l equals 0-- or two states -- with l equals 1/2-- or three states-- with little l = 1-- or four states--with l = 3/2 -- and so on, and so forth. And we quickly deduced that it was impossible to. And so we conclude that it is impossible to build a tower with just one state in the top, or just two in the bottom, or even just one in the middle. represent the half integer states with a wave function which represents a probability distribution on a sphere. We observed that that was impossible. And the reason is, if you did so, then when you take that wave function, ifyou rotate by 2pi-- in any direction-- if you rotate by. 2pi, then if you do that, the probability distribution is the same as if you rotated by. 1.5pi, or 1.6 pi, or even 1.7 pi, and so on. 2pi the wave function comes back to minus itself. But the wavefunction has to be equal to itself at that same point. That means the value of theWave function must be the same at some point. At 2.2pi that point is the same as the point at which the Wave function is equal to its value at that point. The wave function is then the same value as the value it was at the point it was equal to at the same point in time. The value of that value is the Wave Function. be equal to minus itself. That means it must be zero0. So, you can't write a wave function-- which is a probability distribution on a sphere-- if the wave function has to be equal tominus itself at any given point. So this is a strange thing. And we sort of know how to solve it, but it's a bit of a mystery to us at the moment. We'll have to wait and see how it works out for us in the real world. of said, well, look, these are some other beasts. But the question is, are they just wrong? Are they just meaningless? And what we're going to discover is the following-- and this is really gonna go back, is that they are not meaningless, but they are just wrong, and they're just wrong for a reason. And we're gonna find out what that reason is, and we'll find out how to get it back to what it was in the first place. to the very first lecture, and so, we'll do this in more detail, but I'm going to quickly tell you-- imagine take a magnet, a little, tiny bar magnet. In fact, well, imagine you take a little bar magnet with some little magnetization, and you send it through a region. And so, if you have a bar magnet in your hand, you can use it to send a magnet to another part of the world. And you can do this by sending a magnet from one region to another region. that has a gradient for magnetic field. If there's a gradient, a magnet wants to anti-align with the nearby magnet. So, you can get a net force. And that force is going to be proportional to how big your magnet is. But it's also going toBe proportional to the magnetic field that you have. And if the force is proportional to. the force, then you can have a force of up to 1,000,000 times the size of your magnet. the strength of your magnet, then how far-- if you send this magnet through a region, it'll get deflected in one direction or the other. How far it gets deflected is determined by how big of a magnet you sent through. You send in a bigger magnet, it deflects in one way or another. If you send a smaller magnet in the opposite direction, it doesn't deflect as far as the bigger magnet. You can also send a larger magnet in a different direction, and it will deflect in that direction. A charged particle moving in a circular orbit. Or better yet, well, better yet. imaging you have a charged particle in a circle. A charged particle. in a round orbit. Everyone cool with that? OK, here's a funny thing. So, that's fact one. Fact two, suppose I have a system which is a charged. particle. In this case, the charged particle is in a orbit around the Earth. In fact, the system is a circle, and the particle is moving around it. sphere-- this is a better model-- imagine you have a sphere of uniform charge distribution. And you make it rotate, OK? So, that's charged,. that's moving, forming a current. And that current generates a magnetic field along the axis of rotation, and that's what's happening in this case. It's a little gelatinous sphere, and it's charged, that is moving, form a current, and so on. And it's generating a field along that axis. And this is what happens when you rotate it. Right hand rule. So, if you have a charged sphere, and it's rotating, you get a magnetic moment. And how big is the magnetic moment, it's proportional to the rotation, to the angular momentum, OK? So, you determine that, for a. charged sphere here which is rotating with angular momentum,. let's say, l, has a. magnetic moment which is proportional to l. OK? Let's put this together. Imagine we take a charged. sphere, we send it rotating with same angular momentum. We send it through a field gradient, a gradient for magnetic field. What we'll see is we. can measure that angular momentum by measuring the deflection. The bigger the angular momentum, the bigger the magnetic moment. So, now here's the cool experiment. Take an electron. And electron has some charge. Is it a little, point-like, or does it have a big magnetic moment? The answer is that it's a little point- like, but it has a bigger magnetic moment, which means it has more angular momentum. That's how we know it's an electron and not a nucleus. thing? Is it a little sphere? Let's not ask that question just yet. It's an electron. The thing you get by ripping a negative charge off a hydrogen atom. So, take your electron and send it through a magnetic field gradient. Why would you do this? "Because I want to see what happens when you send an electron through a field gradient" "I don't know why I would want to do that," he says. "It's a very strange thing to do." Because you want to measure the angular momentum of this electron. You want to see whether the electron is a little rotating thing or not. So, you send it through this magnetic field gradient, and if it gets deflected, you will have measured the magnetic moment. If it's rotating, it would just go straight through, right? It would have no angular momentum, and it'd have no magnetic moment, and thus it would not reflect. Yeah? If it'm rotating, if it's turning, it's going to reflect. it's gonna deflect. Here's the experiment we do. And here's the experimental results. The experimental results are every electron that gets sent through bends. And it either bends up a fixed amount, or it bends down a fixed Amount. It never bends more, it never bends less, and it certainly doesn't bend less. It's gonna deflect. It’s gonna dis deflect. It never bends more, it never bends less, and it certainly doesn’t bend less. never been zero. In fact, it always makes two spots on the screen. It never hits the middle. No matter how you build this experiment, no matter how. you rotate it, no Matter what you do, it. always hits one of two spots. What that means is that no matter what. you build, it will always make two spots, and it will never hit the middle, no. matter what you build. No. matter. how you. rotate it,. no matterwhat. you do. It will always hit one oftwo spots. OK? Always makes two spot. tells you is, the angular momentum-- rather the magnetic moment-- can only take one of two values. The angular momentum is just some geometric constant times the angular Momentum. So, from this experiment-- glorified-- we can say that the magnetic Momentum can only be taken in one way. Everyone cool with that? So, we'll say it's the other way around. We'll call it the "magnetic moment" experiment. And we'll go on with our lives. as the Stern Gerlach Experiment-- from this experiment, we discover that the angular momentum, Lz, takes one of two values. L, along whatever direction we're measuring-- but let's say in the z direction-- Lz takes oneof two values, plus some constant and, you know, plus h bar upon 2, and so on. Lz is a measure of the momentum in a particular direction, in this case in the direction of the z-axis. It can also be measured in other directions, such as in the y-direction. or minus h bar upon 2. L equals 1/2. But wait, we started off by talking about the rotation of a charged sphere. And you just do this measurement. But what this tells us is, which state? Which tower? Which set of states describe an electron in this apparatus? L equals1/2, minus hbar upon 2, plus h bar on 2. And this is what the measurement tells us about the state of the electron in the apparatus. And it tells us which tower is in which state. deducing that the magnetic moment must be proportional to the angular momentum. And what we've just discovered is that this angular momentum-- the only sensible angular momentum, here-- is the two state tower, which can't be represented in terms of rotations on a sphere. Yeah? What we've learned from this is that it's not possible to have a magnetic moment that is proportional to angular momentum in the first place. And that's what we're trying to figure out here in this experiment. experiment is that electrons carry a form of angular momentum, demonstrably. Which is one of these angular momentum 1/2 states, which never doesn't rotate, right? It always carries some angular momentum. However, it can't be expressed in terms of rotation of some spherical electron. It has nothing to do with the rotation of an electron. The experiment was carried out at the University of California, Los Angeles. The results of the experiment were published in the journal Physical Review D. rotations. If it did, we'd get this nonsensical thing of the wave function identically vanishes. So, there's some other form of angular momentum-- a totally different form ofangular momentum-- at least for electrons. Which, again, has the magnetic moment proportional to this angular momentum with some coefficient, which I'll talk about later in the show. The magnetic moment is proportional to the angular momentum, but with a different coefficient. This coefficient is called the "magnetic moment," and it's proportional to angular momentum. call mu0. But I don't want to call it L, because L we usually use for rotational angular momentum. This is a different form of angular momentum, which is purely half integer, and we call that spin. And the spin satisfies exactly the same commutation relations-- it's a vector-- Sx Sx. It is a vector that is a half integer in the same way as a rotational momentum vector. It's called a "spin" and it has the same commutation relations as a rotation vector. with Sy is equal to ih bar Sz. So, it's like an angular momentum in every possible way, except it cannot be represented. Sz does not have any representation, in terms of h bar upon i [INAUDIBLE]. It is not related to a rotation. It's an intrinsic form of angular momentum. It is like a momentum that can't be represented in any way, shape, or form. It can only be expressed in the form of a bar, with h bar on i. An electron just has it.momentum. If you send an electron through a Stern Gerlach Apparatus, it always hits one of two spots. And that's it, according to the inventor of the electron microscope. He says the only thing that can stop an electron from hitting one of the two spots is a force that stops it from hitting both spots at the same time. The force is called momentum, and it can only be stopped if it hits a specific spot on the electron. The legacy of these little L equals 1/2 states, is that they represent an internal form of angular momentum that only exists quantum mechanically, that you would have never noticed classically.right? It's an experimental fact. And this is how we describe that Experimental fact. That was a very very long way of saying it's a quantum mechanical fact. It's a very, very special kind of fact. We're very proud of it, and we hope it will be used in the future. long answer to what was initially a simple question. But we'll come back and do this in more detail, this was just a quick intro. Yeah? AUDIENCE: So, for L equals 3/2, does that mean that there's 4 values of spins? PROFESSOR: Yeah, that means there's [? 4 ?] values of spin. And so there are plenty of particles in the real world that have L equals3/2. They're not fundamental particles, as far as we know. know of a fundamental particle. If super symmetry is true, then there must be a particle called a gravitino, which would be fundamental, and would have spin 3/2, and four states. But that hasn't been observed, yet. Other questions? AUDIENCE: Was the [? latter of ?] seemingly nonsensical states discovered discovered? Did the discovery of super symmetry lead to a new type of particle? If so, what would it look like, and how would it behave? first, and then the experiment explain it, or was it the experiment-- PROFESSOR: Oh, no! Oh, that's a great question. We'll come back the that at end of today. So today, we're gonna do hydrogen, among other things. Although, I've taken so long talking about this, we might be a little late. We might have to come back at the end of the day and do it again. We're going to do hydrogen. Little slow. We'll talk about that a little more when we talk about hydrogen, but it was observed and deduced from experiment before it was understood that there was such a physical quantity. However, the observation that this commutation relation led to towers of states with this pre-existed as a physical phenomenon. Little slow, we'll talk more about hydrogen in a few minutes. But first, let's talk about atoms and molecules and how they relate to each other in the universe. mathematical statement. So, that was a mathematical observation from long previously, and it has a beautiful algebraic story, and all sort of nice things. But it hadn't been connected to the physics. And so, the observation that the electron must carry some intrinsic form of angular momentum with one of its electrons. And that's what we're trying to get to with the new theory of superconductivity. We're going to try and get to the bottom of it with this new theory. two values, neither of which is 0, was actually an experimental observation-- quasi-experimental observation-- long before it was understood exactly how to connect this stuff. The intent of the experiment wasn't to connect the two values, the professor says. "It was like within months, but whatever," he adds. "I shouldn't say long, it was likeWithin months, I mean, whatever," the professor adds, "but whatever" "It wasn't supposed to be that way," he says, "the intent was not to connect them" solve-- AUDIENCE: No, no. The experiment was this-- there are the spectrum-- Well, I'll tell you what the experiment was in a minute. OK, yeah? Audience: [INAUDIBLE] Z has to be plus or minus 1/2. What fixes the direction in the Z direction? PROFESSOR: Excellent. In this experiment, the thing is the thing that fixes the way the light hits you in the face in the X direction. that fixed the fact that I was probing Lz is that I made the magnetic field have a gradient in the Z direction. So, what I was sensitive to, since the force is actually proportionally to mu dot B-- or, really, mu dot the gradient of B, so, we'll do that, too. We'll do the same thing for Lz, but in the opposite direction. And that's what we do. We do the opposite in Lz and Lz in the other direction. this in more detail later-- the direction of the gradient selects out which component of the angular momentum we're looking at. So, in this experiment, I'm measuring the angular. momentum along this axis-- which for fun, I'll call Z, I could've called it X-- what I discover is the angular angular momentum. This is what I'm trying to get at with this experiment. I'll go into more detail about this in more details later. Back to Mail Online home. momentum along this axis must take one of two values. But, the universe is rotationally invariant. So, it can't possibly matter whether I had done the experiment in this direction, or done the experiments in the other direction. What that tells you is, in any direction if I measure the angular. of the universe, it will be the same in any given direction. That's what the experiment tells you, and that's why it's so important to measure it in the first place. momentum of the electron along that direction, I will discover that it takes one of two values. This is also true of the L equals 1 states. Lz takesOne of three values. What about Lx? Lx also takes one-three values. Is is every system, every system in the universe, I think. I'm not sure why, but I think it's because it's the way the universe works. I don't know why that's the case, but it is. in a state corresponding to one of those particular values? No, it could be in a superposition. But the eigenvalues, are these three eigen values, regardless of whether it's Lx, or Ly, or Lz? OK, it's a good thing to meditate upon. Anything else? One more. Yeah? [INAUDIBLE] the last. Yeah, I'm sorry, I just want to get to the bottom of it. I don't know what else to say. problem [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: Indeed. OK. Since some people haven't taken the-- there will be a conflict exam later today, so I'm not going to discuss the exam yet. But, very good observation, and not an accident. OK, so, today we launch into 3D. We ditch our tricked-out tricycle, and we're off to the races. We'll be back in a few minutes with a look at the next episode. we're gonna talk about real, physical systems in three dimensions. And as we'll discover, it's basically the same as in one dimension, we just have to write down more symbols. But the content is all the same. So, this will make obvious the reason we worked with 1D up until now. We're going to talk about three-dimensional systems in a new way, and it's going to be very different from the way we've been talking about them in the past. now, which is that there's not a heck of a lot more to be gained for the basic principles. So, the first thing I wanted to do is write down the Laplacian in three dimensions in spherical coordinates. And I want to note a couple of things. This can be written in the following form, 1 over r dr r quantity squared. OK, that's going to be very useful for us-- trust me, I'm sure it will be useful for you. on this one-- this is also known as 1 over r dr squared r. And this, if you look back at your notes, this is nothing other than L squared-- except for the factor of h bar upon i-- but if it's squared, it's minus 1 upon h bar squared. If it's square, it is the same as L squared, except that it's less than the square root of the squared factor of the number of bars on the square of the square. OK, so this horrible angular derivative, is nothing but L squared. OK, and you should remember the [? dd ?] thetas, and there are these funny sines and cosines. But just go back and compare your notes. So, this is an observation that the Laplacian in three dimensions and spherical is the same as L squared in two dimensions and three dimensions. And it's the same in four and five dimensions and in three and four. And so on. coordinates takes this simple form. A simple radial derivative, which is two terms if you write it out linearly in this fashion, and one term if you writing it this way. And the angular part can be written as angular part of radial derivative. This is going to turn out to be useful for us. We can use this information to find out more about the shape of a coordinate system, and how to use it to find a new coordinate system. We'll see how this works out in the next section. 1 over r squared, times the angular momentum squared with a minus 1 over h bar squared. So, in just to check, remember that Lz is equal to h bar upon i d phi. Lz squared is going to be equal to minus hbar squared dphi. OK? So, Lz square is 1.1 over R squared, 1 over R, and 1 over H bar squared, and so on. LZ squared is 1 over Lz, and H bar is 1/H bar, so Lz squared is 1/Lz. CNN.squared.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery. Please submit your best shots of the U.S. for next week. Visit CNN.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots. The gallery will be open to the public for the first time on Thursday and Friday at 10 a.m. ET. For the full gallery, visit CNN.sqared.gov/Travel. We'll feature photos from around the world for the next few weeks, and we'll also feature some of our favorite vacation spots. want to think about systems in 3D, which are spherically symmetric. This is going to be a particularly simple class of systems, and it's also particularly physical. Simple things like a harmonic oscillator In three dimensions, which we solved in Cartesian coordinates earlier, we're gonna solve later, in spherical coordinates. We're going to solve the problem in three dimensions. We'll start with the 3D world, and work our way up to the spherical world. We've got a long way to go. The isotropic harmonic oscillator and hydrogen all share a bunch of common properties. I want to explore those. And along the way, we'll solve a toy model for the system for the first time. Click here to read the full transcript of this week's episode of The Daily Discussion. For more, visit CNN.com/science and follow us on Twitter @cnnscience and @jennifer_fisher on Facebook. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. hydrogen. So, the energy for this is p squared upon 2m, plus a potential, which is a function only of the radial distance. But now, p squared is equal to minus h bar squared times the gradient squared. But this is gonna be equal to, from the first term, minus hbar squared-- let me just write this out-- times r dr squared r. And from the second term, L squared over r squared upon2m plus 1 over 2mr squared L squared plus u. This is the energy operator when the system is rotational invariant in spherical coordinates. This is just quick algebra. So, it's useful to know. Questions? Yeah? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] is that an equals sign or minus? PROFESSOR: This? AUDience: Yeah. PROFessor: Oh, that's an equals Sign. OK, and this is the Energy Operator when the System is rotations. of r. The Energy Operator is a function of rotations of the system. know it. So, consider the following thing, 1 over r dr r. Why would you ever care about such a thing? Well, let's square it. OK, because I did there. What is this equal to? Well,. this is 1 over R dr r and 1 over Dr squared plus 2 over r times dr. And the answer is, they're operators. And so, you should ask how they act on functions. So,. a function-- acting as a function -- is equal to f prime prime-- if this is a function of r-- plus2 over r f prime. So, I'm cheating a little bit by just writing this out. But trust me, it's going to be a useful form. Yeah? AUDIENCE: Do we need to find d squared [INAUDIBLE] dr squared r. Isn't that supposed to be 1? Isn't it supposed to say d squared r? I'm sorry, I don't know what that means, but I think it means d squared. I'm not sure if that's what it means, or if it's the right answer. over r? PROFESSOR: Oh shoot! Yes, that's supposed to be one of our-- Thank you. Yes, thank you for that typo correction. Thanks OK. So, anytime we have a system which is rotationally. invariant-- whose potential is rotateally invariant -- we can write. "over r" over "r" or "r-r" over" "over" " over" is a common way to say "over the" in computer science. the energy operator in this fashion. And now, you see something really lovely, which is that this only depends on r. So, if we want to find the eigenfunctions of. the energy operator, we can look at it in this way. This depends on the angular coordinates, but only insofar as it depends on L squared. It's a really lovely way of looking at it, and it works the same way for all the other energy operators, as well as some others. Eigenfunctions of L.E, our life is going to be a lot easier if we work in eigenfunction of L, he says. "That's gonna make this one [? Ex ?] on an eigenfunction of L,. this is just going to become a constant. So, now you have to answer the question, well, can we?" he asks. "We're going to have to work on it," he adds, "and it's going to get better and better" Can we find functions which are eigenfunctions of E and of L, simultaneously? And so, the answer to that question is, well, compute the commutator. So, do these guys commute? In particular, of L squared. And does L commute with the derivative with respect to r, L squared? Yeah, yeah, that's what we're trying to find out. It's a very, very complex problem. But it's not that hard to get to the bottom of. because L only depends on angular derivatives. And the rs don't care about the angular variables, so they commute. What about with this term? Well, L squared trivially commutes with itself and, again, r doesn't matter. And ditto, r and L squared commute. It doesn't have any rs in it. It only has angular derivatives, so it doesn't commute with itself. It just has to commute with L squared, which triviallycommutes with L. squared. So, this is 0. These commute. So, we can find common eigenbasis. We can find a basis of functions which are eigenfunctions both of E and of L squared. In particular, if we want to find a function-- an eigenfunction-- of the energy operator, E, we need to use separation. We need to separate E from L squared to get a basis for E. We use separation to find the basis for the eigen function of E. phi E is equal to E phi E, it's going to simplify our lives if we also let phi be an eigenfunction of the L squared. But we know what the eigenfunctions of L squared are. E phI E isequal to-- let me write this-- of r will then will then be equal to phi. That's the way to get to the truth of the matter. It's a very simple way to go about it, but it's not easy. be equal to little phi of r times yLm of theta and phi. Quick, is little l an integer or a half integer? AUDIENCE: [MURMURS] Integer. PROFESSOR: Yeah, because we're working with rotational angular angular. Now, quickly, because these are the eigenfunctions of the L squared operator, let's look at some of them. We can see that little l is not an integer, but it is half an integer. momentum, right? And it only makes sense to talk about integer values of little l when we have gradients on a sphere-- when we're talking about rotations-- on a spherical coordinates, OK? So, little l has to be an integer. And from this point forward in the class, any time any time, any of us will be using little l as a measure of momentum. We'll be using it to measure rotations, momentum, and so on. We're going to use little l any time we're using rotations. I write l, I'll be talking about the rotational angular momentum corresponding to integer values, and I'll write down s, when I'm talking about half integer values. So, let's use this separation of variables. And what does that give us? Well, l squared acting on yLm gives us l squared, which is the angular momentum of a square root of a number. And that's what we're going to use to work out the rotation of the Earth. We'll use that to get the rotation rate of the earth. If phi E is proportional to a spherical harmonic, then this is gonna take the form minus h bar squared upon 2m 1 over r dr squared r plus 1.h bar squared lL. So, this tells us that E, acting on phi. E, takes a particularly simple form. It is a simple form of E if and only if E is properly proportional to a spherical harmonic. If E is not proposable to a spherical harmony, then E takes a more complex form. 1 over 2mr squared l squared-- but l squared acting on the yLm gives us-- h bar squared lL plus 1, which is just a constant over r squared plus u of r phi E. Question? AUDIENCE: Yeah. [INAUDIBLE] YLm1 and yLM2? PROFESSOR: Absolutely. So, can we consider superpositions of yLlm1, yLllm2? Yes, we can. these guys? Absolutely, we can. However, we're using separation. So, we are gonna look at a single term, and then after constructing solutions with a single eigenfunction of L squared. We can then write down arbitrary superposition of them, and generate a complete basis of states. General statement about separation of states: We can use separation to create arbitrary superpositions of states, and write them down as a basis for states. We're gonna use separation. This is purely a function of r. We've removed all of the angular dependence by making this proportional to yLm. This is the result of acting on phi with the energy operator, and this is the energy eigenvalue. So, the upside here is that when we have a central potential, when the system is rotationally. invariant, the potential energy is invariant under rotations, then the energy commutes. And if I want to make this theEnergy eigen Value equation, instead of just the action of the energy. operator, that is now my energy eigevalue equation. with the angular momentum squared. And so, we can find common eigenfunctions. When we use separation of variable, the resulting energy eigenvalue equation becomes nothing but a 1D energy eigevalue equation, right? This is just a1D equation. Now, you might look at this and say, well, it's not quite as simple as it sounds, but it's still a good starting point. It's a good place to start, and it can lead to a lot of useful information. a 1D equation, because if this were a 1D equations, we wouldn't have this funny 1 over r, and this funny r, right? It's not exactly what we would have got. So, let's get rid of that. Let's just quickly dispense with that funny set of r. And this comes out as the correct h bar squareds upon 2m, but it's got this funnyR and 1 over R. It's got the minus h bar square of 2m-- whoops, and there's, yeah, OK-- it'sGot this funny h bar squares on 2m. back to the sneaky trick I was referring to earlier, of writing this expression. So, rather than writing this out, it's convenient to write it in this form. Let's see why. If we have the E phi of r is equal to minus h bar squared upon 2m, 1, we can write this expression as r = 1: r + h bar + 2m / 2m. We can also write it as r + 2: r - h bar - 2m/2m. over r d squared r r, plus-- and now, what I'm gonna write is-- look, this is our potential, u of r. This is some silly, radial-dependent thing. I'm going to write these two terms together, rather than writing them over and over, and over again, I'mgoing to write them. Over and over. And now,  I'm gonna write them together, over and over, and and over again, until I get it right. together, and call them V effective. Plus V effective of r, where V effective is just these guys. Which has a contribution from the original potential, and from the angular momentum, which, notice the sign is plus 1 over r squared. So, the potential gets really large as you go on, and it gets bigger and bigger as you get further away from the Earth. And so on and on, until you get to the point where you're at the edge of the Earth's atmosphere. And then you're there. Phi of r equals 1 over r u of r. V on phi is equal to-- well, V doesn't have any r derivatives, it's just a function. So, this equation becomes E on u, because this also picks up a1 over r, is equal. to minus h bar squared upon 2m dr squared plus V effective. It's a nice way to get rid of the annoying 1 overr, but there's a nicer way to do it, too. of r u of r. And this is exactly the energy eigenvalue equation for a 1D problem with the following potential. The potential, V effective of r, does the following two things-- whoops, don't want to draw it that way. suppose we have a potential which is the Coulomb potential. And we want to know how much energy is left in the system. We want to find out how much of the energy is still left. We can find out by looking at the potential. So, let's say, u is equal to minus E squared upon r. Just as an example, here's r, here is V effective. So, u first, so there's u-- u of r, so let me draw this-- V has another term, which is h bar squared lL plus 1 over. And so on and so on, until we get to the end of the story, when we say that r is the product of r and V effective, and that V effective is the sum of the two terms. This is for any given value of l. This is a constant over r squared, with a plus sign. So, that's something that looks like this. It is falling off like 1 over r, this is fallingoff like 1.2mr squared. So,. it falls off more over the square root of r squared than 1 over l. It's falling off more than one over the cube root of l, which is 1 over the squared cube of r. It falls off over more than 1 in a row. rapidly. And finally, can r be negative? No. It's defined from 0 to infinity. So, that's like having an infinite potential for negative r. Our effective potential is the sum of these contributions-- wish I had colored chalk. The sum ofThese contributions is going to look like this. It will be the same as our effective potential if we were to add up all of our contributions. It would be the equivalent of adding up all the contributions of all of the people in the world. So, that's my V effective. This is my Ll plus 1 [INAUDIBLE] squared over 2mr squared. And this is my u of r. Question? AUDIENCE: [INAudIBLE]. PROFESSOR: Good. OK, so this is u of R, the original potential. OK? This is 1 over L squared-- or sorry-- lL 1 over 2MR squared. OK. And in text, when I write this by hand, the potential is a big U, and the wave function is a U. is a little u. So, let this be a little U. OK, this is my little u and so, now I'm gonna have to-- oh jeez, this was horrible, sorry-- this is the potential, capital U with a bar underneath it. OK,. seriously, so there's capitalU with abar underneath it, OK, seriously. So there's a capital U. with aBar underneath it,. OK, Seriously, So There's A Capital U with A Bar underneath It, OK? underneath it. And here's V, which is gonna make my life easier, and this is the capital U with the bar underneath it. Oh, I'm really sorry, I did not realize how confusing that would be. OK, is everyone happy with that? Yeah? Back to Mail Online home. Back to the page you came from. Share your photos, videos and more with CNN iReport. Visit CNN.com/sport to share your photos and videos from across the world. AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: Which one? AUDIENCE: Middle. PROFessor: Middle, up, up. Right there! Up! There. [LAUGHTER]PROFESSor: So, these are the wave function. Audience: I know. That's the wavefunction. That is V.PROFessOR: Where? AUDience: To the right. [CHATTER] Near the eraser mark. PR Professor. Wait, if I erased, how can I correct it? AUDIENCE: [CHATTER] There! PROFESSOR: Excellent, so the thing that isn't here, would have a bar under it. Ah! You wouldn't think it would be so hard. OK, good. And this is not [? related ?] to the first time you've heard this question. It's a question about how to answer a question that you've never been asked before. If you've ever been asked this question before, please share your answer. the wave function. OK, god, oh! That's horrible! Sorry guys, that notation is not obvious. My apologies. Oh, there's a better way to do this. Instead of calling the potential-- I'm sorry, your notes are getting destroyed now-- so instead of calling. the potential, we'll call the wave function, instead of the potential. The wave function is a function that takes a number and returns a wave. We'll call it wave function instead of potential. potential capital U, let's just call this V. Audience: [LAUGHTER] No! PROFESSOR: And then we have V effective. No, no. This is good. We can't be careful about this. So, this is V. V effective, which has V plus the angular momentum term. Oh, oh, Oh, Oh! This is a good idea. This can be a good thing. It's a great idea. It can be used for a lot of things. good Lord! This is V effective. V phi [INAUDIBLE] U. Good, this is V. There's no U underline, it's now just V, Veffective. Oh! Good Lord! OK, wow! That was an unnecessary confusion. It's true for both. Because it's just a function of r. Oh, for the love of r, why didn't you say V effective? Although, it would've been just as true as V. God! OK. Let's check our sanity, and walk through the logic. So, the logic here is, we have some potential, it's a function only of r, yeah? As a consequence, since it doesn't care about the angles, we can write things in terms of the spherical harmonics. We can do what we think we can do, and it's just a function of the number of harmonics, not the angle of the plane. So we have a potential of 1. separation of variables. Here's the energy eigenvalue equation. We discover that because we're working in spherical harmonics, the angular momentum term becomes just a function of r, with no other coefficients. So, now we have afunction of r plus the potential V, this looks like an effective potential, V effective, which is the sum of these two terms. On the other hand, this is tantalizingly close to but not quite the energy Eigenvalue equations for a 1D problem with this potential. do a change of variables, phi goes to 1 over ru, and then 1 upon r d squared u, and V effective phi becomes 1 over r V effective u. Plugging that together, gives us this energy eigenvalue equation for u, the energy of the variable u. For example, if u is r, and r is d, and d is u, then u is phi, and phi is V effective V effective U. This gives us the equation for energy of a variable, u. effective wave function, which is 1d problem. And now we have to ask, what exactly is the effective potential? And theeffective potential has three contributions. First, it has the original V, secondly, and thirdly, it is the same as the original wave function. So, we can use all of our intuition and all ofOur machinery to solve this problem. It is a very simple problem, and it can be solved with intuition and machinery. It can be done with the help of a computer program. it has the angular momentum term, which is a constant over r squared. This dominates at small r, and this dominates at large r. The sum of these is the effective. And this guy dominates because it's 1 over r square. It's a big guy. He's the dominant force in the universe. He dominates because he's the most powerful force. He has the most momentum. He is the most dominant force. And he dominates at big r. He also dominates at smaller r. if it's 1 over r. So, we get an effective potential-- that I'll check-- there's the effective potential. And finally, the third fact is that r must be strictly positive, so as a 1D problem, that means it can't be negative, it's gotta have an infinite potential on the left. If r is positive, we have a positive effective potential, and if r is negative, we don't have a negative effective potential and we have no effective potential at all. So, as an example, let's go ahead and think more carefully about specifically this problem, about this Coulomb potential, and this 1D effective potential. AUDIENCE: Where does the 1 over r go? PROFESSOR: Good. So, remember the ddr squared term gave us the Coulomb term, and we can use that to solve this problem. We can use Coulomb to solve the 1D problem, and that's what we're going to try to do. a 1 over r out front. So, from this term, there should be 1 overr, here. And from here, there Should be a 1 over R out front, too. And then I'm gonna cancel the 1 overR out front too, because it's too busy. And so on. And on. and so on, until I get to the end of the term, and then I'll cancel it. And I'll say, 'Ah! Ah! Ah!' And then it'll be over. by multiplying the whole equation by r. Sneaky, sneaky. So, any time you see-- any time, this is a general lesson-- anytime you see a differential equation that has this form-- two derivatives, plus 1 over r a derivative-- you know you can play some game like this. If you see this, declare in your mind a brief moment of triumph, because you know what technique to use. You can do this sort of rescaling by a power of r. And more generally, if you have a differential equations that looks like-- let me do this here-- if you know how to do it, you can do it. have a differential equation that looks something like a derivative with respect to r plus a constant over r times phi, you know how to solve this. If there were no other terms here, then this would say, ddr plus c over r is phi. That means when you take a derivative it's like dividing by r and multiplying by c. But if phi goes like r to the minus c, that's not the exact solution to the equation, but I can write phi is equal to r tothe minus c times u. And then this equation becomes dDr plus dot, dot,dot u equals zero. Very useful little trick-- not really a trick, It's just observation-- and this is the second order version of the same thing. Very useful things to have in your back pocket for moments of need. OK? So, let's pick up with this guy. So,let me give you a little trick, let me giveyou a little tip, let you know what I'm thinking. I'm going to give you this trick, and then I'll give you another one, and a third, and so on. name for this. This term that comes from the angular momentum [? bit, ?] this originally came from the kinetic energy, right? It came. from the L squared over r, which was from the gradient squared energy. This is a kinetic energy term. Why is there a kineticenergy term? Because it's the energy that gives us angular momentum. It's the force that gives you the momentum to move in a certain direction. It is the energy which gives us the term angular momentum, or kinetic energy. term? Well, what this is telling you is that if you have some angular momentum-- if little l is not equal to 0--- then as you get closer and closer to the origin, the potential energy is getting very, very large. And this should make sense. If you're spinning, and if you're spinning, and you have angular momentum, then you have potential energy that is very large, which is why you're moving so fast. And so on and so on. you pull in your arms, you have to do work, right? You have to pull those guys in. You speed up. You're increasing your kinetic energy due to conservation of angular momentum. If you have rotationally invariance, as you bring in your hand you're increasing the kinetic energy. And so on and so on, until you get to the point where you're able to do it on your own, you're going to have to keep going. And that's what you do. so, this angular momentum barrier is just an expression of that. It's just saying that as you come to smaller and smaller radius, holding the angular momentum fixed, your velocity-- your angular velocity-- must increase. Your kinetic energy must increase-- and we're calling that a potential term just because we know that's what's going to happen. We're calling it the 'angular momentum barrier' for a reason. We know that as we get closer to the center of the universe, our angular velocity will increase. can. You should have done this in classical mechanics as well. So, this is called the angular momentum barrier. Quick question, classically, if you take a charged particle around in a Coulomb potential, can you get it to stay in one place? Well, you should. have done it in classical Mechanics. If you can get it into one place, then you can do it in the same way in quantum mechanics. You can get the same thing in quantum Mechanics as you can in the classical world. classically that system decays, right? Irradiates away energy. Does the angular momentum barrier save us from decaying? Is that why hydrogen is stable? No one wants to stake a claim here? Is hydrogen stable because of conversation of angular momentum? AUDIENCE: No. PROFESSOR: No, absolutely not. Right? So, first off, first of all, let's just say that we're not going to be able to make a hydrogen bomb in the future. We're going to have to wait and see. in your first problems set, when you did that calculation, that particle had angular momentum. So, and if can radiate that away through electromagnetic interactions. Another way to say this is that we can construct-- and we just explicitly see--that we can't use angular momentum to get to the center of the universe. So that didn't save us. We can't rely on it to get us to the centre of the galaxy. We need to use other ways to get there. we can construct a state with which has little l equals 0. In which case the angular momentum barrier is 0 over r squared, because there's nothing. And the reason is that the electron can radiate away energy and angular momentum, because it's in a state where there's no barrier. The barrier is not what keeps you from decaying, it's the energy you're radiating away that's the problem. It's the reason why we can't have a state in which there's a barrier. and so l will decrease and decrease, and can still fall down. So, we still need a reason for why the hydrogen system, quantum mechanically, is stable. [? Why do ?] [? things exist? ?] So, let's answer that question. What I want to do now is, I want. to find out what the reason is for the existence of this system, and why it is so stable. I. want to know why it's so stable, and how it works. to solve-- do I really want to do it that way?-- well, actually, before we do, let's consider some last, general conditions. General facts for central potentials. So, the first is, regardless of what the [? bare ?] potential was, it's not enough to say, 'I want to solve this problem,' it's also necessary to say 'I don't know how to solve it' It's not just a question of whether or not it's possible to solve a problem. It's also about the conditions that make it possible to do so. just due to the angular momentum barrier, we have this 1 over r squared behavior near the origin. So, we can look at this, and ask, what are the boundary conditions at the origin? What must be true of u of r near theorigin? Near u of the origin we have a 1 over R squared behavior. We can ask, look, what is the boundary condition for this behavior? And the answer is that it must be 1 over 1 over 2 over 3 over 4. r-- or sorry, near r goes to zero-- what must be true of u of r? So, the right way to ask this question is not to look at this u of. r, which is not actually the wave function. Instead, we should look at the actual wave function, phi sub.r, or phisub.r. That is, we can ask what is true of phiSub.r if r is near r and u of R is near zero. E, which goes near r equals 0, like u of r over r. So, what should be true of u? Can u diverge? Is that physical? Does u have to vanish? Can it take a constant value? So, I've given you a hint by telling you that I want to. I want you to think about what u is and what it means to you. What do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments below or on Twitter @CNNOpinion. think about there being an infinite potential, but why? Why is that the right thing to do? Well, imagine u of r went to a constant value near the origin, then the wave function diverges near theorigin. If u of R goes to a Constant Value near the Origin, Then The Wave function Diverges Near The Origin. If U of R Goes To A Constant Value Near The origin, Then the Wave Function Diverges near The origin. This is the case for the infinite potential. That's maybe not so bad, maybe it has a 1 over r singularity. It's not totally obvious that that's horrible. So, suppose u goes to a constant. What's so bad about that? So, phi goes to constant over r. What’s sobad about this? So,. So, so, so. So,. so,so,so. So. so.so, so,. so. so, SO. SO, SO,SO,SO. SO.SO, so much so, that it's not so obvious that this is horrible. let's look back at the kinetic energy. P is equal t. The kinetic energy is gonna be minus h bar squared p squared-- so the energy is going to go like, p squared over 2md squared. But here's an important fact, d squared-- the Laplacian-- of 1 over r, well, that's a big deal. That's the energy that's going to be released when a person is running. That energy is called kinetic energy, and it's a very powerful thing. At a general point, d squared has a term that looks like 1 over rd squared r r. Well, r times 1 overr, that's just 1. And this is easy to see what this is at ageneral point. It's just a simple formula for a square root of d squared. It doesn't have to be a complex formula. It just has to be the same as the product of the squares of d and r. And it's just as simple as that. is 0, right? So, the gradient squared of 1 over r, is 0. Except, can that possibly be true at r equals 0? No, because what's the second derivative at 0? As you approach the origin from any direction, the function is going like 1over r, OK, so it's 0. So it's like 1 over 1 over 2, or 1 over 3, or 2 over 4, or 5 over 6, or 7 over 8, or 9 over 10. growing, but it's growing in every direction. So, what's its first derivative at the origin? It's actually ill-defined, because it depends on the direction you come in. The first direction coming in this way, the derivative looks like it's becoming this. But from this direction it's become this, it's actually badly. It's a bad sign. It means it's going to get worse and worse, and that's what we're going to have to deal with. divergent. The second derivative has to go as you go across this point, it's telling you how the first derivative changes. But it changes from plus infinity in this direction, to plus Infinity in thisdirection. That's badly singular. So, this can't possibly be the second derivative. It has to be something else. It's a new type of derivative. The new derivative is called the second derivative of the first. It is a new kind of derivative of the first, which is the first derive. true, what I just wrote down here. And, in fact, d squared on 1 over r-- and this is a very good exercise for recitation-- is equal to delta of r. It's 0-- it's clearly 0 for r0 equals 0--- but at the origin, it's divergent. And it's Divergent in the same way that it is divergent in space and time, and in the sense that it can't be equal to 0 for the same reason. exactly the way you need to get the delta function. OK, which is pretty awesome. So, what that tells us is that if we have a wave function that goes like 1 over r, then the energy contribution-- energy acting on this wave function-- gives us a delta function at. The energy contribution is what gives us our delta function, and it's the same for every wave function. It's the energy that makes up the wave function, not the shape of the wave. the origin. Unless you have the potential, which is a delta function at the origin, nothing will cancel this off. You can't possibly satisfy the energy eigenvalue equation. So, u of r must go to 0 at r goes to 0. Because if it goes to a constant-- any time-- it's not going to be able to be canceled out by a constant. It has to go to a point where it can't be cancelled out by any other point in time. If we calculate the energy, we'll discover that the energy is badly divergent. It does become divergent if we don't have u going to 0.constant. So, notice, by the way, as a side note, that since phi goes 0, we've got a bad divergence in the energy. That's why we need to have u go to 0, because we have a bad energy divergence, yeah? That's the reason we need phi to go 0, so that we can get 0. like, phi is equal to u over r, that means that phi goes to a constant. This is good, because what this is telling us is that the wave function-- So, truly, u is vanishing, but the probability density, which is the wavefunction squared, doesn't have to vanish. That's good. It's a good sign that we're getting closer to the end of the period of time that we've been looking at for the past few decades. about the derivative of u, as you approach the origin from [? Lucatau's ?] Rule. So, this is the first general fact about central potential. The next one-- and this is really fun one-- good Lord! Is that, note--- sorry, two more-- the energy depends on l but not not l. That's a really fun fact. And the next one is that the energy of a molecule depends on the number of atoms in the molecule, but not the size of the molecule. on m. Just explicitly, in the energy eigenvalue equation, we have the angular momentum showing up int the effective potential, little l. But little m appears absolutely nowhere except in our choice of spherical harmonic. For any different m-- and this was pointing out before-- for any differentm, we don't have to use little m. We just have to choose a spherical harmonic for each m, and that's all that's needed for us to know. We don't need to use any other harmonic for any other m. would've got the same equation. And that means that the energy eigenvalue can depend on l, but it can't depend on m, right? So, that means for each m in the allowed possible values, l, l minus 1, [? i ?] minus l-- and this is 2l plus 1 possible. This is 2 l plus 1 plus 1, or 2l minus 1 plus l. That's 2lplus1 plus 1. That means that for each l in theallowed possible values of m, that's l plus m minus 1. And this is l+1 plus m plus l plus l, or l-1 plus l + 1. values-- for each of these m's, the energy is the same. And I'll call this E sub l, because the energy can depend on l. The degeneracy of E sub L is equal to 2l plus 1. Why? Why do we have this degeneracy? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: Yeah, exactly. It's the same as the energy of a nuclear reactor, so it's just like a nuclear power plant, but it's more powerful. We get the degeneracies when we have symmetries, right? When we have a symmetry, we get a degeneracy. And this degeneracy isn't fixed by rotational invariance. And why is this the right thing? Rotational symmetry? So why, did this give us this degeneratesy? And so, here we have the degeneracy, which is not a symmetric degeneracy but a degenerate degeneracy that is not symmetric. So why is that the case? Because it's not symmetrical. But what the rotational degeneracy is saying is, look, if you've got some total angular momentum, the energy can't possibly depend on whether most of it's in Z or X or Y. It can'tpossibly depend on that, but that's what m m m says about the state of the universe. But that's not what the degeneracy says, it's just a way of saying it. It's just the way we think about it. We don't know what it means, but we think it means something. is telling you. M is just telling you what fraction is contained in a particular direction. So, rotational symmetry immediately tells you this. But there's a nice way to phrase this, which of the following, look, what is rotational symmetry? Rotational symmetry is the statement that the energy doesn't care, and so does rotational symmetry in the case of a black hole. It's the same as saying that the universe is made up of black holes, and that black holes have black holes. about rotations. And in particular, it must commute with Lx, and with Ly. So, this is rotationally symmetry. And I'm going to interpret these in a nice way. This guy tells me I can find common eigenfunctions. And, more to the point, a full common eigenebasis. That's a full eigenbasis on a rotationally symmetric basis. And that's a very nice way to look at it, I think. of E and Lz. Can I also find a common eigenbasis of ELz and Ly? Are there common eigenevectors of Lz andLy? No. Because they don't commute, right? E commutes with each of these. OK, so, I'm just going to say,  I'm gonna pick a commonEigenBasis of E and Lz. But I could've picked Lx, or I could have picked Ly. I'm just picking Lz because that's our convention. eigenbasis of E and Lz-- what do these two commutators tell me? E commutes with Lx plus iLy and Lx minus iLy, L plus/minus. So, this tells you that if you have an eigenfunctions of E, and you act with a raising operator, you will get a higher eigenfunction of E than if you don't act with the raising operator. E is a function of Lx, so Lx is a commutator of E. get another eigenfunction of E. And thus, we get our 2L plus 1 degeneracy, because we can walk up and down the tower using L plus and L minus. Cool? OK. So, this is a nice example that when you have a symmetry you get a degeneracy. And vice versa, and vice versa. And so on and so on, until we get to the end of this article. And then we'll go on to the next part of the story. OK. Let's do some examples of using these central potentials. So, E with Lx is 0. E with Ly-- So, are you happy with that statement? That E withLX is 0? AUDIENCE: Yeah. PROFESSOR: Yeah, good. OK, and so. OK. OK,. OK, so, so E withLy is 0, and Ly with Ly is 0 and so on. OK? OK. So E with ly is 0; Ly with lyx is 1. Ly with lx is 2, and L with lh is 3. this 0 because this is just Lx plus iOi. So, E with Lx is 0, and E with Ly is 0. And so, this is like the statement that L squared with L plus/minus equals 0. AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: Cool. OK, so, let's do this. OK. OK,. Let's do it. Let's say E commutes with these guys. And we say that E with E plus E plus L plus Ly equals 0, so E commute with these people. some examples. So, the first example is gonna be-- actually, I'm going to skip this spherical well example-- because it's just not that interesting, but it's in the notes, and you really need to look at it. OK, so, the spherical well. Oh hell, yes, I am going to do it. The spherical well is a very interesting example. It's a great example of how you can make something look different from the way it looks in the real world. So, I'm going to do it in an abridged form, and maybe it's a good thing for recitation. So, in this spherical well, what's the potential? So, here's v of r. Not U bar, and not V effective, just v or r. And here's V effective. And there's v effective. and there's Veffective. And that's what we're going to work on here. We're not going to get there yet, but we're getting there. the potential is going to be this, so, here's r equals 0. And if it's a spherical infinite well, then I'm gonna say, the potential is infinite outside of some distance, l. OK? And it's 0 inside. So, what does this give us? Well, in order to solve the system, we need to find a way to make the potential infinite. And we can do this by taking the number of the radius of the well, l, and adding it to the length of it. we know that the first thing we do is we separate out with yLms, and then we re-scale by 1 over r to get the function of u, and we get this equation, which is E on u is equal to minus h bar squared upon 2m dr squared and we know that E is the ratio of h bar to dr squared. We also know that  E on u  is equal to   minus  h bar squared on 2mdr squared. plus v effective-- well, plus [? lL ?] plus 1-- over r squared with a 2m and an h bar squared. And the potential is 0, inside. So we can just write this. So, if you just-- let me pull out the hbar squareds over 2m-- it becomes minus minus 1. And we can write this: plus v effective plus 1 plus r squared plus 2m plus h bar square. And that's what we're going to do. [INAUDIBLE] plus 1 over r squared. So, this is not a terrible differential equation. And one can do some good work to solve it, but it's a harder differential equation than I want to spend the time to study right now. So I'm just going to consider the case-- I'm going to call it a special case. I'm not going to get into it too much, but I'll consider it. I'll just say that it's not a bad case. It's a good case. case-- when there's zero angular momentum, little l equals 0. E-- and I should call this u sub l-- Eu sub 0 is equal to h bar squared upon 2m. And now, this term is gone-- the angular momentum barrier is gone. It's time to get rid of the term "momentum barrier" and move on to a new concept, " angular momentum" The new concept is called "angular momentum" and it's based on the fact that there's no angular momentum at all. There's no angular momentum, dr squared ul. Because this is only a function of r. So now, this is a ridiculously easy equation. We know how to solve this equation, right? This is saying that that ul.is gone-- because there's noangular momentum, Dr squared ul, which can be written succinctly as ul-- or sorry, u0-- prime prime, because this isonly afunction of r, which is a product of r and dr. So, we know that ul is gone. the energy, a constant, times u is two derivatives times this constant. So, u0 can be written as a cosine of kx-- or sorry-- kr plus b sine ofkr. h bar squared k squared upon 2m equals E. And I should really call this E sub 0, because it's so much simpler than E. It's just E plus b plus h bar plus k squared on 2m. That's the formula for the energy of a person. it could depend on little l, here. So, there's our momentary solution, however, we have to satisfy our boundary conditions, which is that it's gotta vanish at the origin, but it's also gotta vanish on the wall. So,. u of 0 equals 0 tells us that a tells us  that a a is a zero-dimensional object. We need to satisfy the boundary conditions that a must vanish at both the origin and the wall, and a must also vanish on both occasions. must be equal to 0, and u of l equals 0 tells us that, well, if this is 0, we've just got B. So, kl must be the 0 of sine, must be 0 of kr, and so on. This means that kr evaluated at l, which is sine of kl, mustBe equal to0. This is why kr is the sine and kl is the kl of the kr-sine equation. n pi over-- must be equal to n pi, a multiple of pi. And so, this tells you what the energy is. So, this is just like the 1D system. It's just exactly like when the 1d system. So now, to finally close this off. What does this tell you? What does it tell you about the energy of the universe? It tells you that the universe is expanding at a rate of n pi over n pi. That is, it's expanding faster than the speed of light. that the eigenfunctions are? And let me do that here. So, therefore, the wave function phi sub E0 of r theta and phi-- oh god, oh jesus, this is so much easier in [INAUDIBLE] so, phi [INAudIBLE] 0 of rtheta andphi is equal to y0m. But what must be done? What must happen? And so on and so on, until we find the answer. m be? 0, because m goes from plus L to minus L, 0. Y00 times, not u of r, times 1 over r times u. 1 overr times u is a constant times sine of kr. Sine of. kr is the ratio of r to the square root of its square root, or r to r, or 1 to r times r. 1 to 1 is 1,000,000 times 1 to 2,000 is 1 to 3,000. The wave function is 1 over r times sine of n pi over Lr. And what's Y00? It's a constant. And so, there's an overall normalization constant, that I'll call n.kr, but k is equal to npi over L. N pi overLr. is a constant, and so, we get Y00, which is the wave function over r. It's 1 over R times 1 over L, and it's k over L,. and so on. So, this looks bad. There's a 1 over r. Why is this not bad? At the origin, why is it not something I should worry about it? AUDIENCE: [MURMURS] PROFESSOR: Yeah, because sine is linear, first of all, [INAUDIBLE] argument. So, this goes like, n pi over L times r times r. That's a linear sine, and that's a good thing. That r cancels the 1 over r. So, near the origin, this goes like a constant. Yeah? So, u has to 0, but the wave function doesn't. Cool? OK. so, this is a very nice more general story for larger L, which I hope you see in the recitation. OK. OK, so that's what we're going to do here. That's what's going to happen. So that's the story. OK? That's it. Questions on the spherical well? The whole point here-- Oh, yeah, go. AUDIENCE: What do [INAUDIBLE] generally [INAudIBLE]? PROFESSOR: That's true. So, let me rephrase the question, and tell me if this is the same question. There's nothing special about the origin. So why do we have a spherical well in the first place? So, why is it called a 'spherical well' and not a 'ballistic well' do I have a 0 at the origin? Is that the question? AUDIENCE: Yeah. PROFESSOR: It's true. There's nothing special about the origin, except for two things. One is that we're working in a system which has a rotational symmetry. Second, saying that little u has a 0 is not the same as saying that that 0 is a point. It's the point fixed by the rotations. So, actually, the origin is a special point here. the wave function has a 0, but it gets multiplied by 1 over r. So, the wave function, in fact, is non-zero, there. The physical thing is the probability distribution, which is the [? norm ?] squared of the wavefunction. And it doesn't have a 0. It doesn't even have a 1. It just has a 1 over 1, and that's what makes it a probability distribution. The probability distribution is the normal distribution of a wave function. have a 0 at the origin. Does that satisfy? AUDIENCE: Yes. PROFESSOR: So, the origin is special when you have a central potential. That's where the proton is, right? Right, OK. So, there is something special about theorigin. Wow, that was a really [? anti-caplarian ?] sort of sort of thing. It was like, "Oh, my God, that's a really good question." It was really, really good. argument. OK, so that's where the proton-- so, there is something special about the origin, and the wave function doesn't vanish there. It may vanish there, but it doesn't necessarily have to. And we'll see that in a minute. Other questions? Yeah? Audience: So, what again, what's the reasoning for saying that the u of r has to vanish at [? 0 instead ?] [? of L? ?] PROFESSOR: Good. whoops, phi goes to constant-- if u doesn't go to 0, if it goes to any constant, non-zero, then the wave function diverges. And if we calculate the energy, we get a delta function at the origin. So, there's an infinite contribution of energy at the start of the wave. That's not physical. It's just the way the wave functions work, and it's not going to change any time in the near future or in the future. So, in order to get a sensible wave function with finite energies, we need to have the u vanishes, because of the 1 over u. And the reason that we said it had to vanish at l, was because I was considering this spherical well-- spherical infinite well-- where a a is a wave function. And I was thinking of a spherical well where a is an infinite wave function, and I wanted to see if I could get it to behave like a finite wave function in this way. particle is stuck inside a region of radius, capital L, and that's just what I mean by saying I have an infinite potential. So, with all that done, we can now do the hydrogen-- or the Coulomb-- potential. And I want to do it with the hydrogen, not the hydrogen from the other side of the atom. OK. OK, thanks. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to go to the next page. People often use the following words when solving this problem-- we will now solve the problem of hydrogen. This is false. I am not about to solve for you the problems of hydrogen, I am going to construct for you a new problem.emphasize that we often use. the following Words when-- people often use to solve this problem. We are going to build a problem-solving tool. We will construct a problem solving tool for you to use. This will help you to solve your problems with more ease. nice toy model, which turns out to be an excellent first pass at explaining the properties observed in hydrogen gases, their emission spectra, and their physics. This is a model. It is a bad model, It doesn't fit the data. But it's pretty good. And we'll be able to improve. And it's a good first pass. It's a very, very good model. And I think it's going to get better and better over time. I hope it's good enough to be used in the future.  physics is a process of building models that do a good job of predicting. And the better their predictions, the better the model. OK? So, it is the solution of the Coulomb potential. So, I cannot say this strongly enough, Physics is a Process of Building Models That Do A Good Job of Predicting. And I want to emphasize that strongly enough. It's a process that is very, very complex. But it's a Process. And it's very exciting. And we'll talk about it more later. they're all wrong. Every single model you ever get from physics is wrong. There are just some that are less stupidly wrong. Some are a better approximation to the data, OK? This is not hydrogen. This is going to be our first pass at hydrogen. It's the Coulomb potential. And we're going to use it to make a new type of superconductor. And it's going to take a long time, but it's the first step in the right direction. Coulomb potential, V of r, is equal to minus e squared over r. This is what you would get if you had a classical particle with infinite mass and charge plus b. And then another particle over here, with mass, little m, and charge, minus e. And you didn't have a Coulomb potential of r. You didn't even have a particle with mass. You just had two particles with different masses and different charges. That's how you get Coulomb Potential of a particle. pay too much attention to things like relativity, or spin, or, you know, lots of other things. And you have no background magnetic field, or electric field, and anything else. And if these are point particles, and-- All of those things are false that I just said. But if all of them are false, then you can't have a magnetic field. You can't even have an electric field. So you have to have a point particle field. And that's what we call point particles. those things were true, in that imaginary universe, this would be the salient problem to solve. So, let's solve it. Now, are all those things that I said that were false-- the proton's a point particle, the Proton is infinitely massive, there's no spin-- are those preposterously stupid? AUDIENCE: No. No, they're not. The proton is a point particles, and it has no spin, so it can't be spun. PROFESSOR: No, they're excellent approximations in a lot of situations. They're just not exactly correct. I want to keep this in your mind. These are gonna be good models, but they're not exact. So, we're not solving hydrogen. We're gonna solve this idealized Coulomb potential. That's what we're trying to do here. It's not about solving hydrogen, it's about solving Coulomb Potential. That is what we want to do. problem. OK, so let's solve it. So, if V is minus e over r squared, then the equation for the rescaled wave function, u, becomes minus h bar squared upon 2mu prime prime of r plus the effective potential. We've already used separation of variables, and we know that the wave function is this little u times 1 over r times yLm. For some l and some some, we have the equation we want to solve. We have the solution. The first thing we should do any time you're solving an interesting problem, the first thing you should do is do dimensional analysis. And if you do dimensionalAnalysis, the units of e squared-- well, this is easy-- e squared must be an energy times a length. So, if you're trying to solve a problem, you need to know how many e squared units there are. That's what dimensional analysis is about, and it's a very useful tool for solving a problem. this is an energy times a length. Also known as p squared l, momentum squared over 2m, 2 times the mass times the length. H bar has units of p times l. It's useful to put things in terms of mass, momentum, and lengths, because you can cancel them out. This is the same as saying that a person has a body with a head and a torso with a radius of a few inches. It is also known as a person having a body and a head with an radius of several inches. From this, we can build two nice quantities. We can build something with units of a radius. And I'm going to choose the radius. OK. And what's the only other parameter we have? We have the mass, which has units of mass. And so, from this,we can build r0. The first, is we canBuild r0, which is the radius of the object. And the second, is that the object has a mass of r1. The radius of this object is r1, and the mass of it is r2. factors of 2 judiciously, h bar squared over 2me squared-- whoops, e squared-- so, let's just make sure this has the right units. E squared has units of energy times the length, but h bar squares over 2m is units of p squared and l squared. So that has to be a factor of 2, not 2me, so that's what we're going to use. We'll call it "e squared" or "e bar squared" units of energy times the length squared. So, length squared over length, this has units of length, so this is good. And from this, it's easy to see that we can build a characteristic energy by taking e squared and dividing e squared by length squared, so we can get a length energy. This is called the characteristic energy of a length squared energy. The characteristic energy is the length of the energy divided by the energy squared, or e squared, and this is known as the length energy of the length. it by this length scale. And so then, the energy, which I'll call e0, which is equal to e squared over r0, is equal  to 2me to the 4th over h bar squared. So, before we do anything else, without solving any problems, we immediately can do a couple of things. We can use this energy to solve the problem of how to get to the center of the circle. And then, we can use it to get the circumference of the cube. things. The first is, if you take the system and I ask you, look, what do you expect? If this is a quantum mechanical-- a 1d problem in quantum mechanics-- with a potential, and we know something about 1D quantum mechanical problems-- I guess, this guy-- we knowSomething about. Things. The second is that if this is. a 1D problem inQuantum mechanics-- a. potential, with a possible, we knowsomething about. 1D problems. 1D quantum mechanical problems. Which is that the ground state has what energy? Some finite energy. It doesn't have infinite negative energy. What do you expect to be roughly the groundState energy of this system? AUDIENCE: [MURMURING] PROFESSOR: Yeah. Roughly minus e0. That that's the energy of the ground State. Right. That's what we're looking for. That is the energy that we're trying to get to. seems like a pretty good guess. It's the only dimensional sensible thing. Maybe we're off by factors of 2. But, maybe it's minus e0. So, that's a good guess, a first thing, before we do any calculation. And if you actually take mu e to the 4th over h bar, it's the same as taking h bar to the 1st over the 2nd over the 3rd over the 5th over the 6th. That's the way to go. squared, this is off by, unfortunately, a factor of 4. This is equal to 4 times the binding energy, which is also called the Rydberg constant. Wanna make sure I get my factors of two right. Yep, I'm off by a Factor of 4, that's right. I'm wrong by afactor of four. That's right, my friend, I was wrong by four. I was off by four times. That’s right, that was wrong. I’m sorry. 4 from what we'll call the Rydberg energy, which is 13.6 eV. And this is observed binding energy of hydrogen. So, before we do anything,Before we solve any equation, we have a fabulous estimate of the bindingenergy of hydrogen, right? All the work we're about to do is to work out what that binding energy is, and how it's related to the universe. We'll show you how it works out in the next few weeks, when we'll have a better idea of what it means. gonna be to deal with this factor of 4, right? Which, I mean, is important, but I just want to emphasize how much you get just from doing dimensional analysis. Immediately upon knowing the rules of quantum mechanics, knowing that this is the equation you should solve, without ever touching it, you can solve it without ever having to touch it. You can solve the equation without ever even touching it. It's a very simple thing to do, but it's very powerful. that equation, just dimensional analysis gives you this answer. OK? Which is fabulous. So, with that motivation, let's solve this problem. Oh, by the way, what do you think r0 is a good approximation to? Well, it's a length scale. AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: Yeah! It's probably something like the expectation. It's likely something like that. OK, that's what we're going to go with. That's the answer. value of the radius-- or maybe of theradius squared-- because the expectation value of that radius is probably 0. OK, so, let's solve this system. And at this point, I'm not gonna actually solve out the differential equation in detail. I'm just gonna tell you how the solution goes, and I'll show you how to solve it to get to the right answer. The solution is the same as the previous one, but it's a bit more complex. It's a little bit more complicated than the previous solution. because solving it is a sort of involved undertaking. So, think back to the harmonic oscillator when we did the brute force method of solving it. And so, here's the first thing, so we look at this equation. We had this differential equation-- this guy-- and we want to solve it. We want to find out what the answer is. And we find out that it's a very complex equation. And then we solve it, and we find the answer. And that's the beginning of the story. solving the hydrogen system, OK? When we did the brute force method-- she sells seashells-- when the brute Force method of solving, what did we do? We first did, we did asymptotic analysis. We extracted the overall asymPTotic form, at infinity and at the origin, to get a nice regular form. That's how you get a regular form of a hydrogen system. It's not a perfect solution, but it's a good starting point. differential equation that didn't have any funny singularities, and then we did a series approximation. Most differential equations of some, maybe if you're lucky, it's a special function that people have studied in detail, but most don't have a simple solution like a Gaussian or a power large, or something. Most of them just have some complicated solution. This is one of those miraculous differential equations where we can actually exactly write down the solution by doing the series approximation, having done asymptotic analysis. the first thing when doing dimensional analysis too, let's make everything dimensionless. OK, and it's easy to see what the right thing to do is. Take r and make it dimensionless by pulling out a factor of rho, or of r0. So, I'll pick our new variable is gonna be r0, and we'll call it r-1. We'll call the new variable r-2, or r-3, and that will be r-4. called rho, this is dimensionless. And the second thing is I want to take the energy, and I will write it as minus e0, times some dimensionless energy, epsilon. So, these guys are my dimensionless variables. And when you go through and do that, the equation you get is minus. e0. And that's the equation for the equation that we use to solve the problem of gravity. It's a very simple equation, but it's very powerful. d rho squared plus l l plus 1 over rho plus epsilon u is equal to 0. So, the form of this differential equation is, OK, it's not different in any deep way, but it's a little bit easier. This is gonna be the easier part of the story. We'll be back in a few days with the second part of this story. Back to the page you came from. Click here to read the rest of the article. Back To the page we were from. way to deal with this, because I don't have to dealing with any stupid constant. And so now, let's do the brute force thing. Three, asymptotic analysis. And here, I'm just going to write down the answers. And the reason is, first off, this is something you should either do or not do, depending on what you want to do. It's not something that you should do if you don't think it's going to work. in recitation, or see-- go through-- on your own, but this is just the mathematics of solving a differential equation. This is not the important part. So, when rho goes to infinity, which terms dominate? Well, this is not terribly important. That term is gonna be gonna dominate, too. And so on and so on, until we get to the end of the story. And then we'll go on to the next part of the show. And we'll end the show on a cliffhanger. Two derivatives is a constant. And if we get that d rho squared plus u, rho goes to infinity, these two terms dominate.dominate. You know what those solutions look like, they look like exponentials, with the exponential being brute-- with the power-- the exponent, sorry, being root epsilon. That's what we're trying to do here. We're looking for a solution to the problem of how do we get to infinity? We're going to try to find a solution. So, u is going to go like e to the minus square root epsilon rho. For normalize-ability, I picked the minus, I could've picked the plus, that would've been divergent. So, as rho goes to 0, what happens? Well, as Rho goes To 0, this is insignificant. And this is totally. And it's not a problem. It's just a very small thing that happens when the square root of rho is 0. dominates over this guy. On the other hand, if l is equal to 0, then this is the only term that survives, so we'd better make sure that that behaves gracefully. As rho goes to0, asymptotic analysis is gonna tell us that u goes like rho. Well, two derivatives, that's what we're going to get. That's what's going to happen when l goes to 0. And that's the way it's gonna go. we pulled down a rho squared, and so two derivatives in this guy, we pulled down an l, then an l plus 1. So, this should go like rho to the l plus1. There's also another term. One growing, one decreasing, here, there's another solution. That also does it, because we get minus l. But that is also badly diversion at the origin, and we need to go back to the origin of the problem. We need to get the plus l l minus 1. it goes like 1 over 0 to the l. That's bad. So, this tells us, having done this in analysis, we should write that u is equal to rho to theL plus 1 times e to the minus root epsilon rho times some remaining remaining. That would be the solution to the problem of how to get to 0 from 1. That is the solution I have come up with for the problem. It's not perfect, but it's better than the alternative. function, which I'll call v, little v. Little v of rho, and this, asymptotically, should go to a constant near the origin and something that vanishes slower than an exponential at infinity. So then, we take this and we do our series expansion. We take that expression, we plug it into the equation for the rho function, and then we plug in the equation. We then plug the equation into the formula for the Rho function. it in. At that point, all we're doing is a change of variables. We plug it in, and we get a resulting differential equation. Rho v prime prime plus 2 1 plus l minus root epsilon rho v Prime plus 1 minus 2 root ePSilon l plus 1 v equals 1 v. It's the same as the equation for the square root of the root of  the square root of the root  of the root of the square root  of the logarithm. V is equal to sum over, sum from j equals 0 to infinity, of a sub j rho to the j. So, this is the resulting differential equation for the little v guy. And we do a series expansion. Plug this guy in here, just like in the case of the case 0.0. The result is the series expansion for the v guy, which is the same as the v equation. The series expansion is the result for the differential equation, and it's the same in this case. of the harmonic oscillator equation, and get a series expansion. Now, OK, let me write it out this way. And the series expansion has a solution, which is a sub j plus 1. And this is, actually, kind of kind of a fun process. So, if you, you know, like quick little things like this, it's kind of fun to do. It's a fun way to learn about the theory of harmonic oscillators, for example, and how they work. calculations, this is a sweet little calculation to take this expression. Plug it in and derive this recursion relation, which is root-- or 2 root-- epsilon times j plus l plus 1 minus 1 over j plus 1 j plus 2 l plus 2 aj. So, here's our series expansion. It's a series expansion of a series. It is root-epsilon-j plus l-1 minus 1 plus j-1 over j-2 over j. And in order for this terminate, we must have that some aj max plus 1 is equal to 0. So, one of these guys must eventually vanish. And the only thing's that's changing is little j. So,. what that tells us is that for some maximum value of little. j, for some minimum value oflittle j, For some maximum number of little j to be 0, we need to have little j be 0. And so, for this to happen, little j must be at least 0. For this to occur, the number of j is at least 1. root 2 epsilon times j maximum plus l plus 1 is equal to minus 1. But that gives us a relationship between overall j max, little l, and the energy. And if you go through, what you discover is that the energy isequal to 1 over 4 n squared, where n is equalto j max plus lplus1. And what this tells is that  the energy  is labeled by an integer, n, and an integer,. And it's equal to m. minus e0 over 4 n squared, independent of l and m. And so, by solving the differential equation exactly, which in this case we kind of amazingly can, what we discover is that the energy eigenvalues are, indeed, exactly 1/4 of e0. And they're spaced with a 1 over n squared. And we find that they're independent of m and l and independent of n and l. So we can say that they are independent of each other. Squared, which does two things. Not only does that explain-- so, let's think about the consequence of this very briefly-- not only do that explain the minus 13.6 eV, but that also explains the binding energy of hydrogen as is observed, that it does more. Remember in the very first sentence, we said, 'squared' This is a way of saying that the square of the square root of the energy of the hydrogen molecule is less than 1%. And we say that this is because it is more than 1. beginning one of the experimental facts we wanted to explain about the universe was that the spectrum of light of hydrogen went like 30 over 4 n squared. This was the Rydberg relation. And now we see explicitly. So, we've solved for that expansion. But there's a real puzzle here. We need to find out how the universe got so big. We can't just say 'the universe expanded. We have to explain it. We've got to find a way of explaining it' Every energy should be degenerate, with degeneracy 2l plus 1. But here, we've discovered the energy is, in fact, not just independent of m, but it's independent of l, too. Why? What symmetry is explaining this extra degeneracy? We'll pick that up next time. We've fit a nice bit of experimental data, but we've found that the energy isn't independent of m, but of l. We're going to find out why that is.