The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open CourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. back to what we were doing. The plan for today is as follows. We're going to look at this unitary time evolution and calculate this operator u, given the Hamiltonian. That will be the first order of business today. Then we will look at the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. And finally, we will go on to the next phase of the experiment. Back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript of this interview with Professor Richard Quest. The Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics is one where the operators, the Schrodinger operators, acquire time dependence. And it's a pretty useful way of seeing things. It makes the relation between classical mechanics and quantum mechanics more obvious. So it's pretty useful. It's also pretty useful for calculating things as well, and makes the connection between classical and quantum more obvious, as well as being a useful way to see how things work in the real world. So, yes, it's useful. a very important tool. So we'll discuss that. We'll find the Heisenberg equations of motion and solve them for a particular case today. All this material is not so to be covered in the test. The only part-- of course, the first few things I will say today about solving them are about solving the differential equations. That's what we're going to focus on today. We're not going to cover all the other stuff. We've got a lot to talk about. for the unitary operator you've done in other ways, and I will do it again this time. So going back to what we were saying last time, we postulated unitary time evolution. We said that psi at t was given by some operator U of t t0 psi t0. And we said that t t t was a unitary number. And I will say again that this is the same as what we said last time. It's the same thing, but it's a different way of saying it. The Hamiltonian is given in terms of U by this equation. So that was our derivation of the Schrodinger equation. We found that whenever we declare that states evolve in time in that way, they satisfy a first order time differential equation. And we talked about this operator. First we showed that it doesn't depend really on t0. Then we found that this equation implied the SchRodinger equation with a Hamiltonian given by the following expression. ih dU dt of t t0 u dagger of tt0. we showed that it's Hermitian. It has units of energy. And as you may have seen already in the notes, there is a very clear correspondence between this operator and the way the dynamics follows with the ideas of Poisson brackets that are the precursors of commutators from classical mechanics. It's a very nice way to look at the dynamics of a wavefunction. It is very nice to see how it can be used to understand the dynamics. It can be a very useful way to understand how the dynamics works. So that's in the notes. I will not go in detail in this. Many of you may have not heard of Poisson brackets. It's an interesting thing, and really that will be good enough. So our goal today is to find U given H, because as we mentioned last time, we need to find a U. We'll be back next week with the next episode of "This Is Life with Lisa Ling" at 10 p.m. ET. Back to the page you came from. for physics it is typically more easy to invent a quantum system by postulating a Hamiltonian and then solving it. So our goal in general is to find U of t t0 given H of t. That's what we're supposed to do. So the question is: What is the time evolution operator of the quantum system we are trying to create? The answer is that it is a time-evolutionary Hamiltonian, which is a type of time-invariant Hamiltonian. ih dU dt is equal to H of t U of t t0. By multiplying this equation by a u from the right, I will write first this term. So I multiplied this equation  by u and wrote it as ih dT dt ih U dt. I then wrote the equation as H of T U of T t0 ih DT Dt H of H U Dt T of H of U DT T of Dt Dt of H. u from the right. This operator is unitary, so u dagger u is one. That's why this equation cleaned up to this. Now there's no confusion really here with derivatives, so I might this well write them with normal derivatives. So I'll write this equation as d dt of U. The result is the equation for the ratio of U to the square root of its square root, which is the ratio between U and the root of the cube root of U, or the ratio U to U. t t0 is equal to H of t U of t t0. You should be able to look at that equation and say I see the Schrodinger equation there. How? Imagine that you have a psi of t0 here, and you put it in. Then the right hand side becomes h and t acting on psi of t. And on the left hand side, this psi of. t0 can be put inside the derivative because it doesn't depend on t. Therefore this becomes ih bar d dt of psi of T. let's solve this. We'll go through three cases. Case one, h is time independent. So we're doing this sort of quickly. So H of t is really H like that. No explicit time dependence there. So what do we have? ih bar. Let's write dU dt is equal H times H times D. DU is equal D times D, so D is equal to H. D is the same as H. H is the time dependence. U. use equal to e to the minus iHt over h bar times U0. Does that work? Well, we can think du dt and ih. So we get ih when I take dU dt, I have to differentiate this. And we tried to write a solution of the form U use equalto e to  e to    i  h   h   i h i Ht  ih  h iHt ih. exponential. And now in this exponential, this full operator H is there. But we are differentiating with respect to time. And H doesn't depend on time, so this is not a very difficult situation. You could imagine the power series expansion. H, as far as this derivative goes, is like if it would be even a number. It wouldn't make any difference if it's an operator. So the derivative withrespect to time of this thing is minus iH over h times the same exponential. the right. It cannot be to the right of U0 though, because this is a matrix, a constant matrix that we've put in here as a possible thing for boundary condition. So so far we've taken this derivative, and then i's cancel, the h bar cancels, and you get H. And then you get U0, which is a derivative of H, and U0 is the boundary condition for U0. And so on and so on, until you get to U0 and then you have U0-U0. But this whole thing is, again, U. So the equation has been solved. So try this. And it works. So having this solution we can write, for example, that U of t t0 is going to be e to the minus iHt over h bar, some constant matrix. When t is equal to t0, this matrix becomes the unit matrix. And therefore from here, U0 is the inverse of this matrix, which is nothing else but e. So I can substitute back here what U0 is and finally obtain U of t t0 is e to the minus iH over h bar t minus t0. And this is for h time independent. And that's our solution. There's very little to add to this. We discussed that in recitation on Thursday. This is a very simple solution to a very complex problem. And we'll be back in a few days to talk about it again. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. unitary operator you've been seeing that from the beginning of the course in some sense, that you evolve energy eigenstate. If this acts on any energy eigenestate, h is an energy. If you act here on an energy eigestate, the energy eegenestate is an eigen state precisely for H, you can. You can do anything with an energy that is in the eigenstates of H. You have to be able to act on any of them. E to the, say, alpha h on a state psi n is equal to e to the alpha en psi n. So the function of an operator acting on an eigenstate is e to h on psi n if h on psi n isequal to en on psis n.put just the number here. That is the number of a state that is in a state of a certain type. For example, a state is in the state where the state of the state it is in is psi n, and the state is called a psi state. is just the function evaluated at the eigenvalue. So this is a rule that you've been using a really long time. OK, so when h is time independent, that's what it is. How about when h has a little time dependence? What do I call a littleTime Dependency? A. Time Dependency is the difference between time independent and time dependent. A. time dependence is when a time dependent function has a time dependence on another time-independent function, such as a clock. little time dependence is an idea, the sign to make it possible for you to solve the equation, even though it has some time dependence. So you could have Hamiltonians that are time dependent, but still have a simplifying virtue. So H of t is time dependent. But assume that the equation is not time dependent and that it can be written as a function of time. Then the Hamiltonians can be thought of as a type of Hamiltonians, with a time-dependent Hamiltonian. H at t1 and h at t2 commute for all t1 & t2. So what could that be? For example, you know that the particle in a magnetic field, the spin in amagnetic field is minus gamma B dot the spin. And you could have a time dependent magnetic field. Now then if the magnetic field is time dependent, but imagine its direction is not time dependent. So if the direction of the field isn't time dependent then it could be a constant gamma. I'm not sure this is the constant gamma that they usually call gamma. for example, you would have here minus gamma Bz of t times Sz. And the Hamiltonian at different times commute because Sz commutes with itself, and the fact that it's time independent doesn't make it fail to commute. So if you have a magnetic field that is fixed in one place, it doesn't matter if it's in a different place at other times. That's what happens with a Hamiltonian, which is time independent and can be used to solve complex problems. direction but change in time, you can have a situation where your Hamiltonian is time dependent, but still at different times it commutes. And you will discuss such case because it's interesting. But later on as we do nuclear magnetic resonance, we will have the more interesting case in which the Hamiltonian does not change. And we will talk about that later on in the course of this article. We hope you will join us for the rest of the show on Friday. We will be in the audience at the University of California, San Diego. a magnetic field rotates and therefore it's not that simple. So what happens if you have a time dependent Hamiltonian that actually commutes? Well, the claim is that U of t t0 is given by a natural extension of what we had before. You would want to put exponential of the Hamiltonian in the Hamiltonians. The Hamiltonian is a Hamiltonian with a time dependence on the time it takes to commute. It is a time-dependent Hamiltonian, which means it can be written in terms of time. minus iHt, but the reason this worked was because the derivative with respect to time brought down an iH over h bar. So one way to fix this is to put t t0 H of t prime dt prime. So this is an answer to try this. Look at this. It's a very simple way to solve the problem. The answer is to change the derivative of the time derivative to a prime. The result is the same as the original answer, except with a prime instead of a t. If the Hamiltonian were to be time independent, you could take it out. And then you would get t minus t0. That brings you back to this case, so this looks reasonable. So let me call this quantity R of t. Then you notice that R dot of t, and then you notice the quantity t of t as a function of time. That looks reasonable, too, so we can call it R of T. And that's what we're going to call the quantity of time in this case. the derivative of this quantity with respect to time. Well, when you differentiate an integral the upper argument, you get just the integrand evaluated at the time. So this is H of t. And now here comes a crucial part of the equation: H is the time derivative of the time product. So H of h is the derivative of time product of time and time. This is the integral of time divided by time, or H of H. It is also the time factor of time. And it is the integration of time. point. This U is really e to the R. And you're trying to differentiate to see if the equation holds dU dt. Would be d dt of 1 plus R plus RR plus 1 3 factor RRR. And now what is the d u dt? Would be 1 plus 1 plus 2 plus 3 plus 4 plus 5 plus 6 plus 7 plus 8 plus 9 plus 9. And so on and so on. This is the equation for the d U dt equation. happens? You differentiate here, and the first term is R dot. Here You, would have one half R dot R plus R R dot and then 1 over 3 factorial, but three factors. But here is the claim. R dot RR plus RR dot R and R plus RR R dot is the factorial effect. It is the result of the fact that the first half of the word is R, the second half is R and the third is R. The result is thefactorial effect, which is the product of the first two terms. R dot depends on H, and R is an integral of H as well, but the H at different times commute anyway, so this must be true. Since the Hamiltonians are assumed to commute, R dot commutes with R. This becomes like a normal derivative of an exponential in which you can move the R dot to the left everywhere. And this becomes like an exponential where R dot is like an H and here's a contribution to H. And there's no place where you can get a contribution, because Rdot is like a H. you're differentiating the usual thing. So this is R dot and times the exponential of R. So actually that means that we've got pretty much our answer, because R dot is minus i over h bar H of t. And e to the R is U, so we got dU. So that's pretty much the answer to the mystery of how the universe is made of atoms and molecules. The answer is that it is the same as the number of atoms that make up the universe. dt equals this, which is the same as this equation. The only reason a derivative with respect to time will not give the usual thing is if R and R dot fail to commute, and they don't. So you could put the R dot here. You can put R dot.dt here. It's the same thing as the equation for the time derivative. It doesn't matter what the derivative is, just the fact that it's not the usual time derivative, and that it doesn't commute. on the other side, because it commutes with R, but it's better here. And therefore you've got this very nice solution. So the solution is not that bad. Now finally, I want to discuss for a second the general case. So that's case-- there was a 1, a 2, a 3, a 4, a 5, a 6, a 7, a 8, a 9, a 10, a 11, a 12, a 13, a 14, a 15, a 16, a 17, a 18. If H of t is general, there's not too much you can do. You can write something that will get you started doing things, but it's not obviously terribly useful. But it's interesting anyway that there's a way to write H of T general. It's not terribly useful, but at least it's a starting point for thinking about how to do things in the future. It could be a useful tool for the future, too, if you know how to use it. something that makes sense. I'll write the answer and explain how it looks, and then you will see that it's OK. It's interesting. But it probably is not the most practical way you can solve this problem. So here it is. U of t and t0. U is for U of T, t is for T, and T is for t0 is for 0. I'm not sure if this makes sense, but it's an interesting way to look at it. There's an acronym for this thing. T it's called the time ordered exponential. This operator does something to the exponential function. So it's a definition. So I have to say what this time ordering exponential is, and it's the following. You take the exponential and just begin to expand. So this is a time-ordered exponential. It's a way of expanding the exponential. So the time- ordered exponential is a way to expand the exponential, and this is the way to do it. 1 minus i over h bar-- or I'll put like this, plus minus iover h bar integral from t0 to t of dt1 H of t1. So far, so good. I've just expanded this. Now if I would continue expanding, I would get something that doesn't provide the solution. I would like to find a way to make the problem easier to solve. I'd like to know how to make it easier for people to solve the problem. You see, this thing is the solution when the Hamiltonian at different times commute. In fact, it's not the solution. So what is the next term here? The next term is you think of the exponential as you would have done if you were trying to solve the problem of how to get the Hamiltonians to work together at the same time. That's what the exponential is supposed to do, and that's what we're trying to do here. We're not going to get there right away. expand as usual. So you will have here plus one half of this thing squared. So I will put something and then erase it, so maybe don't copy. One half minus i over h bar squared. And you would say, well, t0 to t dt prime H of t prime. That would be one half minus one half over one half. And that would be the square root of one half plus the other half. So that's the square of one and a half plus one and one. t0 to t dt double prime H of double prime. Well, that would be just an exponential. So what is a time ordered exponential? You erase the one half. And then for notation call this t1 and t1. The next integral do it only up to time t1, and then the next integral. And so on and so on until you get to the end of the series. And that's the time order of a time-ordered exponential. It's called a "time ordered exponential" and call this t2. So t1 will always be greater than t2, because t2 is integrated from t0 to t1. And as you integrate here over the various t1's, you just integrate up to that value. So you're doing less of the full integral then you should be doing, and that's what we're trying to do here. We're not trying to make a full integral, we're just making a full integration. We don't want to do too much of it, we just want to make it better. that's why the factor of one half has disappeared. This can be continued. I can write the next one would be minus i over h bar cubed integral t0 to t H of t1. And then they next integral goes up to t1 dt2 H of  t2. And the next integral is t0  to t1  dt2  of  t2, and so on. And so on until the end of the book. t2. So t0 to t2 dt3 H of t3. Anyway, that's a time ordered exponential. And I leave it to you to take the time derivative, at least to see that the first few terms are working exactly the way they should. That is, if you take a time derivative. The time derivative is a measure of the time it takes for a term to reach a certain point in a time-varying function. For example, in the case of t2.t2, t0 is t0, and t3 is t2, and so on. of this, you will get H times that thing. So it's a funny object. It's reassuring that something something is going to happen to you," he says. "You will differentiate the first term, and you'll get the right thing," he adds. "Then the second term and you will start getting everything that you need," he concludes. "It's reassuring," says the actor of the object, which is a power series of the same name. "I think it's very funny," says his wife, "and it's really fun." like this success, but in general, you would want to be able to do all these integrals and to sum them up. So it's of limited usefulness. It's a nice thing that you can write it, and you can prove things about it. But it's not that easy, and it's nice to have a way to do it. And it's a good thing that I can do it, because it means I'm not doing it all the time, but it's also a bit of a nuisance. and manipulate it. But when you have a practical problem, generally that's not the way you solve it. In fact, when we will discuss the rotating magnetic fields for magnetic resonance, we will not solve it in this way. We will try to figure out the solution some other way. And we will talk about how to use the magnetic field in a more practical way in the next episode of this series. The next episode will focus on the use of magnetic fields in the study of magnetic resonance. But in terms of completeness, it's kind of pretty in that you go from the exponential to the time ordered exponential. And I think you'll see more of this in 806. So that's basically our solution for H and for the unitary operator U. And what do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments below or on Twitter @CNNOpinion. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter @cnno and @daily_cnn. we're going to do now is turn to the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. Yes, questions? AUDIENCE: Why does R dot [INAUDIBLE]? PROFESSOR: Because that's really a property of integrals. d dx integral up to x from x0 g of x prime is just equal to g of d prime. d prime is the same as g prime, so R dot is equal to d prime, which is the difference between g prime and x prime. This is a constant here, so you're not varying the integral over in this limit. So if this limit would also be x dependent, you would get another contribution, but we only get the contribution from here. What's really happening is you're integrating up to x, then up to up tox.x. That's what's going on here. It's a constant. We're not changing the integral. We are just integrating it up to a constant amount. That is what's happening here. Professor: Time order the following.x plus epsilon subtracting, so you pick up the value of the function of the upper limit. Yes? Audience: So what happens to the T that was pre factor? PROFESSOR: What happens to this T? AUDIENCE: Yeah, what happens?PROFESSor: That's just a symbol. It says time order theFollowing.x minus epsilon subtracting,. so you picked up. the value. of thefunction of the lower limit. exponential. So at this stage, this is a definition of what t on an exponential means. T is not an operator in the usual sense of quantum mechanics or anything like that. Whenever you have an exponential of this form, the time ordered exponential is this series that we've written down. It's just a definition. Yes? AUDIENCE: So when we have operators in differential equations, do we still get [INAUDIBLE]? PROFESSOR: If we have what? solutions? PROFESSOR: Yes, pretty much. Because at the end of the day, this is a first order matrix differential equation. So it's a collection of first order differential equations for every element of a matrix. It's pretty much the same as you have before. If you know the operator at, you'll be able to solve the equations for the matrix. If not, you're going to have to go back to the beginning and do the same thing again. any time, initial time, with the differential equation you know the operator at a little bit time later. So the operator is completely determined if you know it initially and the differential equations. So I think it's completely analogous. It's just that it's harder to solve. Nothing else. One last thing: I'm not a mathematician, I'm just a guy who likes to think about things. I like to think of things in terms of math, and that's what I do. question. "What is the interpretation of that wave function?" "Well, it's not that we get the wave," says the professor. "It's just that we can somehow fly in this unitary operator, and then we have a differential equation, and we somehow, let's say, get a wave function out of it" "What do you think the wave function is?" asks the audience. "I don't know. I don't think it's a wave," the professor says. function out of this. What really is happening is that you have learned how to calculate this operator given H. And therefore now you're able to evolve any wave function. So you have solved the dynamical system. If somebody tells you a time equals 0, your system is here, you say. You have learned to calculate the operator. And then you can evolve a wave function out of it. You say, 'If somebody tells me a time is 0, my system is in here' can now calculate where it's going to be at the later time. So that's really all you have achieved. You now know the solution. When you're doing mechanics and they ask you for an orbit problem, they say at this time the planet is here. What are you supposed to do with that information? You can't do anything with it. You can only use it to get a better idea of where the planet will be at a later point in time. That's all you can do. find? x is a function of time. You now know how it's going to develop. You've solved equations of motion. Here it's the same. If you know it at any time, you've solved problem. OK, so Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. Heisenburg picture ofQuantum mechanics. You know the wave function. of time equals. If it's known, it's a solution. If not, you're still working on the problem. You're still trying to solve it. The Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics is not something that you necessarily invent from the beginning. The way we think of it is we assume there is a Schrodinger picture that we've developed in which we can look at quantum mechanics. So basically the Heisenburg picture exists thanks to the existence of the Schrodingers picture.picture. The idea is that quantum mechanics can only be understood if it is understood in terms of this picture. This is the idea behind the 'Heisenberg theory' have operators like x, p, spin, Hamiltonians, and wave functions. And then we are going to define a new way of thinking about this, which is called the Heisenberg picture of the quantum mechanics. So it all begins by considering a Schrodinger operator As hat, and s is for As. As a result, we have a new picture of quantum mechanics called the 'Heisenberg model' which is based on the 'Schrodinger model' of quantum mechanics. Schrodinger. And the motivation comes from expectation values. Suppose you have time dependent states, in fact, matrix elements. One time dependent state alpha of t, one time dependentState beta of t. Two independent time dependentStates. So you could ask what is the matrix element of A between these two states? And the answer is that it's a time-dependent state alpha and time-dependence beta. And that's why it's called a matrix element. And it's also called a time dependency state beta. two time dependent states, a matrix element. But the time dependence has already been found, say, in principle, if you know U dagger. And then you can speak about the time dependent matrix elements of the operator As or the matrix element of this time dependent operator between the time equals 0 states. This operator is sufficiently important that this operator is called the Heisenberg version of the operators s. Has time dependence, and it's defined by this equation. So whenever you have Schrodinger operator, whether it be time dependent or time independent, whatever the Schrodingers operator is, it has time dependence. I have now a definition of what I will call the Heisenberg operator. And it is obtained by acting with a unitary operator, U.S. And operators always act on operators from the left and from the right. That's something that operators act on states from theleft. They act on U.N. states from left to right. And that's something they act on state from right to left. And so on and so on. It's a very complex system. It has a lot of moving parts. "If you have an operator that's on another from the right only or from the left only, I think you have grounds to be concerned," he says. "Operators act on operator from theleft and from theright, as you see them here, is the natural, ideal thing to happen," he adds. "It's a very, very good sign when you see people acting in a way that is consistent with what the law should be," says the state's top law enforcement official. suspicious that maybe you're not doing things right. So this is the Heisenberg operator. And as you can imagine, there's a lot of things to be said about this operator. So let's begin with a remark. Are there questions about this Heisenburg operator? Yes. Do we know anything about it? Yes, we do. We want to know what it's like to be him or her. And we want to find out what he or she thinks about it. the Schrodinger operator? PROFESSOR: You have to speak louder. AUDIENCE: Is the Schrodinged operator related to the Hamiltonian [INAUDIBLE]?PROFESSor: Any Schrodingers operator, this could be the Hamiltonians. This could be x hat, it could be Sz, could be any of the operators you know. All the operators that you know, that's what I'm trying to get at, is that what you're looking for. are Schrodinger operators. When t is equal to 0, U of t-- of 0 0 is the operator propagates no state, so it's equal to the identity. So this is a wonderful relation that tell us you that time equals 0 the two operators are really the same. And another simple remark. If you have the unit operator in the Schrodingers picture, what is the unit operators in the Heisenberg picture? Well, it would be. The unit operator would be U t 0 dagger 1 U t 0. But 1 doesn't matter. U dagger with U is 1. This is a 1 Schrodinger, and therefore it's the same operator. So the unit operator is the same. It just doesn't change whatsoever. OK, so that's good. But now this is something that doesn't work. It's not the same as the previous one. It doesn't have the same unit operator. It has a different unit operator, but it's still the same number. interesting also happens. Suppose you have Schrodinger operator C that is equal to the product of A with B, two Schrodingers. If I try to figure out what is CH, I would put U dagger-- avoid all the letters, the t 0. It's supposed to be t 0, not U. Cs U. U. A. C. A, B, C, A. B, B. C, C. B. A., B. B,. C, D, D. But that's equal U dagger As Bs U. But now, in between the two operators, you can put a U U dagger, which is equal to 1. So As U dagger BsU. And then you see why this is really nice. Because what do you get is that U is equal 1, and B is equal 2. So U is 1, B is 2, U is 3, and As U is 4, so U is 5, so As U U is 6. C Heisenberg is just A Heisenber times B Heisenburg. So there's a nice correspondence between those operators. Also you can do is for commutators. So for example, if A Schrodinger with B Schrodingers is equal to C Schrodingen, then by doing exactly the same things, you see that A heisenberg with B He Eisenberg would be the commutatorequal to C Heisenberger. Yes? AUDIENCE: That argument for the identity operators being the same in. Hamiltonian is [INAUDIBLE]. AUDIENCE: Because then you can push the operator just through the exponential of the Hamiltonian. PROFESSOR: Yeah, we'll see things like that. We could discuss that maybe. Both pictures are from the University of California, Santa Cruz's online course, "Hamiltonian: The Theory of Time-independent Operators" The course is available online at: http://www.caltech.edu/Hamiltonian/index.html. a little later. But there are some cases, as we will see immediately, in which some operators are the same in the two pictures. So basically operators that commute with the Hamiltonian as you say, since U involves theHamiltonian, if the operator commutes with U, this is a Hamiltonian. This is the case in which the operator in the second picture is the same as the one in the first one. But this is not always the case, and we'll see why in the next section. the Hamiltonian and you can move them across, then they are the same. So I think it's definitely true. So we will have an interesting question, in fact, whether the Heisenberg Hamiltonian is equal to the Schrodinger Hamiltonian, and we'll answer that very soon. So the one example that here is the one that we can use to prove that it is the same, and it is definitely true, and I think we'll be able to prove it soon. I think you should keep in mind is this one. You know this is true. Whatever commutation relation you have of Schrodinger, it's true for Heisenberg as well. OK, so then let's talk about Hamiltonians. So by definition, a Hamiltonian by definition would be equal to U of t 0. And therefore this is just ih bar times the unit operator again, because the units operator is the same in all pictures. So these commutation relations is true for any Heisenburg operator. commute with each other. Remember, if that is the case, the unitary operator is any way built by an exponential. It's this one. And the Schrodinger Hamiltonians commute. So as was asked in the question before, this thing commutes with that, and you get that they are the same. So that's the way it works, and that's how it works in the real world, as well as in the quantum world. That's how the universe works. if this is happening, the two Hamiltonians are identical. And we'll have the chance to check this today in a nice example. So I will write in this as saying the Heisenberg Hamiltonian as a function of time then is equal to the Schrodinger Hamiltonian. If this is the case, then the Hamiltonian is the same as the time function. And if this is not the case then we have a new way of looking at the Hamiltonians. We'll see how this works out later today. Heisenberg Hamiltonian is the Schrodinger Hamiltonian where X's, and P's, or spins and everything has become Heisenberg. So the equality of the two Hamiltonians is a very funny condition on theSchrodinger. Hamiltonian, which is of x, p, and t, is supposed to be equal to the Sch Rodinger. So you have a function of X, p and t. And you put X He Eisenberg P Heisenburg, and somehow the. whole thing is the same. So this is something very useful and we'll need it. One more comment, expectation values. Comment number four on expectation values, which is something you've already-- it's sort of the way we began the discussion and wanted to make sure it's the way it's always going to be. It's a good way to start the discussion. It'll be a good starting point for the next time we talk about expectations. It will be a great way to get started. Clear. So four, expectation values. So we started with this with alpha and beta, two arbitrary states, matrix elements. Take them equal and to be equal to psi of t. So you would have psi t As psi t is, in fact,equal to psi 0 A Heisenberg psi 0. Clear. Sofour, expectationvalues. So they are equal to the expectation values of alpha and Beta. So alpha andBeta are equal and the expectation value of t is t. Now that is a key equation. You know you're doing expectation value at any given time of a Schrodinger operator, turn it into Heisenberg and work at time equals 0. It simplifies life tremendously. Now this is the key identity. It's the way we motivated everything in a way. And that is the way to get to the end of the world. And it's the key to getting to the beginning of the future. And we're going to get there. it's written in a way that maybe it's a little too schematic, but we write it this way. We just say the expectation value of As is equal to the expectationvalue of AH. And this, well, we save time like that, but you have to know what you mean. It's not a very good way to say it, but it's the best way to get the point across. We're not going to get into it here, but that's the way it's written. When you're computing the expectation value for a Schrodinger operator, you're using time dependent states. So we say that the Schrodingers expectation value is equal. When you're Computing the expectation. value of the Heisenberg operator,you're using the time equals. 0 version of the states, but they are the same. So the expectationvalue is equal to the time. equals 0 version, but it's not the same as the time dependent. version. It's the same for the time-dependent and time dependent versions. to the Heisenberg expectation value. We right it in the bottom, but we mean the top equation. And we use it that way. So the heisenberg operators, at this moment, are a little mysterious. They're supposed to be given by this formula. But we've seen that calculating U can be done in a different way. We use the formula to calculate U. and the result is the same as U. in the original formula. The result is U, which is the result of calculating U and U. difficult. So what we try to do in order to simplify that is find an equation that is satisfied by the Heisenberg operator, a time derivative equation. So let's try to find a differential equation for the operator is useful. But the fact is that seldom you know U. And even if you knowU, you have to do this simplification, which is hard. So finding a differential equations for the operators is useful, but it can be difficult. So differential equation is a good starting point. So what do we want to do? We want to calculate ih bar d dt of the Heisenberg operator. Well, we have several things. Remember, the Schrodinger operator can have a bit of time dependence. The time dependence would be an explicit time dependence, so we can use this to calculate the time dependence of the operator. We can then use this time dependence to work out how long it takes to do a calculation. We have a time dependence on the time of a second. So let's take the time derivative of all this. So you would have three terms. ih bar dU dagger dt As U plus U dagger As dU dt plus-- with an Ih bar-- U dagger ihbar dAs minus dt. dAs dt and U. Well, you have these equations. Those equations are called time derivatives. Those are the time derivatives of time. They are the derivative of time and time. And they are the product of time derivative and time derivative. were the Schrodinger equations we started with today. The derivatives of U, or the derivatives of the U dagger. so what did we have? Well, we have that ih bar dU dt was HU-- H Schrodingers times U. And therefore ihbar dU dagger dt. I take the dagger of this. I say, "I take the derivative of this" and I write it as HU. I then write it down as H U. I would get a minus sign. I would put it on the other side. Is equal to U dagger Hs with a minus here. And all the U's are U's of t and t0. I ran out of this thick chalk. So we'll continue with thin chalk. All right, so, so. Allright, so we'll continued with thin chalks. AllRight, so they're all U's. And they're equal to T's and U's and T's. we are here. We wrote the time derivative, and we have three terms to work out. So what are they? Well we have this thing, ih bar this. So let's write it. ihbar d d dt of As-- of A Heisenberg, I'm sorry-- Is equal to that term is. Is that what we want to say? That's what we're trying to say. We're going to say it's a time derivative. That's the way to do it. minus U dagger Hs A Schrodinger U. minus ih bar dU dt on the right. So we have plus U dagger As Hs dUdt, so U. Well, that's not bad. It's actually quite nice. And then the last term, which I have very little to say, is U.minus ihbar dUDt. So that's the next term plus ihBar dU Dt. The last term is Uminus UdDt, which is the third term. because in general, this is a derivative of a time dependent operator. Partial with respect to time, it would be 0 if As depends, just say, on X, on P, on Sx, or any of those things, has to have a particular t. So I will just leave this as Partial with Respect to Time, and call it As. For more information, see As and Time Dictatorship, or visit the As andTime Dictator website. For further information, or to talk to someone who has worked on the same problem, see the As/TimeDictator site. Using the definition that anything, any operator that we have a U dagger in front, a U to the right, is the Heisenberg version of the operator. So what did we have? Here it is. ih bar d dt of A Heisenburg of t.plus ihbar dAs dt Heisenenberg. U dagger U. This turns everything here into Heisen Berg. Here you have A He Eisenberg, H He Eisenburg, and A Eisenberg. what you got is the commutator between them. And then you have plus ih bar dAs dt Heisenberg. So that is the Heisenburg equation of motion. That is how you can calculate a Heisen Berg operator if you want to. That whole thing. is a whole thing, and it's called a He Eisenberg operator. It's a way to work out the equations of motion for a given object. That's how you work out a Heosenberg operator, for example. want. You tried to solve this differential equation, and many times that's the simplest way to calculate the Heisenberg operator. So there you go. It's a pretty important equation. So let's consider particular cases immediately to just get some intuition. So Suppose As has no explicit time dependence. So There you go, you've solved the differential equation. Now let's look at some other cases to see if we can get the same result. And we can do it in a way that makes sense to you. basically, there's no explicit t, and therefore this derivative goes away. So the equation becomes ih bar dAh, of course, dt is equal to Ah Heisenberg sub h of t. Simple. If the Schrodinger operator is time independent, it's time independent. And you know the Heisenburg operator is supposed to be simpler. It's timeindependent. It doesn't matter how long it takes to get to the point. It just means that the time derivative is timeindependent, and so is the derivative of the derivative. identical to the Schrodinger Hamiltonian. Time dependence of expectation value. But we can leave it like that. It's a nice thing anyway. So let me do a little remark on time dependent of expectation values. So suppose you have the usual thing that you want to compute. You're faced with that expectation value of As, and it changes in time. You want to know how you can compute that. Well, well, Well, let me tell you how. How does the expectation value  depend on time? you first say, OK, ih bar d dt. But this thing is nothing but psi 0 A Heisenberg of t psi 0. Now I can let the derivative go in. And using this, assuming that A is still no, I can say psi 0 ihbar dAh dt psi0. So this becomes psi 0ih bar  dAh  dt  Psi 0. I can then use this to get the same result as the original. time dependence, A has no explicit time dependence, then you can use just this equation, which give you psi 0 Ah Hh psi 0. So all in all, what have you gotten? You've gotten a rather simple thing, the time derivative of the expectation values. So ih bar d dt. ih d t ih b dt ih c dt c d t c d d t dt dt b d t b d b b b d d b. Expectation values of Schrodinger operators are the same as the expectation value of their Heisenberg counterparts, except that the states are taking up time. It's really the same equation. This equation we derived a couple of lectures ago. We call those expectation values the same thing as a Heisen Berg expectation value. So this thing becomes the right hand side is the expectationvalue of A Heisenburg H Heisenber like that. And just the way we say that heisenberg expectation values are theSame as SchRodinger expectation values. equals 0. So you can use either form of this equation. The bottom one is one that you've already seen. The top one now looks almost obvious from the bottom one, but it really took quite a bit to get it. One last comment on these operators. How about conserved? How about Conserved.equals 1? Or conserved.Equals 2? or conserved equals 3? Or even conserved, conserved is conserved; conserved conserved equals 4. operators? What are those things? A time independent As is set to be conserved if it commutes with a Schrodinger Hamiltonian. If As with Hs is 0, Ah with Hh is 0 because the map between Heisenberg and Schrodingers is 0. Now you know that if As with As equals 0, As with Ah equals 0. If Ah with Ah is 0 then Ah with A equals As with A. If A with A means As with B, then B with B is 0 and so on. pictures is a commutator that is valued at the Schrodinger picture is valued in the Heisenberg picture by putting H's. So what you realize from this is that this thing, this implies Ah commutes with Hh. And therefore by point 1, by 1, you have to dAh dt is equal. By point 2, by 2, and by 3, by 4, by 5, by 6, by 7, by 8, by 9, by 10, by 11, by 12, by 13, by 14, by 15, by 16, by 17, by 18, by 19, by 20, by 21, by 22, by 23, by 24, by 25, by 26, by 28, by 29, by 30, by 31, by 32, by 33, by 34, by 35, by 36, by 38, by 39, by 40, by 41, by 42, by 43, by 44, by 45, by 46, by 47, by 48, by 49, by 50, by 51, by 52, by 53, by 54, by 55, by 56, by 57, by 58, by 59, by 60, by 61, by 62, by 63, by 64, by 65, by 68, by 69, by 70, by 73, by 74, by 78, by 79, by 80, by 81, by 82, by 83, by 84, by 85, by 88, by 89, by 90, by 91, by 92, by 93, by 94, by 95, by 96, by 102, by 103, by 104, by 105, by 106, by 107, by 108, by 109, by 110, by 112, by 113, by 114, by 111, by 116, by 117, by 118, by 123, by 130, by 132, by 133, by 134, by 135, by 138, by 139, by 144, by 195, by 196, by 204, by 215, by 217, by 233, by 214, by 216, by 273, by 304, by 274, by 283, by 286, by 287, by 298, by 307, by 308, by 303, by 314, by 310, by 312, by 317, by 324, by 340, by 343, by 326, by 401, by 336, by 333, by 338, by 358, by 405, by 396, by 423, by 424, by 425, by 444, by 501, by 530, by 504, by 529, by 1954, by 1955, by 1956, by 1957, by 1958, by 1959, by 1960, by 1961, by 1962, by 1963, by 1964, by 1965, by 1966, by 1967, by 1968, by 1969, by 1970, by 1974, by 1975, by 1976, by 1978, by 1980, by 1981, by 1982, by 1983, by 1984, by 1985, by 1986, by 1987, by 1988, by 1989, by 1990, by 1992, by 1994, by 2002, by 2005, by 2006, by 2007, by 2008, by 2009, by 2010, by 2012, by 2013, by 2014, by 2015, by 2016, by 2017, by 2025, by 2030, by 2018, by 2050, by 2022, by 2024, by 2019, by 2020, by 2021, by 2100. to 0. The Heisenberg operator is actually time independent. It just doesn't depend on time. So a Schrodinger operator, it's a funny operator. It doesn't have time in there. It has X's, P's, spins, and you don't know in general, if it's time independent in the sense of conserve of expectation values. But whenever As commutes with Hs, well, the expectation values don't change in time. But as you know, this d dt can be brought in, because the states are not time dependent. operator, is really time independent. Whenever you have a Schrodinger operator, has no t, the Heisenberg one can have a lot of t. But if the operator is conserved, then the heisenberg operator will have no t's after all. It will really be conserved. So let's use our last 10 to get to the bottom of the mystery of the t-word. The last 10 t-words are: t, t-t-t, t. minutes to do an example and illustrate much of this. In the notes, there will be three examples. I will do just one in lecture. You can do the other ones in recitation next week. There's no need really that you study these things at this moment. Just try to understand them and be able to apply them to your life. If you have any questions or concerns, please contact me at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk or on Twitter @jennifersmith. get whatever you can now from the lecture, and next week you'll go back to this. So the example is the harmonic oscillator. And it will illustrate the ideas very nicely, I think. The Schrodinger Hamiltonian is p squared over 2m plus 1/2 m omega squared x hat squared. OK, OK, that's the example. Next week we'll go on to the next part of the lecture. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. X and p are the operators you've always known. They are Schrodinger operators. So we leave them like that. Now I have to write the Heisenberg Hamiltonian. Well, what is that? yes? Yes, that's what it is. It's a new type of Schrödinger's equation. And it's called the "Schrodinger-Phenomenon" or the "Heisenberg-Schröders equation" It's the same as the "Phenom" or "Schrüders' equation. AUDIENCE: It's identical. PROFESSOR: Sorry? AUDIENCE: it's identical, yes. But I will leave that for a little later. I will just assume, well, I'm supposed to do U dagger U. As you said, this is a time independent Hamiltonian. It better be the same, but it will be. It will be identical, but not the same as the U.S. A dagger U is a dagger with a sharp edge. clearer if we now write what it should be in general. Have a U dagger and a U from the right. They come here, and they turn this into P Heisenberg over 2m plus 1/2 m omega squared. OK, that's your Heisenburg Hamiltonian. And we will check, in and out, in the next few days to make sure it's working. We'll let you know if it's not, and if it isn't, we'll send it back to you. fact, that it's time independent. So how about the operators X Heisenberg and P Heisenburg. What are they? Well, I don't know how to get them, unless I do this sort of U thing. That doesn't look too bad but certainly would be messy. You would have to do an X-U-U thing, which would be a bit of a mess, but not too bad. That wouldn't be too bad, though, would it? exponential of e to the minus iHt over t with the x operator and another exponential. Sounds a little complicated. So let's do it the way the equations of the Heisenberg operators tell you. Well, X and P are time independent Schrodinger operators, so that equation that I boxed holds. That's the way to do it. It's a little more complicated than you think, but it's not a big deal. It just takes a bit of time. So ih dx Heisenberg dt is nothing else than X Heisen Berg commuted with H Heisenburg. Because X Heiskenberg, as you remember, just commutes with P Heuskenberg. So instead of the Hamiltonian, you can put this. This is X Heismenberg P Heisenberg squared over. That's what the commutator would look like if it were the other way around. That would be X Heistenberg squared over P Heisthenberg. X Heisenberg is like you had X and P. So what is this commutator? You probably know it by now. You act with this and these two p. So it acts on one, acts on the other, gives the same on each. And we get some nice equation that says dX He Eisenberg dt is 1.2m. And then what do we get? The ih there and ih cancels. So we could put hats. Better maybe. The Heisenberg equations of motion look like ordinary equations for dynamical variables. They look like an equation in classical mechanics. So that's a good thing about the Heisenburg equations ofmotion. Let's get P.over m. Well, we didn't get that one. We didn't even get the P. over m part of the equation. We got the P over m. part of it. We've got this one. It actually looks like a classical mechanics equation for a dynamical variable. It's called P overm. get the operator still, but we got an equation. So how about P dP dt. So ih dP Heisenberg dt would be P Heisenburg with H Heisen Berg. And this time only the potential term in here matters. So it's P heisenberg with 1/2 m omega squared X Heisen Rosenberg squared. So  P dP  dt  ih dDt  H dP Dt H Dt D Dt dt D dD dt H dDd. what do we? We get 1/2 m omega squared. Then we get again a factor of 2. And then a P with Xh, which is a minus ih bar. So the ih bars cancel, and we get dPh dt is equal to-- the dPh is the ratio of omega squared to omega squared, or the ratio between omega squared and omega squared is 1: omega squared (1/2 omega squared + omega squared = omega squared), or 1:1:1 omega squared - omega squared / omega square = omega square. The Heisenberg equations of motion can be solved in a number of ways. Take a second derivative of this equation. Minus m.h bar cancelled-- m omega squared Xh. All right, so these are our Heisenburg equations ofmotion. So how do we solve for them now? Well, you sort of have to try the kind of things that you would do classically. You can do this by solving the equations in a series of steps, starting with the first one. d second Xh dt squared is equal to minus omega squared Xh, exactly the equation of motion of a harmonic oscillator. And the dPh dt would be [INAUDIBLE] 1 over m times minus m omega squared xh. So dSecond Xh Dt squared would be 1 over 1 times minus 1 over 2 times minus 2 over 2. That's the equation for a harmonic oscillator and it's the same for a harmonic oscillator. It's really absolutely nice that you recover those equations that you had before, except that now you're talking operators. And it's going to simplify your life quite dramatically when you try to use these operators, because, in a sense, solving for the time dependent Heisenberg operators is the same as solving for time dependent operators. It's really really nice, and it's really going to make your life a lot easier, and a lot of people will be able to benefit from it. finding the time evolution of all states. This time the operators change, and you will know what they change like. So you have this. And then you write Xh is equal to A cosine omega t plus B sine Omega t where A and B are some time independent operators. This is the same as writing Xh as a function of the time-varying operators A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, J, K, K. So Xh of t, well, that's a solution. How about what is P? Ph of t would be m dX m dx dt. So you get minus m omega sine omega tA plus m omega cosine Omega tB. That is the most general solution. But it's not the best. It's just a starting point for the rest of the story. And it's a long way from the end, but it's the beginning of a good story. still doesn't look like what you would want, does it? No, because you haven't used the time equals 0 conditions. At time equals0, the Heisenberg operators are identical they to the Schrodinger operators. So at t equals 0, Xh of t becomes A, but that must be X hat, and so on. The result is the same as using the time = 0 condition, but with a different result. It's the same with the time + 1 condition, and the time - 1 condition. the Schrodinger operator. And at t equals 0, Ph of t becomes equal to this is 0 m omega B. And that must be equal to the P hat operator. So actually we have already now A and B. So B from here is P hat over m omega. And therefore Xh of t is equal to A, which is X hat cosine omega t plus B. It's P hat. So it's [INAUDIBLE] P. An Ph of T is here. cosine omega t minus m omega X hat sine omega T. P hat minus m Omega X hat omega t. Yep, this is correct. This is your whole solution for the Heisenberg operators. So any expectation value of any power can be written as a function of P hat plus m omega. Phat minus omega X omega X is the same as P hat + m omega + omega t, or P hat - m omega - omega t (P hat - M omega - Omega T) of X and P that you will want to find its time dependence, just put those Heisenberg operators, and you will calculate things with states at time equals 0. It will become very easy. So the last thing I want to do is complete the promise that we had about the time dependence of a state of a system. That is to say, you can find a state with a time dependence that is equal to 0. And you can do that with any state of the system that is at time 0. what is the Heisenberg Hamiltonian. Well, we had the He Eisenberg Hamiltonians there. And now we know the heisenberg operators in terms of the Schrodinger one. So Hh of t is equal to Ph-- 1/2m Ph squared. So I have P hat cosine omega t minus m omega X hat sine Omega t squared plus1/2 m omega squared Xh squared. That's what the Heizman Hamiltonian is. So let's simplify this. You have 1/ 2m cosine squared omega t P. 1/2 m omega squared over m squared omega squared sine squared of omega t P squared. 1/2m omega squared cosine squared omega t X squared. And the cross product, which would be plus-- or actually minus 1/ 2m. The product of these two things. m omega sine omega t cosine omegaT. And you have Px plus XP. OK, I squared the first terms. Now the second one. Well, let's square the P squared here. 2. Schrodinger Hamiltonian. Same factors, same factors, opposite signs. So you confirm that this theoretical expectation is absolutely correct. And what's the meaning? You have the Heisenberg Hamiltonian written in terms of the He Eisenberg variables. But by the time you substitute these Heisenburg variables, the Hamiltonian is completely different. And here omega over 2, same factor, same sign, opposite sign. Very good. It's the same as saying omega 1, omega 2, omega 3, omega 4. variables in, it just becomes identical to the Schrodinger Hamiltonian. All right, so that's all for today. I hope to see in office hours in the coming days. Be here Wednesday 12:30, maybe 12:25 would be better, and we'll see you then. [APPLAUSE] We'll be back at 12:50 on Wednesday, and be here at 1:30 on Thursday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from.