Professor Shelly Kagan asks you to think about life on the experience machine. The scientists are busy stimulating your brain in such a way as to give you an exact replica. From the insides of what it would be like to have identical experiences to the ones you've had, we look at what it's like to be on the machine. Click here to read the full interview with Professor Kagan and see the rest of our coverage of this week's TED Talk. Back to the page you came from. you would have if you were really doing--well, whatever it is that's worth doing. Climbing the alps, writing the great American novel, raising a great family that loves you, being creative. Whatever it is you think is worth having, the experience machine gives you all the experiential side of those things. The experience machine is available in the U.S. on Amazon.com and the iTunes App Store. For more information, visit experiencemachine.com or go to www.samaritans.org. things. But you're not really doing those things. You're actually just floating in the scientist's lab. And we ask ourselves, would you want to live a life on the experience machine? Would you be happy or would you be unhappy, to discover that you actually have been living a life in a lab? We ask ourselves: Would you have been happy with your life if you knew that you were living it in a laboratory? We want to know if you would be happy if you found out that you had been living it. on the experience machine? Most of us, when we think about this, find ourselves wanting to say, no, we wouldn't want to have a life on the experience Machine. It's not the ideal of human existences; it is not the best possible life we can imagine ourselves having. But that means, it's not a life we would want to live, but it is a life that we can live. And that means that we have to live with the consequences of our actions. if we think something's missing, we then have to ask yourselves, what's missing? What's wrong with the experience machine? The one thing we can conclude immediately is, that the hedonist--and views like hedonism--must be wrong, insofar as they say. If you think life on the experiences machine is missing something, that's a sign that you're missing something. And if you think that's the case, then you're probably missing something as well. And that's why you're not a good person. that all that matters for the best possible life is--for well-being--is getting the right kinds of experiences. Because by hypothesis, the experience machine gets the mental states right, get the insides right. So, if something's missing from that life, there's more to the life than what's on the surface. That's the hypothesis. And that's what we're trying to get to. We want to make sure we're getting the experience right, not just the mental state right. best kind of life than just having the right mental states, than just getting the insides right. Well, we ask ourselves then, well, what's missing? I think different people will answer that in different ways. And if we had more time we could spell out rival theories of well-being, which could be very interesting. If we could have more time, I think we would be able to come up with a lot more ideas about how to improve our quality of life. I think that would be a very exciting time. could be interestingly distinguished one from another in terms of how they answer the question, "What's missing from the experience machine?" on the one hand, and "Why are the things that are missing from it worth having?" Different theories of well-being might answer that in different ways. Instead of focusing on what's missing, focus on what is worth having, and why it's important to have it. For more, visit CNN.com/soulmatters and follow us on Twitter @CNNSoulMatters. of trying to pursue those alternative theories in a systematic fashion. "If you're just spending your life floating in the scientist's lab, you're not," he says. "There are some of the things that seem to be missing from that kind of life," he adds. "You're not going to get the answers you want if you just spend your life in a lab." "There's a lot more to life than just being a scientist," he writes. "It's not just a job. It's a way of life." actually accomplishing anything. You're not actually getting the things out of life you thought you were getting. You wanted to be climbing the mountain, but you're notactually climbing a mountain. You want to be writing the great American novel, butyou're not writing thegreat American novel. you're just floating there. you want to write the great novel but you don't actually write it. you wanted to write it but you just don't have the courage to do it. You just want to get it out of your system. American novel. You're just floating there. You wanted to be loved, but you're not actually loved. Nobody other than the scientist even knows that you exist. So, there's there's no love. There's no hope. There is no hope for the future. There are no hopes for the present. There was no love for the past. The only hope is that the future will bring hope and hope. It's the same as the present, but it's a little bit different. a variety of things you wanted. You wanted to know your place in the universe, but you don't even have that kind of knowledge either. You think you're writing novels, finding the cure for cancer, climbing Mount Everest. You're completely deceived about all those things. You don't have the knowledge you think you have. You have no idea what you're doing, because you're not doing it. It's like you're in a dream and you're pretending to be someone you are not. the kind of self-knowledge that many of us value. Well, as I say, different theories would try to systematize these examples in different ways; that we don't have any kind of accomplishments or knowledge. Different theories might have different outcomes. We're not in the right kinds of loving relationships. We don't know what to do with our lives. We can't do anything about it. We need to learn how to do something about it, and we need to do it now. Trying to work out the details of these views would be complicated as well. Take the example of accomplishment. Well, we don't know if it's because we want it or because we recognize it as valuable. Rather than trying to pursue those questions, we should focus on the question of whether it's worth it to do it at the beginning of our lives. That's what we should be trying to do, not try to figure out why it's important to do what we do. all think accomplishment's important, but it's not as though any old accomplishment is important. If somebody sets themselves the goal of making the biggest rubber band ball in the Eastern United States, I suppose there's a sense of the word that that's an accomplishment if they've got it. But it doesn't strike me as the kind of accomplishment which makes for a particularly valuable life. So, we might have to distinguish between any old accomplishments and genuinely valuable accomplishments. But again, just put those details aside. There are certain things that are good above and beyond experiences. After all, not every bit of knowledge is equally valuable. It's one thing to know your place in the universe, or to know the fundamental laws of physics, it's another to know who you are and where you came from. The right kind of accomplishments and knowledge can be the difference between a good life and a bad one. For more, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @slstories and @CNNOpinion. thing to know what was the average rainfall in Bangkok in 1984. I'm not clear that that kind of knowledge gives a whole lot of value to your life. So, we need the right kinds of accomplishments and the right kind ofknowledge and theright kinds of relationships. But it's not always easy to get them. It's not easy to find the right people to help you get the right things. It can be hard to find people who are willing to do that. It takes a long time to build relationships. imagine you've worked that out. The crucial point is that it takes more to have the best kind of life than just getting the insides right. It also requires getting the outsides right--whatever that comes to. Having in your life not just experiences but the right kinds of goods or accomplishments is key. It's not enough to just have the right experiences, it has to be the right kind of experiences as well. That's the key to having a good life, and it's not just about having the right people. or whatever term we use for it. Now, let's say, instead of pursuing the questions of how exactly that theory should go, notice that if we had that theory we could still evaluate in principle--whatever the practical difficulties might be--in principle we can still evaluate rival lives. We could talk about rival lives in the same way that we would talk about a person's life in the first place. That's the way to look at it, at least for the time being, and it's a good way to start. about adding up all the positive experiences along with all the--ask yourself how many goods, how many accomplishments of the right sort were in that life? And that's on the positive side of the ledger. And against that we would then have to subtract the sum total of the negative. That would be the negative side of life. That's what we would have to add up against that positive side. And that would be what we'd have to take away from our life. We would then be left with a life that was very, very negative. experiences, all the failures and deceptions or what have you. Those would count against the overall value of your life. We could still say it's--how good your life is, is a matter of adding up the goods and subtracting the bads. But we would now have a somewhat broader, or rather, a broader, view of the value of life. It would be based on a broader range of experiences, experiences, failures, deceptions and so on, rather than just the good ones. more encompassing or inclusive, list of goods, and a more broad and encompassing list of bads. So, we could still evaluate rival lives. My life would've gone better had I chosen to become a farmer instead of a doctor, he says. "My life would have gone better if I had chosen to be a farmer," he adds. "I would have been a better person. I would have had a better life. I wouldn't have had to go through what I went through." of chosen to become a doctor. Or my life would've gone better for this period of ten years, but then it would've become worse. Or what have you. Or when we ask ourselves, how will things go for me over the next couple of weeks if I go on vacation. Or how would things go if I went on vacation if I didn't have a job? Or if I hadn't had a job at all. Or if my life had turned out differently, or if I had a different career path. versus staying back here? We add up the goods, subtract the bads--whatever our favorite list is. We come to our best educated guess about the rival evaluations of not just lives as a whole, but chunks of lives. Now, what do those totals come to? Well, you might think it's a lot, but it's actually a lot of good things. It's all about how you choose to live your life, and how you want to live it. We'll let you know what we think in the comments. an empirical question, and in fact I am inclined to think it's an empirical question,. varying from person to person. But it's worth taking a moment to flag the fact that there are people, there are philosophers, who think we can generalize across all humans. You might say that optimists may be more optimistic than pessimists about the future of the world. But that's a very different question to ask, and I'm not sure I'm ready to answer it yet, so I'm going to leave it there. "Life's always worth living; it's always better than non-existence." That's what the optimist thinks--not just for themselves individually, but for everybody, the total is always positive. Against that, I suppose, you've got the pessimist, who thinks that for everybody in every case, in every circumstance, thetotal is always negative. "Life'salways worth living"; it's "always better thanNon-existence"; "Life is worth living;" "Non- existence" is "non-existence" pessimists say we'd all be better off dead or never having been born in the first place. "The overall grand balance is negative for everybody in every circumstance," one pessimist says. "Life perhaps has some good things," another says, "but the overall grandbalance is negative" "We would all be best off dead," another pessimist adds. "Or perhaps more accurately still, all beBetterOffDead" is CNN.com's weekly, offbeat look at stories you may have missed. say. And in between the optimists on the one hand and the pessimists on. the other, you've got moderates who say, "It varies" "For some people the balance is positive, for some people perhaps thebalance is negative, whether for their life as a whole or for certain stretches," he says. "And that's the way it should be," he adds. "That's how it's supposed to be. It's not just one way or the other. That's not how it works." "We then have to get down to facts about cases, try to describe the instance, perhaps somebody who's in the terminal stages of some illness where they're in a great deal of pain," he says. "And the various other external goods of life, they can't--because they're bedridden, they're can't.of their lives," he adds. "We have to make sure that we don't lose that part of their lives" "We've got to be very careful about what we do," says the doctor. "It's a very, very difficult thing to do." no longer accomplish things, perhaps their family has abandoned them. Whatever the details might be, we could describe lives and say, whether or not their life was good as a whole, what the future holds out for them is negative. That's what the moderates would say. It varies from case to case, it varies from person to person. It's not a universal truth, but it's a good one to start with, and it's also a good way to start the conversation, too. Nobody's going to deny that among the goods of life are pleasure and other positive experiences. We've expanded our list of goods so that they are not all bad. And among the bads of life is the fact that you can't have it all. That's one of the things we're trying to get rid of in this book. To read the rest of the book, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. For more, visit www.soulmatthewsthebook.com. life are pain and other negative experiences. But we've expanded the list of goods so it includes external goods and not only experiential or internal goods. Still, the views that I've been sketching all still have the following assumption in common. How good it is to be alive is a good thing to think about and talk about. It's a good feeling to know that you are alive and that you have a chance to make a difference in the lives of those around you. It is a great feeling to think that you can have a positive impact on the world. matter of adding up all of the--call it the contents of life. Add up your experiences and your accomplishments and the particular details of your life as what the story is about. It's as though we've been assuming, and I have been assuming up to this moment, that being alive is the most important thing in the world, he says. "Being alive is being alive," he says, "and that's what it's all about. That's what life is all about." per se has no value. It's--life itself is a container which we fill with various goods or bads. And deciding how valuable it is, how good it is for me to be alive is a matter of adding up the value of the contents of the life. We've expanded the list of goods that can go within your life, but for all that, we've still been acting as though the neutral container theory is the right approach. But against this there there is the Hedonism. are those who think, no, in addition to thinking about the value of the content of life, we have to remember--so these people claim--that life itself is worth having. There's a benefit to me above and beyond the question of what's going on within my life--am I loved, am I I? That's the way to look at it. It's not just about what's happening in your life, it's also about what you're doing in it, too. accomplishing things, am I having nice experiences or not? Above and beyond the question of the contents of my life, we have to remember that the mere fact that I'm alive gives my life some value. So, these are "valuable container" theories. Now, think about what it would mean to be able to do all these things and still have a good life. That would be a very different experience to the one I have now. I think that would be very exciting. accept a valuable container theory. You're saying that being alive per se has some positive value. Life may have value in and of itself, but it's not mere life. Even fans of the, what we might call valuable container theories, don't think that, "Oh, wouldn't it be wonderful if--as long as I was alive in the way that a blade of grass is alive"? Life is not just being alive, it's being alive in a certain way. It's not just "being alive" per se. What we want is the life of a human. We want a life in which we're accomplishing things, there's agency. Because you have to be a knower in order to have knowledge. The life of somebody who can have an emotional side. So, it's a life of knowing things. It's not just a job, it is a life. It is a human life. And we want to live it. We don't want it to be just about work. We also want to have fun. something like the life of a person that, when we say, that being alive per so is valuable, presumably what they mean is being alive as a person per se is valuable. Note that point; keep it in mind. For simplicity I'll talk about these views as though they say life per se was valuable. Actually, I suppose there could be a more extreme view still. It seems implausible to me, but I suppose it's worth noticing there are people who think, "No,Being alive per se, right--even though there I am and my brain has been so thoroughly destroyed that I'm not longer able to know anything. "I'm not now able to relate emotionally to anybody," he says. "There I am in a persistent vegetative state, but at least I'm alive" "You can imagine somebody somebody like me," he adds, "who has been through a lot, but is still alive." "It's a miracle I'm still here," he writes. "It is a miracle that I am still alive" who has that view. I've got to say I find that a pretty implausible view. So I'm going to restrict myself, at least when I think about it, to versions that say, it's the life of a person per se that's valuable. Now, notice that if we accept this view, if we are willing to accept that a person's life is valuable, then we are in the right place. We are in a position to make a difference in the world. to decide how well off I am, or somebody else is, you can't just add up the contents of the life. You can't. Just add up all the pleasures and subtract the pains, or add up. all the accomplishments and subtract. the failures. Or add up  all the knowledge and knowledge and know-it-all knowledge and. know- it- all knowledge and have all the experience and knowledge of the world. You have to know what you know and what you don't. subtract the ignorance and deception. Doing that in terms of the contents gives you a subtotal, but that subtotal is no longer the entire story. If we accept a valuable container theory, we also have to add in some extra positive points to the container theory. We also have in, if weaccept a valuablecontainer theory,We also have. in addition to the positive points, to the negative points, we have to accept some extra negative points. We have to. accept that the container is not perfect, and that we need to accept that. take account of the fact that, well, at least you're alive or have the life or a person--or whatever it is that you think is valuable in and of itself. So first we get the content subtotal; then we add some extra points for the mere fact that you're Alive. Then we add more points for being alive. And finally, we add points for having a life of your own, and for having the life of a person you want to share with the world. Now, notice that since we are adding extra positive facts, extra positive points, for the fact that you're alive, even if the contents subtotal is negative, the grand total could still be positive. Suppose that being alive per se is worth plus a hundred points, just to make up some number. Even if your content subtotal was negative ten, that doesn't mean you're not better off alive. negative ten plus the extra hundred points for the mere fact thatyou're alive is still going to give you a positive total, plus 90. possibility of accepting a valuable container theory is to remind us that in deciding are you better off dead, has death deprived me of something good or not. It's important to not just focus on the contents but to also remember to add some positive points above and beyond the contents of the container. In deciding whether or not to die, it is important to remember that death is not the end of the world. It is the beginning of a new life, a new beginning, a better life. content subtotal to take into account the value of the sheer fact that you're alive. If you're a fan of the neutral container theory, you won't have anything extra to add, because life per se is just a zero. But if you accept a valuable container Theory, you have to add something more. Even if, you might say, the way my life is going in terms of its contents is bad, being alive per se might still be a good thing. Have to add some extra points. get bad enough, that can outweigh the value of being alive so that the grand total is negative. Modest container theories, that is, say there's a value to being alive, but it can in principle be outweighed. Whether it gets outweighed easily, or whether it's very, very difficult and the contents have to be horrible to outweigh it, depends on how much value you think being alive per se has. So, those are modest theories--positive value for life. But it can be outwe weighed. no matter how horrible the contents are, the grand total will always be positive. It's as though being alive is infinitely valuable in comparison to questions about the contents. We could call this the "fantastic valuable container theory" as opposed to the "modest valuable container Theory" I suppose that label would be more appropriate for this case, though. I'm not sure what to call it, but it seems like a good name for a theory of value. I'll have to think about it. gives away where I want to come down on this. I find the fantastic valuable container theory fantastic in the sense of incredible. I can't bring myself to believe it, which--I have some sympathies for valuable container theories, but I also have some sympathy for neutral container theories. Sometimes I'm sometimes I'm not sure where I'm going with this, but it's a good place to start, if you want to talk about the nature of the universe. I don't know where to go from here. drawn toward the neutral view; sometimes I'm drawn toward the thought that being alive per se is good for you. But even in those moments when I'm Drawn towards valuable container theories, it's always the modest version. I don't find myself drawn to the fantastic version. Now, if we make a list of all the things that are good for us, we'll have a much better idea of what's good for our bodies. We'll have to wait and see if we can come up with a list. The deprivation account says, death is bad for you insofar as it deprives you of something. By virtue of dying now, what you've been deprived of is, another chunk of life. The question we've been asking ourselves is, "So why is death bad?" we ask ourselves. We ask ourselves, why is it bad for us to die? We ask, why should we be afraid of it? We want to know why it's bad to die, we want to understand why it is bad. that would've been good for you to have. And what we now see is that--to see whether that could be the case or not, we've got to get clear in our own minds about whether we believe in a neutral container theory, a positive, valuable container theory or--and among those, a negative container theory. That's what we're trying to figure out here. And we're going to find out soon if that's the case, or if it's a different way of looking at things. between a fantastic and a modest container theory. If we are neutralists, we're going to say, what would the contents of my life have been, for the next year, ten years, whatever? If that would've been worth having, then--if the next chunk of mylife would've be, that would be worth having. That's a neutralist way of looking at the world, and that's what I'm trying to do here. I'm looking at it as a container, and trying to figure out what my life would have been like if I'd had that. "If the balance from here on out would've been negative, then it's good for me that I died now instead of being kept alive with a life not worth having," he says. "On the other hand, if it's bad for me to die now rather than live for the next ten years, then I should die now," he adds. "If I die now, I'll have a better life than I would have had if I lived another 10 years," he writes. worth living. That's how the neutralists put it. If we are valuable container theorists, we think the answer has got to be, well, look at the contents, but don't forget to add some extra points, even if the next five years for you would've been, in terms of the contents. Worth living, that's what we're trying to say, and we think we've got it down to a fine art. We hope you've enjoyed this article. It's been updated to make clear that we are happy to clarify this. modestly bad--perhaps the value of at least being alive at all outweighs it, so it still would've been better for you to be alive. But if the contents get bad enough, then you'd be better off dead. Notice that on the modest view, if we ask ourselves, would it have been better to be dead than alive? If the answer is yes, then it would be better to have been dead. If it's not, then we should be glad we were alive. been good to be immortal? the answer's going to depend on not just whether we accept Bernard Williams' claim that immortality would be bad for you. We now realize that what Williams was talking about was the contents of an immortal life. And that's no longer an adequate view, and that's why Williams' view is no longer adequate. It's time to change our view of immortality and make it a positive thing. It is time to make immortality a good thing, not a bad thing. or at least it's no longer a complete story, if we are valuable container theorists. We could say--you could imagine somebody saying, "Oh yes, you're right, Williams, the contents get negative, but that's still outweighed by the mere fact that you're alive. So on balance, being immortal is a good thing" Whether that's right or not depends on just how bad would it be to be immortal. So more life would always be better, no matter how horrible the contents might be. theory myself--I don't find it particularly attractive. I'm inclined to think not only that the contents of life would be bad, eventually, for all of us if we were immortal. But let me remind you that saying that does not rule out the possibility of consistently going on to say that even though it's a good thing that we die, because eventually immortality would be a bad thing. I don't think that's a very good thing, but I'm not sure it's very good either. We die while it's still the case that living another ten years or twenty years--or for that matter five hundred years--would still or could still have been horrible. It could still be the cases that we die before life has turned bad. We die before it's too late to do anything that would have made a difference in our lives. For all that, death could still come too soon for some people. It's still possible to die before you know it's going to be a bad day. good for us. It's compatible with thinking that immortality would be bad to think that in fact death comes too soon. But of course, we now have a return of the division between moderates, optimists and pessimists. optimists are those--now in this more chastened version of optimism,optimists say, "Even if immortality would have been bad eventually after a million years or ten million years, the next chunk of life would've been good for all of us." So that death--they're optimists in this strange sense, if they think life would's been good, which means. of course that that we die is bad for us. Because we all die too soon. That's what the optimists might say. Against that, the pessimists may say, "Boy, death comes not a moment too soon for any of us" The next chunk of life is always not worth having, they might say, because it's too soon to die. But that's not true. It's always too late to die, and it's never too late for us to live. always worse than nothing." And in between these two extremes are the moderates, who say, "For some of us, death comes too soon. For some of we, death does not come too soon." There's a quote I want to read. It's actually out of place now. I should have read it. I'm sorry, I should've read it earlier. It was a great quote. It made me want to cry. I was so proud of it. But I'm glad I didn't read it now. it a lecture or two ago when I started talking about immortality, but I misplaced it. So, I found it this morning. So before I just leave the subject of immortality, let me conclude with some words of wisdom from a former Miss USA contestant. She was asked the question, "What do you think about immortality?" She replied, "I think it's a very interesting question. I don't know what I think about it. I just think it is a very good question" "Would you want to live forever?" And she responded, "I would not live forever, because we should not live Forever" "If we were supposed to live Forever, then we would live forever. But we cannot live forever," she says. "Isn't that nice? All of us should live forever" "We cannot live indefinitely, which is why I would notLiveForever," she adds. "We should live for today." "We shouldn't live Forever," she concludes. "All of us, should liveforever" right. So I've been talking for, actually now a couple of weeks I suppose, about the central badness of death. Why is it that death is bad for me? And the answer I propose is the deprivation account. The central bad thing about the fact that I'm going to die is that I'll be deprived of my life. And that's a very bad thing. It's a terrible thing. And it's not just a bad thing, it's the worst thing in the world. is the fact that because I'll be dead I will be deprived of the good things in life. And we've now seen that that's a bit crude, right? We have to not talk--just talk about the good thing in the life, but the good of life itself, and we have to do that. That's what we're trying to do here. We're not just talking about good things, we're talking about life's good things. And that's what this is all about. notice that perhaps on certain views, for certain cases, it's not really the case that when I die I'm being deprived of a good life. Because the next chunk, or perhaps from there on out, it would've been bad. But still, details and complications of the sort we've been considering are of course a problem. We're still working out how best to go about it, but it's been a long time in the making. We'll have to wait and see how things pan out. aside, the fundamental badness of death is that it deprives me of life worth having. But I think it's arguable that--I think one could make the case that this isn't the only bad thing about death, even if we're focusing on why is death bad for me? There are other features of death, as we experience it, that are separable from the deprivation account, that at least add to the way that death occurs for us. We then have to ask the question, does death occur for us? this add to the badness of death? Or conceivably for some of these things, perhaps it mitigates it; it minimizes it in one way or another. So, what I want to do is take at least a couple of minutes and pursue some of those extra features as well. Here's what I'm going to do: I'm gonna take a look at some of the extra features in the game and see if I can figure out how to use some of them. an example. There's no avoiding the fact that you're going to die. I mean look, you're all going to college, but it wasn't inevitable that you go to college. It's not merely the fact--it's not simply true that you are going to live. It is inevitable that we will die, and we will all die. That's just the way it is, and that's how it's always been, and it's not going to change any time soon. you chosen not to, you could've avoided going to college. But it doesn't matter what you choose, you can't avoid dying. It's a necessary truth that we're all going to die. So we might choose not to go to college, but we'll all die one way or the other, no matter how much we try to avoid it. We're all gonna die, so we might as well get used to it, as it's always going to happen. We just have to accept it, and live with it. ask, what about this inevitability of death? Does that make things worse? And here I want to distinguish between the individual question about the inevitable of death, and the universal question. So just start by thinking about the fact that it's unavoidable that you're going to die. Does the unavoidability of death make it worse? Or does it make it better? Or is there a better way to look at it? I don't know the answer, but I think there is. of death make it better or worse? And the interesting thing is, I think you can see--you can get a feel for both possible answers here. On the one hand, you can imagine somebody who says, "Look, it's bad enough that I'm going to die, but the fact that there's of death makes it even worse" And on the other hand, there's a person who thinks, "It's OK to die. It's good to die." And that's a very different thing. nothing I could do about it just makes it worse. It's like adding insult to injury that I'm powerless in the face of death. I cannot escape the Grim Reaper. This sheer powerlessness about this central fact about the nature of my existence is an extra insult added to the already bad situation. I'm not going to lie to you, I'm going to tell you that it's going to get a lot worse before it gets any better. I've got a long, long way to go, but I'm getting there. injury." Against that, however, there are those people who'd want to say, "No. Actually, the inevitability of my death reduces the badness." You all know the expression, "Don't cry over spilt milk." Right? That what's done is done. You can't change it. What you can't changed, loses--when you focus on what you can. change, loses -- when you focus. on the things that you cannot change, lose. the fact that you can't change it, it loses some of its grip to upset you. Well, if that's right, and if we then realize that there's nothing I can do about the fact that I'm going to die, then perhaps some of the sting,some of the bite, is gone. If that's the case, perhaps we can start to live a little bit more normally. We can try to live our lives a little more normally, and not be so upset by what's happening to us. eliminated. It's as though you try--try getting upset about the fact that two plus two equals four. Try feeling upset at your powerlessness to change the fact. that 2 plus 2 equals 4. Can you work up anger and regret and and say, "I want two plus 2 to equal five"? If you can't, try feeling upset and regretting that you didn't get your wish. If you want to change it, you have to be angry and regretful about it. Spinoza thought that if we could only recognize the fact that everything that happens in life is necessary, then we'd get a kind of emotional distance from it. We could no longer be disappointed, because to be disappointed in something presupposes that it could've been some other way. And Spinoza said if you see that it couldn't go, then you can't be upset over it. Most of us, of course, can't, because when we see that something is just necessary, we--it reduces the sting of it. any other way, then you can't be sad about it. If we see that our death is inevitable and we really internalize that fact, perhaps that would reduce the badness of it. Well, maybe that's right, but going back to the firsthand, I don't know how many of you have been through it yourself. I'm sure you've had your ups and downs, but you've also had your downs, too. So, I'm not sure what the answer is. have read Dostoyevsky's short novel The Underground Man. The underground man is upset about the fact that two plus two equals four and there's nothing that he can do about it. So he curses existence, curses God at having made him so impotent that he is. He's upset about being two and two and there is nothing that can be done about it and he curses God for not being able to do anything. He curses existence and curses God. He is angry at having been made impotent. can't change the fact that two plus two equals four. Descartes thought that it wouldn't be good enough if God as omnipotent couldn't changed the facts of mathematics. And so he imagines that God, as omnipotence, could've made two plustwo equals two and two plusTwo equals four, which is what they actually are. He imagines God could've done this by making two plus 2 equal two and 2 plus 2 equals 4, which he did by adding two to 2 and 2. Dostoyevsky: It is indeed a fact of our powerlessness that we're stuck with the necessities. God isn't stuck with them. It doesn't help to say that it's inevitable. It makes it worse, he says. And so it's a kind of--;So, it is indeed an--;And so, it's not a fact, but it is a fact that we have to live with it. It's a fact we're powerless, and that we must live with. worse." Well, there's both sides. And as I say, I myself, in different moods, get pulled in both ways," he says. "On the one hand you say, it's bad that I'm going to die, but I'm not a monster," he adds. "It makes me feel even worse that everybody else is stuck dying," he writes. "Or perhaps we should say dying too soon," he concludes. "I don't know if that's the answer." in light of our discussion about immortality. It's a pity that most everybody, or perhaps everybody, dies too soon. That makes it even worse. On the other hand, you know, let's be honest here, we also know the expression, "Misery loves company." And there's at least some comfort to be found in the fact that most of us will die too soon, even if we don't know it at the time. That's a comforting thought, to be sure. had, isn't there, in the realization that this thing isn't just true for me? It's not like the universe has singled me out for the deprivation of dying too soon. It's something that it does to everybody. So perhaps there's some comfort in the inevitability of death. Well, here's a. Here's a photograph of me and my wife. We were on our way to the beach when we got the call that she was going to die. It was the first time I'd seen her in years. different aspect of death worth thinking about. What about the variability of death? After all, it's not just the case that we all die. And I'll stop saying die too soon. Let's just suppose we understand that clause to be implied in what I'm saying. It's not Just the case. It is not just a case of dying too soon or dying too early. But it is a factor of death. And we should think about how we die, and why we die. that we all die. There's a great deal of variation in how much life we get. Some of us make it to the ripe old age of 80,90 a 100 or more. Others of us die at 20, or 15, or 10, or younger. Even if death were inevitable, it wouldn't be the end. It would just be the beginning of a long and painful journey. It's not the end of the world, it's just the beginning. It will be the start of a new life. wouldn't have to come in different-sized packages. We could imagine a world in which everybody dies--everybody dies at the age of a hundred. Does it make things worse or better that there's this kind of variability? From the moral point of view, it's not a bad thing. It's just a different way to look at the world, and it's a different kind of way to think about the world. It doesn't make things better or worse, it just makes things different. I suppose, it's fairly straightforward to suggest it makes things worse. After all, most of us are inclined to think that inequality is morally objectionable. It's bad that, through no fault of their own, some people are poor and other people are rich. If inequality is moral objectionable, then it's even worse if it's not, as it is in the UK, says Lord Tebbit of the Institute of Fiscal Studies in Washington, D.C. He says: "I think it's a very bad idea to make things worse by making things more unequal" very likely we're going to think it's morally horrendous that there's this crucial inequality: some of us die a the age of 5 while others get to live to 90. But in keeping with the focus of our discussion about the badness of death, I want to put aside the moral question and think about how good or bad for me is it there's variability in death? Well, we might say, let's look at it from two basic perspectives, those who get less than the average lifespan and those who gets more than theAverage lifespan. From the point of view of somebody who gets less, this is obviously a bad thing. It's bad enough that I'm going to die too soon. I said I wasn't going to keep saying that remark, and here I am saying it anyway. But what's worse is that I don't know what's going to happen to me when I'm dead. I'm still trying to figure out what the hell is going on, and I'm not getting any closer to figuring it out. I've got a long way to go, but I'm getting closer. Even worse is I'm going to get even less than the average amount of life. That's clearly an extra-bad. But we might then wonder, for every person who gets less, there's another person who has more than the median. That person gets to say, hey. Well, you know, it's a pity that I am going. It's an extra bad thing to get less than average life, but it's not as bad as getting less than median life. It doesn't mean you're going to die. There are people who are basically screwed by the fact that they get less than the average amount. So perhaps in terms of the individual badness of death that's a wash. But it seems to me it's a further fact about human psychology that we care more about being short-changed than we do about being, as we might put it, overcompensated. And if that's right, especially for something like death, the extra bad of the death seems likely to be the case. fact that there's variability and so some people get less than average--that extra bad, I suspect, outweighs the extra benefit of some people having more than average. Well, let's consider a different feature. We've had inevitability; we had variability. What about unpredictability? Not only is it inevitable that you're going to have a bad day, but it's also possible that you'll have a good day, too. And it's possible that both can happen at the same time. to die; not only do some people live longer than others, you don't know how much more time you've got. Now, you might think, well, didn't we already discuss that when we started thinking about variability? But in fact, logically speaking at least, variability, although it's a requirement for unpredictability, is not a bad thing. It's a good thing, because it means we can't predict when we're going to die, or how much time we have left. doesn't guarantee unpredictability. You could have variability with complete predictability. We could imagine a world like this where it's inevitable; everybody's got a natural birthmark that indicates the precise year, day, and time in which they're going to die. It could be a world where everybody's born with a birthmark, and it could be inevitable. It's a world that's inevitable, and we could imagine it as a reality. It can be a reality, if we want it to be. some date on it. And for that matter, there could still be variability. Some people live 80 years, some people live 20 years. But there's no unpredictability. Because of the birthmark, everybody knows exactly how much longer they've got. Well, so in our world we don't have that. In our world, in our society, we have to wait and see what the future holds. We have to live in the moment. We can't go on living in the past. world, not only do we have variability, we've got unpredictability. Does that make things better or worse? Would it be better to know when you were going to die? Well, one way in which unpredictability at least has the potential of making things worse is this. It's not a good thing to know what you're going to do before you do it. It can make things worse, and it's a bad thing to not know what to do in the first place. Because you don't know how much more time you've got--You can make a guess based on statistics, but as we saw, there's wild unpredictability. You can think, look, "the average lifespan in the United States is whatever it is, 82 years" So I probably have, you guys are in your 50s, 60s, 70s, 80s. So you're in your late 30s, 40s, 50s. You're probably in your 60s or 70s. 20s--you know 20--roughly another 60 years are going. And as you're busy calculating all this, you're walking across Chapel Street and you get hit by a truck and you die. Right? Because of unpredictability, you can't really know. And because you can's really know, it's difficult to make the right decision. And so, we're going to have to wait and see what the next 60 years have in store for us. And we're looking forward to it. kinds of plans. And in particular, it's hard to know how to pace yourself. You decide to go off to medical school, become a doctor. And so not only do you put the time into college, you put a lot of time into medical school. And then you put more time into your career. And you put all of that into your life. And it's really hard to keep track of all of it. It's really, really hard. You have to be very, very careful. residency and you put your time into your internship. It's a long-term plan, which can go wrong if you get sick and die in your early 20s. Well, that's a rather dramatic example, but the same sort of thing in principle can happen to you. It can be a very long commitment, and it can be very difficult to make it work. But it's a very, very good thing if you make the effort to try and do it, and if you do it well, it can work out in the end. all of us. You make a life plan, what you want to accomplish in your life, and well, obviously enough, some of us will die too soon. Not just in terms of, "oh, well, life still could've had good things," but too soon in Terms of you didn't get where you wanted to be. That's what death is about, and that's what it's going to do to you. It's not going to let you get to the end of your life the way you planned. you wanted to get in terms of your life plan. If only you'd known you were only going to have 20 more years instead of 50 more years, you would've picked a different kind of life for yourself. The unpredictability makes it worse. And indeed, less obviously, it can work. It can work less obviously than you might think. It's not always easy, but it can be worth the effort. It could be the difference between a happy life and a miserable one. the other way as well. You make a life plan and then, you know, you don't die yet. You continue to stick around, and then your life has this feeling of--at least we can imagine this happening--being sort of anticlimactic. You peaked too soon. If only you'd known you had. Ifonly you'd knew you had, you'd have done things differently. You'd have had more fun. You would have had a better life. You wouldn't have had to die so soon. another 50 years, that you weren't going to die young--or James Dean, going to burn out fast and die young. If only you'd realized you were going to live to the ripe old age of 97, you would have picked a different life for yourself. Now, in thinking about these points, I think, "If only I'd known I was going to be 97, I would have lived a little longer" I think that's a good thing to think about, too. in effect I'm suggesting that the value of your life--so , we previously were talking about different theories of well-being and what makes for the best kind of life. Here we have yet another kind of feature that we haven't talked about. We might think of it as, the overall value of our lives, which we might call our quality of life, or our overall quality of being. We may think of this as the overall good quality of our life, as well as our individual quality of living. shape of your life matters. Let me illustrate the point with some very, very simple graphs. These are not meant to be realistic, but they'll give you the idea. So, we all know the Horatio Alger story right? We could also call "the narrative arc ofyour life" matters. What we could also calls "the narratives of our lives" matters, too. It's not just about what you do, it's about how you do it, and how it affects your life. Somebody starts out poor and makes his way through hard work and dedication and effort to riches and success. Rags to riches--that's a wonderful, inspiring life. Let's draw the graph of that life. So here's how well off you are, here is time, and you start with nothing and you begin with nothing. You start with no money and you go from nothing to riches. You go from poverty to riches in a very short period of time. That's the story of life. end up incredibly well off. That's the Horatio Alger life--H.A. Great life. All right. Here are the axes again. Instead of the rags to riches life, imagine the riches to rags life. Starts off with everything, ends up with nothing. that's a great life. That is the ragged to ragged life. that is the life of the rich and the poor. The rags-to-riches life is a life of riches and poverty. the Algers Horatio story. It's the reverse. Now, I doubt if there's anybody here who is indifferent between the choices, indifferent with regard to the choice between these two lives. I imagine that everybody here prefers this life. But notice that in terms of the contents of the life, at the end of the day, it's a very different story. And that's the way it's going to be for the rest of our lives, I'm sure. We'll have to wait and see. least the local contents, it's a bit hard to see why that would be the case, right? We've got equal periods of suffering and doing slightly better and slightly better. For every bad period here there's a corresponding bad period there. For. every good period there is a corresponding good period here. For each good period, there is an equal period of failure and success. for every good moment, there's an equal moment of failure. for. every great moment, we have a corresponding great moment. for each great period, we've got a corresponding terrible period. every good period here there's a corresponding good period in your life. In terms of the contents of your life, being crude but you see the point. And even if we accept the valuable container theory, and so we say, "Hah, you know, every good period has a corresponding bad period," that's not the case. That's not true. It's just a way of looking at things. And that's a good thing. It means you can look at things in a different way. being alive per se is worth something as well. Well, you're alive for equal periods of time. So the extra points get added either way. You might say, look, if we're not indifferent between these two lives, that's because we think the overall shape of your life matters as also. That's why we think it's more important to be alive than to be dead. We think that's why it's so important to live a full life. It's not just about being alive, it's also about being a good person. The story "bad to good" is the kind of story we want for ourselves, while the story "good to bad" is not. Why is that? And this of course should remind us of the power of the narrative arc, as I put it. The narrative arc is the story we tell ourselves about ourselves, not the other way around. The story is the one we want to tell ourselves, and the one that we don't want to be told by others. It's the story of our lives, not our own. the puzzle about Lucretius. Why do we care more about future non-existence than past non- existence? When the bad is behind us, that seems less bothersome than when the good is in front of us. You may remember the story from Derek Parfit about having the painful operation. Was it going to be a bad one or a good one? We'll have to wait and see, says the author of the book, "Lucretius: A Biography of a Legend" to be in the future or did it take place earlier today? You don't remember. We're not indifferent. We want the bad behind us, not the bad in front of us. So, whatever the explanation is, we care about the overall shape and trajectory of our life. Now, that being said, we want the good to come to us. We don't want it to happen to us in the first place. We'd rather have it happen later, when we're older. the case, we have to worry then that because of the unpredictability of death that our lives may not have the ideal shape. A lot of us might feel that a life like this, where we peak but then we stick around--you know, isn't--can at least fail to be as well-lived as we'd like. "I think we're going to have to live with the fact that we're not going to live as long as we would have liked," he says. desirable in which we end with a bang. If you start thinking about narrative arcs--imagine a novel, right? It's one thing to have--it's not to say that the best--if you want your life to be like the plot of a great story, it's not as though you think, "All right, all right, we're going to end this in a way that makes us feel good about ourselves" It's a different thing to want to have a good ending. the dnouement must occur at the very last page." It's okay to stick around for a while, but if the high point of the story occurs in chapter 2 and then there are another 67 chapters after that, you think, this was not a well-constructed novel. And insofar as we are concerned, the novel is not a novel at all. It's a collection of short stories and short stories with a twist or two in them. The novel is about a man who finds out who he is. Without predictability, you don't know what you're going to do in life. We want to know where and when to peak, as it were, in terms of our accomplishments. We worry about the overall shape of our lives, and we might worry about wanting it to have the right shape overall. That matters to us, but the trouble is, without predictability you dont know where to peak. Wed like to know what were going to peak at in our lives. where to put the peak. Because if you try to aim for peaking later, you might not make it to that. If you put it too soon, you may stick around for longer than that, and then the peak has come too soon. All of this suggests then that the peak should be placed at the beginning of your career. If it's at the end of your life, it should be at the very beginning. If not, it may be too late for you to get to the end. unpredictability of our death adds an extra negative element. It makes it harder to plan what the best way to live my life would be. And from that perspective it looks as though it would be better to know how much time you've got left. But then we have to be more realistic about what we want to do with our lives, he says. He adds: 'From that perspective, I think it's better to be a little more realistic and realistic about how long you have left' ask--so I'll throw the question out and we'll call it a day, start with this next time--then we have to ask, would it really be better to know? Would you want the birthmark? would you want to know exactly how much time you've got left? All Right. See you next. Ask your questions at CNN.com/soulmatestories and @CNNOpinion on Twitter and Facebook. Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter and @cnnliving. time.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery. Please submit your best shots of the U.S. for next week. Visit CNN.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots. Visit Time.time.co.uk/Travel each week for a different gallery of photos from across the globe. Click here for a gallery of the best shots from around the world. Visit TIME.com: Travel next week for snapshots of the world's most popular destinations.