CNN's John Defterios takes a look at the U.S. government's fiscal policy. Defterio: "We've been looking at this idea of fiscal policy and remember that we had we had these different types of fiscal policies right where we had expansionary and we had contractionary and in our expansion area fiscal policy we" Defterius: "So let's look at our fiscal policy because we've beenLooking at this Idea of Fiscal Policy. We've been Looking at This Idea Of Fiscal Policy" saw that taxes were going down or government spending was increasing. Result of this was such that if we had a deficit it was growing larger or if you had a surplus it was getting smaller. With our contractionary fiscal policy it was the exact opposite here. We had taxes increasing orGovernment spending decreasing. Such that if you were having a deficit or a surplus, the deficit was getting larger. We have in essence three different views of fiscal policy and how well it works or how well. it works. it doesn't work so let's kind of look at them in the atas model right we have this Keynesian view. We have our kind of a classical view and we have our what would be called supply-side view. There's more views than that obviously but we're just gonna look at some of them in this model. It doesn't working. It's not working. We're looking at it in a different way. We've got a new way to look at it. at these these three stir them the three main ones so let's kind of go all the way back to our problem where we've got say real GDP. We've got our price level got aggregate demand. We have our long-run aggregate supply. We also have our short- run aggregate supply all right. So we have these three main stirs and we need to sort of work out how to deal with them all at the same time. We need to find a way to work through these three Stirrings. so we're at some full employment level of output YF and here we are initially we're in some recession right. We're at output level say y1 and some price level just call it P l1 and we know from the atas model that eventually what's going to happen here is what we're going to see. So we know that we're not going to get out of this recession. We know that the economy is going to be in a recession for some time to come. irate demand it's what's changing the short-run aggregate supply right eventually this recession we've got a lot of unemployed people remember here you see unemployment is greater than the natural rate of unemployment right so in essence you have cyclical unemployment we don't want that right there was something that was going to happen. We don't have that right now. We've got to get out of this recession. We have to get rid of it. We're in a recession and we need to get it out of the way. happened to made aggregate demand decrease that got us to this SR is one or maybe it was a change in relying on supply eventually we know that whatever it is eventually our short-run aggregate supply curve is going to increase here. He's going to eventually do it, we just don't know what it is yet. We'll have to wait and see how it plays out, but we know it will eventually get better, we're sure of it, and it will get better. this is what we're saying all right and eventually we'll return to this full employment level of output and we'll do so at this lower price level say pl0 or I'll just call it pl - so we know that eventually SRA s increases to S aureus - output equals output equals SRAs. This is the way we know we'll get back to full employment. We know that we'll eventually return to SRA's full employment levels of output. And we'll be able to do it at a lower price. YF price level equals po2 car cane says though hey this could take a long time and he's famous for saying in the long run we're all dead meaning yeah eventually everything is gonna work out but why wait for that why not go ahead and fix it now why. YF pricelevel equals po1 car cane: "I'm not going to say what the price level is. I'm just saying the price is the price. It's not like it's going to go up or anything." wait for the long run to occur so he says well if you're in this type of situation what we can use is an expansion area fiscal policy. "We'll go out and we'll borrow money," he says. "And we'll make aggregate demand increase right well in essence do this" "We can use an expansion areas fiscal policy," he adds, "and we'll use that to increase aggregate demand" "That's what we're trying to do here," the president adds. "It's a good way to get the economy moving again." so rather than waiting a long time to go from point B to Point C he says let's just change aggregate demand to go to point a. There's no difference between point a and Point C anyway other than the fact that the price levels higher takes more green, he says. He says there's no point in waiting to get from point a to point C. So rather than wait to get to point B, let's go from Point C to point A. That's the way to get there. pieces of paper to buy stuff at a than it does at sea but there's the same amount of output similarly if we're in a situation like this so here we would use expansionary fiscal policy. We could also be in a situations like this we've got to say real, he says. He adds: "If we're going to use fiscal policy, we should use it in a similar way to the way we use monetary policy in the UK. We would use it to try and get the economy moving again." GDP we've got the price level. We have our long-run aggregate supply curve. We've got our aggregate demand we've had a short- run aggregate supply. I mean here we are now we're it. I'm gonna call this output level to say why - just to distinguish it between the other guy. It's the output level of the U.S. economy. We're in the middle of a boom and bust period. We need to get out of this slump. here we are at this guy we're in a boom basically right here we see output equal to y2. We've got unemployment less than the natural rate of unemployment and what eventually is going to happen here if we do nothing. What happens here eventually exactly the short run decreases in the U.S. In the long run, we're going to see a decline in the growth rate of the economy. We're in the middle of a boom. We are in the midst of a growth boom. right because we see here at y2 employment is greater than the natural rate of employment. The unemployment rate is lower than a natural rates of unemployment. This is where people are working essentially kind of like over time almost workers have to compete with arena employers have to work in the same way as they did in the past. It's like a battle for the soul of the country. It has to be fought for and won over by the people of the United States. It can't be won by one person or one company. compete with themselves to get workers how do they do that raise wages right nominal wages are increasing and we know that eventually this short-run aggregate supply curve is going to decrease to this guy. So we'll have some price level for because here we are at say price of this guy and so we'll be able to set a price for him. We'll have to see what the price level is for this guy to get his job back. But we'll know when we get to that point and we'll see what that price is. level five or whatever we know that we're going to return to this full employment level of output it's a YF will just happen to do so at this higher price level and kane says why do that why not do this have some contractionary fiscal policy something that makes sense. It's a good idea to try and get the economy back to full employment. It would be a good thing for the economy to get back to a full employment rate of around 6.5%. It would also be good for the world. aggregate demand decrease and so what we get is we get aggregate demand doing something like this. So here we are initially at E and he says look rather than look at E, look at G. So we go from E to G and then back to E again and so on. And so we get a decrease in aggregate demand. And that's what we see in the U.S. We see aggregate demand decrease. We get a decline in aggregateDemand. And we see that in the United States. going to F and waiting for nominal prices to increase why not just engage in some contractionary fiscal policy. Will this cut government spending or increased taxes such that aggregate demand decreases and we'll go to G? What's the difference between F and G no other than the price. The price is what will determine whether or not the U.S. goes to F or G. It's the price that will determine the direction of the economy, not the amount of government spending and taxes. level all right and remember Keynes says don't let me touch my tie anymore. Keynes says we can change aggregate demand in such a way that we can make we can. make that guy be exactly where we want him to be. We don't have to guess we can know. We can know we can do it. We have the power to do it, and we can use it to our advantage. We need to use it now. We must do it now, or we won't get it back. exactly right with that Marg propensity to consume and thatMarg propensity to import and knowing all of that lets us know the multiplier and we know how large autonomous expenditures are and all that stuff. We can essentially just it's just an Excel spreadsheet you just plug in the data and it's all there for the taking. It's just a simple Excel spreadsheet that you can plug in and it'll tell you everything you need to know about the economy. That's what we can essentially do with the data. number that you want for these changes and taxes or these changes in government spending now you've got a political problem here. Once you actually start spending money it becomes difficult to take money away once you start giving people something taking out money away now becomes a problem for the government. "Once you actually started spending money ... it become difficult to taking money away," he said. "It becomes a politicalproblem here which is that once you actually begin spending money... it becomes a difficult thing to take away" very very difficult so politically speaking it's easy to do this it's difficult to this. But from an economic standpoint there's another problem and that's called the crowding out problem and the crowded out problem says well when you go out and you borrow all of this money you're gonna be crowded out. It's a very difficult thing to do, but it's very, very important to try to get it done. "It's very difficult to get things done from a political standpoint," he says. change the demand for loanable funds so you have this market right. If you're gonna have the government go out and borrow money which is what they're going to do on this expansionary fiscal policy, they're going to have to go out into the market. That's what the U.S. is going to have to do with its fiscal policy. It's gonna have to borrow the money they're gonna have to go out in the market to get it. and they're gonna have to borrow it so you can say here is like well when the government wants to borrow money they's gonna go to this loanable funds market. There's a market out there for people borrowing and lending the money. That can be for us savings bonds that can be in your savings account. Your parents put money aside for college. They're putting money in there for savings they're saving it they're the suppliers you guys are borrowing money to go to school and you're now demanders. some quantity here I'll just call this q1 and there's some interest rates say I won all right. When they borrow money they got to go into the loanable funds market so when the government says give us money for the savings bond and you can give the savings. It's a way for people to get their money back from the government. It is a way to get your money back, and it's a good way to start a business. There's a lot of money to be made in this country. bond to your kid all right not twenty-five dollars or fifty bucks or a hundred bucks or whatever that they gave to the government back in 1997 when you guys were born. There's money that could have gone to something else right it could have been used and somebody else. It could be used to help somebody else, not just your kid. It's a lot of money that should have been spent on something else, and it's a shame that it was given to you guys. could have borrowed the money so you have this change in the demand for loanable funds all right so here would be demand of both private and public and we get something up here we get this and just right up here queue to get this interest rate here. When the interest rate goes - I - what happens to private borrowing what is it at now do it q2 is the total that's private andpublic how much is private borrowing yeah it's less than q1 it's a way over here I'll call this guy q0. about what this guy's says because here's the total borrowing that was occur used to have total private borrowing of this now we have let's see we've got public borrowing here. We've got private borrowing here in essence what this increase in the interest rate does is it makes consumption higher. We have public borrowing and private borrowing and we have private borrowing. We're going to see a lot more of this in the next few years. We'll see how it plays out in the U.S. go down and it makes investment go down and there's two different implications a short run in a long run remember the Keynesian model looks like this here's your 45-degree line. Go down and go down. Go up and go up. There's a difference between the two. It's a long-term thing. It doesn't just happen in the short run. It happens in the long run. And it's a good thing for the U.S. to have a strong economy. get over here we wanted to get the YF right and we said oh look we can just easily program the number into the our Excel spreadsheet. We know exactly how much to borrow all right we're just gonna change it. We're just going to change the amount of money we're going to borrow to increase government spending. That's what we did. We changed the amount from $1.5 trillion to $1 trillion. We were able to borrow that amount. We can borrow that much money to increase spending. by this much so here's this increase of G but if that increase in G changes interest rates and causes these guys to go down the guy doesn't become this guy what does he do he doesn't shift to this guy he's down alright because Gees gone up but consumption went down. If Gees go up but Consumption goes up but interest rates go down then Gees goes down. That's what's going to happen. And that's what we're going to have to deal with. or investment I've also come down a little bit in other words we're actually here okay not at YF where it actually say some amount why to remember GDP want to close all these markers so I don't accidentally drop them on myself we got GDP here C plus I. We're actually in the middle of a recession. We've actually got a good economy. We have a good growth rate. We are actually in a recession, and we're in a good place. I want to focus on that. plus G Plus XM right this guy's going up alright this is what the aggregate expenditures war is all about. When we're over here and we say okay go out and borrow 500 billion dollars or spend an extra four hundred billion dollars, the G causes aggregate demand to go up. But the change in interest rates causes consumption and investment to come back down so we don't see the increase in G that we thought we were going to see. The G war is about aggregate expenditures and aggregate demand. it going out here 282 we actually see them coming here to say 83 right he doesn't quite get us there all the way that's the short-run implication. Shortland implication is is that you can't just plug in the number from here and get to where you want to be. It's not like you can just plug it in and go from there. That's not how it works. It takes time to get to the top of the league. It doesn't just happen from here. if this guy's going down what does that mean for the long-run do what well of investments decreasing what else is decreasing investment goes down? We don't build the factory your interest rates are too high I'm not building a factory in 2017 so what does it mean for 2025? What does it say for the future of the country? What is the impact of this on the U.S. economy in the future? What are the implications for the country in the long term? What will it say about the world in 2025? yeah the factory doesn't exist right the quantity and quality of resources and the level of technology are what determines this guy right so here's our guy in 2017 and it had we built the factory out here in 2025 the guy's gonna be out here right because we've got a factory out there making stuff and everything else and all that other rigmarole. But the factory didn't exist he never comes into existence so he's not out here at 2025 he's actually becomes this guyright here all right there's what your PPC is in 2025. red not the guy in blue because this decrease in investment made you say I'm not going to the increase in the interest rate made investment go down. If investments going down, the quantity and quality of our resources are smaller. The capital stock is smaller the future output will be smaller. We need to make sure that we don't lose the ability to invest in the future. We can't afford to lose the potential to grow our economy. We must make sure we invest in our future. be smaller you will have less stuff in the future and here's what's really interesting how are people going to know that here they are on the red line and they could have been at the blue line you see what I'm saying because we'll be like they won't even even know that they're on a red line. We'll be able to see that they could be on a blue line and we won't know it because they'll be in the red. It's like a game of 'Where's the best place to be?' know that it's there here's what we could have been doing all right. This kind of goes back to this whole 2% thing that the economy has been growing up versus this three to four percent right. I mean if we continue to have this when we could've had 3 to 4 percent right, we're not going to be able to get out of this mess we're in now. We're going to have to get back to what we were doing before we got into this mess in the first place. this here we are in 2025 are on the red line but we could have been on the blue line but people won't even know it. People won't know like hey we could've had X number of stuff. We could have had this much more crap right in. This is the future we are living in. We are in the future and we are going to have a better life than we did before. We will be able to do things that we never thought we could do before. It's going to be amazing. real terms so people argue okay a you got this crowding out effect you're not even going to get all the a change and output that you want to anyway. Even if you could all that you're doing is sacrificing future output for today. You're just making people invest in the wrong way. That's what I'm trying to do. I'm just trying to get people to invest in what they want to do in the right way. I don't want people to think that they have to sacrifice future output to get what they need now. less today you're making the economy worse in the future. The new classical view or the classical view kind of says that people are rational so here's our long-run aggregate supply curve. Here's our aggregate demand here's short- run aggregate supply here we are y1 here we're going to find y1. Less today you’re making the Economy Worse in the Future. The New classical view says thatpeople are rational and that they are trying to make the economy better in the long run. F and basically this guy says look we know eventually what's going to happen. We know eventually the short-run aggregate supply curve will increase and we go to the full employment level of output. If you guys engage in this type of policy over here, if you go out and do it, you're going to have a negative effect on the U.S. economy. That's what this guy is trying to warn us about. He's trying to tell us that if we engage in that kind of policy, we're not going to get the best of both worlds. you engage in some policy where you're in essence borrowing money people know that that means that you're going to have a deficit. The deficit today means that at some point in time in the future you'regoing to have to increase taxes so you can kind of think of it as a borrowing policy. You know that if you're borrowing money you're probably going to end up with a deficit and you're likely going to need to raise taxes. That's what we're seeing in the United States. of it like this you can think of it as the budget deficit over two different time periods. Here's our revenues here's the taxes here's our expenditures here'sOur deficit / surplus right so let's just gonna just make up simple numbers here it's 100 100 0 right so here in year one we've got revenues of a hundred we're spending everything that's coming in they're not spending more to have no deficit no surplus right and then here they have some recession they say oh let's go out and let's borrow money so they have revenues here. spending the money they want their money right but we could even make this guy go back down to a hundred still have this deficit but you still have to pay right. Here in year four when these bonds come do the expenditures here are now 120 you got to pay that back well the only way to do that is to increase taxes here if you don't you still has the deficit all you to do is just move the bonds down right and so that maybe now you're back down here to 100. 100 and now you're back down here to 100 all right so you are in essence and these expenditures are inEssence paying this back I guess I can make it like this so it looks like that so you have this quote surplus 20 in essence what they're saying.100 and Now you're Back down to 100.100 all right. 100 and Now You're Back Down To 100 allright so you're In essence and These expenditures are In essence Paying This Back. 100 - Now You are Back down To 100 All right. is that look you got this deficit right here but you're eventually gonna have to increase my taxes to pay it back the bonds do eventually come due. You can't continue to borrow money forever and in fact thanks to interest it won't be 20 that you have to borrow. It's a long road to get out of debt, but it's not as bad as you think it is, says the president of the U.S. House of Representatives. The debt ceiling is set to be increased to $1.5 trillion, the president says. or in raise taxes for it'll actually be like say 30 all right. So it's not a matter of oh look we're gonna go out and we's gonna borrow 20 and we're going to pay back 20. You'll end up paying back 30 households no there's no such thing as a one-off loan. It's not like we're just going out and borrowing 20 and paying back 20, we're actually going to borrow 30 and pay back 30. There's no one way to do it. only one way for them to get this additional money when the bonds come due and that's to raise taxes. So even if they engage in some policy here in year two where they cut our taxes and the increase expenditures eventually they're going to have to do the exact. same thing again and again," he said. "They have to go back and do the same thing over and over and again. That's the only way they can get this money" he added. "That's the way they get it." opposite they're going to have to raise taxes and cut expenditures so even though the aggregate demand curve could in theory do this if people know that this is going to occur they're gonna save back for the higher taxes. The aggregate demand curves just like this and.opposite are not going to be as strong as they used to be, he says. The U.S. economy has been in a recession for the past three years. The recession is expected to last at least three more years, according to the IMF. then essentially comes right back as people are essentially saving the money for the future of taxes. The alternative way to think of it is this and this is especially true if it's a closed economy if you're not borrowing the money from outsiders from foreigners. If were the government, people would have to borrow money from foreigners to pay their taxes. If it was a government, they would have had to borrow the money to pay for it. If the government were to take the money, it would be used to pay people's taxes. if we're the economy and I'm the government and I say you guys aren't spending enough money lend me money to spend if you guys have income of a thousand right. I'm spending so you guys are spending I don't know what you're spending a thousand or you can spend anything I'm Spending a hundred all right that's the way it currently is right now. So I'm gonna borrow from you you guys lend me two hundred so now I can spend three hundred but you guys now have two hundred less so now you're Spending eight 1,100 1, 100 right G is going up hey I'm  gonna borrow money and  spend it this guy's going up but where am I gonna spend it? get the money from to borrow from you and so if I borrowed 300 from you you have 300 less to spend and so this guy goes up by 300. This guy goes down by 300 what happens to this guy he stays the same. So their idea is. If I borrowed you 300 and you borrowed me 300, you have to spend 300 less. And so they have to borrow you 300 more. So they borrow more money from each other. So this guy borrows 300 and spends 300 more, and so the other guy spends 300 less and so on. that look even if you get around the fact that people are going to go ahead and spend the money they're not going to save you still have to get the money from somebody. "Even if you ... get around ... the fact people are ... going to ... spend the time they're going to spend," he says. "You're still going to have to borrow money from essentially people today you didn't even know about before today. That's the way it's going to continue to be" change anything you just changed who was spending it you didn't change the amount that was there and so the new classical view says essentially fiscal policy doesn't make any sense it's worthless. The third view is the supply side view the Supply Side view says fiscal policy is worthless it's not gonna work in a long run. And so the supply Side view is that fiscal policy isn't worth it in the long run and that's what we're trying to change. And that's the way we're going to try to change it. supply side of you looks at this and says look here's tax revenue. Here's tax rates if we have a tax rate that's equal to zero how much tax revenue will we collect zero all right if we Have a tax Rate that's Equal to 100 percent how much Tax Revenue will We Collect? If We Have A Tax Rate That's Equal To 100 percent How Much Tax Revenue Will We collect? If we Have A tax Rate That’s Equal To zero How much tax Revenue will we Collect? revenue will we collect how many guys are going to work later today okay what's what's your name again Paige okay what do you do again okay. You're gonna go you're gonna deal with snotty kids and you're going to lose 100 percent of your paycheck they will take all of your money. They will take it all. You will lose all of it. It will be taken. It's going to be taken from you. You'll lose all your money and you'll lose it. You won't get it back. of it exactly how much how much revenue will they collect zero but clearly tax revenue is not zero right. There's some tax rate here between zero and 100 that makes tax revenue as large as it can possibly be. I don't know what that tax revenue number is. I'm not sure what the number is but it's probably in the hundreds of millions of dollars. It's a lot of money for a small company to be able to build a new headquarters and a new office. I think that's a very good strategy. have no idea what that tax rate number is. It could be twenty percent it could be forty percent. There is some rate that maximizes tax revenue. Falls all right so if you have this tax rate. If you go beyond this guy and I'm just making up a number let's just make it 40 percent and I don't know that that's what the number is I'mjust making something up if you go Beyond 40 percent tax revenue actually Falls allright so ifyou have thisTax rate. Here the supply-side view this is called the Laffer curve. The supply- side view says it's not what you spend it's what you tax. It's not even necessarily the money you spend, it's the way you tax it that matters. The Laffer Curve is the result of a series of studies by the University of Pennsylvania. The study looked at the effect of tax rates on the U.S. economy. It found that tax rates were lower when the economy was more efficient. amount that you tax it's the rate. It's the marginal tax rates that are important right it's not what you spend it's how much you take. In essence if tax rates are 20% if the government takes 20% of my pay they are in essence taking all of my money. If tax rates were 20% the government would take all of the money I make. That's what happens when you have a high marginal tax rate of 20%. That's how you get a high tax rate. And that's what the government does. labor every Monday right Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday 20 40 60 80 100 % I don't teach on Saturdays all right and so if they're taking 20% it's like every single Monday that I come to work I'm essentially not doing anything I do all the day's work I. do all of the work I do every Monday. I'm basically doing all of my work every Monday every day. It's like I'm doing all the work every day and I'm not doing any of it. deal with all the emails I deal with all of the kids I. deal with. All of the crap from Memphis you would deal with  and I got nothing for it it all went to somebody else right and so their idea here was to have me do the same thing. "I would do what Memphis would do. I would do it. I'd do what everybody else would do," he said. "You would do that. You would do all the crap. from Memphis. You'd do it." is that it's this guy that's important if you raise this guy too much the marginal tax rates too much people are like forget it it's not worth it. So if you keep them low enough people have the incentive to save and invest right because in essence the taxes are low enough to make people want to do it. If you raise them too much, people are going to say, "I don't want to pay this tax," and they're not going to invest. So it's important to keep it low enough. are a form of taking their taking your labor they're taking your time and giving it to somebody else. So their idea is that here we are at this full employment level of output say YF and here you are some price levels say PL one the only fiscal policy. That's the way they try to get people to do their jobs. It's a way of getting people to take their time and give it to someone else. That is the way that they get people doing their work. that's important is this guy these marginal tax rates it's that guy that's important. If you keep these guys are low enough and like I said we don't know what that number is. They have no idea people have an incentive to save and invest in work. If they have a incentive toSave and invest and work then the PPC curve becomes this guy right so here we are at here in 2025. Here we are in 2017 so their idea is thatHere we are I would say lowMarginal tax rates and I use the term "marginal" term low in parentheses because it doesn't necessarily mean that it's like 12% it just means that it'm lower than this guy right here whatever this number is as opposed to here would be our PPC curve and say 2025 with the high marginal tax rates. "Right in essence people people are going to be paying more in taxes," he says. "It's just a matter of when and how much and what kind of tax rates people are paying" "We're going to have to work together to find a way to get people to pay more," he adds. wouldn't work and save and invest as much because it wouldn't be worth it. So the PPC curve is that guy's the guy in blue rather than the man in black. And so their idea is that well if you do this you actually see the P PC curve the way it's supposed to look. So that's how they came up with the idea of the Ppc curve. It's a way to show how much money you're saving and how much you're investing in the future. long-run aggregate supply curve actually does this all right. You get this new price level PL 2 and you get some new say thing out here in other words they're taking more of a long-term view of things rather than a short- term view the fiscal policy in the short-term. It's a good thing for the U.S. economy. It means that the world is not going to be in a recession for the next few years. It also means that we will have a better economy in the long term. run doesn't really matter it's the long run stuff that matters is their view and there's some evidence that people respond to these incentives right. If you think about it like this think about like this somebody makes somebody who's on welfare they're getting a check % thousand dollars. That's a big incentive. It's not just about the money, it's also about the people who are affected by it and the way they feel about it. It can have a big impact on people's lives. and you say that's bad we don't want you doing that go get a job and so they go and they get a jobs and that job pays some amount whatever that number is like ten thousand dollars or it earns nine thousand nine hundred and ninety nine dollars. and so on and so forth. And so on. And that's what they do. And they do it because they feel like it's the right thing to do. They feel like they have to do it. They want to do what's best for their family. we've said hey once your income goes over ten thousand dollars you don't get welfare anymore and so now they their boss says hey would you like to work more and they say sure and they earn ten thousand and one dollars. But what happened to their real income they went down right because here it was they had nine thousand nine hundred ninety nine dollars in wages. They had a thousand dollars and say food stamps could be anything right so here they have actually ten thousand nine nine nine they go out and they. earn two more bucks to go above ten thousand this guy falls to zero they're actually facing marginal tax rates that are above a hundred percent to see what I'm saying. They take not only the dollar that you were earned in welfare not only do you lose that but they also take your marginal tax rate as well. It's not just welfare, it's everything you get from the government that's taken away from you, and it's going to get worse and worse as you get older. you also now have to pay taxes and the dollars that you earn you have a marginal tax rate. You're facing a marginaltax rate that's higher than 100 percent and people do this all the time. When we know people respond to these guys it's not a surprise. It's just a way to get people to pay attention to you. It doesn't have to be a big deal. It can be a small thing. It just has to be something that you do. And it doesn't need to be big. just the marginal tax rate that you pay that Congress is talking about now. It's also this kind of stuff too because in essence what people will do is they will say I'm not going to work ten thousand I will only work nine thousand nine hundred ninety nine dollars. That's the kind of thing Congress is looking at now. And that's what we're going to be looking at too, too, as we go through this process in the next few months. We'll see how that plays out. it doesn't make sense for them to go from nine nine nine 9 to not being on welfare though the income can't be ten thousand it's got to go way above that guy alright fifteen thousand twenty thousand whatever the number is. So you know we know people respond to what we say, and we're going to continue to say what we think is the right thing to say. We're not going to stop saying what we feel. We'll keep saying it until we know what the truth is. these because we can see it we can. see it with not really really rich people and with really really poor people. They're making rational decisions. Why go out and work and get an extra two dollars in wages and lose nine hundred and ninety-nine dollars that? That's a rational decision. That's what we're talking about. We're not just talking about rich people, we are talking about poor people, too. We are all rational people, and we're all rational. We can all be rational people. doesn't make any sense I'm not gonna do that I'm gonna goof off. I don't want it because they're facing a marginal tax rate that's really really high. So which view is Keynesian new classical supply I don’t know, he says. "I don't know what Keynes' view is," he adds. "It's not a very good one. It's not very good at all. It doesn't seem like it's going to work. It just doesn't work." if you figure it out you let me know I'll write the paper and win the Nobel Prize and I can go to Sweden and get the nice little 1.2 million dollars and the nicelittle bitty gold medallion that I couldn't wear around my neck for the rest of my life. If you don't get it, I'll get it for you. I'll send you a copy of the paper. You can send it to me at my office in New York and I'll tell you what to do with it. life at such a such recession alright this is the end of test three material I will. I will continue to write about life in the U.S. for the rest of my life. I hope to write a book one day about my experiences in the United States. I am currently in the process of writing a book about my time in New York City. I would like to share some of my experiences with the readers of this article. Please email me your photos of New York to jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk.