The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open CourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. MICHAEL SHORT: Today I want to pick a favorite MIT course to teach you how to use the technology of the future. To see more of Michael Short's favorite MIT courses click here. This week, we're going to look at radiation damage and nuclear materials. We'll start where we left off, watching videos of crushing things with the explicit purpose of understanding material properties, so that we can talk a little bit about radiation damage. Since I got more than a few minutes, I'll start at the bottom of the page and take it from there. We're looking at the effects of radiation damage on nuclear materials, so we'll talk about that next. Back to the page you came from. few requests to say, what's all this nuclear materials? It's like the biggest research field in the department, and yet, it's not talked about in 22.01. Well, now it is. So we talked before about all the different stages in radiation damage from creation of single defects to their clustering. Now we talk about the stages of radiation damage in different types of nuclear materials. We talk about how they are created, how they're clustered and how they get damaged. into things like voids or loops and super structures that have end up having macroscopic effects on material properties, and all of them is due to the production of crystal and defects due to radiation. And to refresh your memory quickly, I'm going to jump ahead to the stress strain, and I'll talk about it in more detail in the next section. I'll be back in a few days with the next part of the series, which will focus on the effects of stress strain on the material. curve that we were looking at before we started watching videos of crushing things, to remind you about the different material properties and what they actually mean. So anyone remember what we mean by toughness in relation to this curve? AUDIENCE: The area [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL SHORT: That's right. The amount of material that can be used to make a material that is very tough or very soft. That's what we're looking at. We're going to show you what that looks like. of energy it would take to actually cause this material to fail. That's a measure of toughness. How about strength? Remember this curve is stress, which is a force per unit area, versus strain. The strength of the material is how much stress you can put on a piece of material. It's the same with the material's toughness. It is the amount of stress you put on it that determines its strength. The material's strength is the same as its toughness, so it's the strength of its toughness. can put in until it starts to either plastically deform or it hits its UTS, ultimate tensile strength, where it will just fail. Stiffness is more of a response function, so it's how much does it deform in relation to how strong it is. How much you can stretch it before it fails, indicated by this point right here. The strain to failure would be a good measure of activity. And finally, stiffness. What do you think? MICHAEL SHORT: Exactly. much stress you put into it. So it's the slope of this part right here, so that's why I want you guys to know that we mean actually different physical things by these properties, which will be important to note when we start to discuss what radiation damage actually does. So that's what we're going to be looking at here. We're looking at how radiation damage affects the human body. We'll be talking about the effects of radiation damage on the body and how it affects the brain. So the basic mechanism of radiation damage is like you might imagine. Let's say this green particle is a neutron or a heavy ion or a proton or an electron or anything. Anything that's energetic enough to cause atomic displacement. So as that neutron or whatever enters, it will strike, and that's how radiation damage occurs. It's like a lightning strike. It just happens to be a green particle. It doesn't have to be very big. It can be a very small particle or a very large particle. some of the atoms in this perfect crystal, creating what's called a primary knock on atom, or PKA, for short. And then that neutron and the released PKA will go on to hit more and more atoms, resulting in what we call a damage cascade, leaving behind a lot of damage. It's a process known as a "damage cascade" and is caused by the release of a neutron and a release of PKA in the crystal. The process is called a 'damage cascade' and occurs when atoms are hit by neutron and PKA. different types of defects. We talked about these last time, but I'll just refresh your memory. A vacancy is a type of defect that, well, it's not really a thing, right? It's just the absence of where an atom would have been. There's also interstitials, or atoms where they shouldn't quite be. And this leaves behind a whole bunch of damage that can diffuse and move because let's say another atom moved into the position of this vacancy. Then we can say the vacancy moved to that atomic position. we quantify using a measure called DPA, or displacements per atom. DPA is a simple measure of how many times has every atom left. That's it, though. It's not actually a unit of damage, and I'll be giving a talk at MRS, the materials research conference. I'm going to be talking about the use of nanomaterials in the future. I'll also be talking on the subject of nanotechnology in the 21st century. I will be talking at the MRS conference in San Francisco. tomorrow, railing against this DPA unit because I'm going to explain this a little bit right now. What is a DPA? A DPA measures the number of times that each atom has moved out of its original site, but it has nothing to do with how many times it stays. It's a measure of how much movement an atom has had, not how long it's been in the same place. It measures movement, but not how much time an atom spends in a particular place. out of its original site because a lot of those atoms will get knocked away and then just move right back. But the DPA part only measure is what we call the ballistic stage of radiation damage. So what DPA actually measures is how many times does this process happen? How many times do the atoms get knocked around? But it says nothing about where they end up, and that's the really interesting part about specifically radiation material science. Because let's see if this works. I've just realized I can jump back to a slide without inducing epilepsy. say one of these interstitials were then to combine with one ofThese vacancies. It's like they were never there. Even though they were displaced, and would be counted as part of the DPA, or the radiation damage dose, the net effect on the crystal material is nothing. So let's let's say they were not there at all. It would be like they had never been there. It wouldn't have had any effect on our crystal material. We wouldn't be able to see them. say what really the DPA is. It's a simple formula that I think you guys may recognize. This look familiar from all of neutronics that we've been doing? It's yet another reaction rate. It is an energy dependent flux times another type of cross-section that we call the damage displacementCross-section. The DPA can be used in a variety of ways to create new types of nanomaterials. It can also be used to create a new type of material, such as a new form of graphene. or sigma D, and it's integrated over your entire energy range, and that's all there is to it. So with what you know 22.01, you can understand the basic unit of radiation damage. As you might imagine, we've had four lectures on neutronics, so if you can understanding all there, you'll be able to understand radiation damage in a lot more detail. We hope to see you in the next few weeks for another lecture on radiation damage and neutronics. is to know about DPA after four sophomore lectures, it's probably a pretty simple unit. What goes into this damaged displacement cross-section is also something that might look a little familiar is a cross section that says, what's the probability of some particle coming in with DPA? DPA is a very simple unit, but it can be a very complex thing to understand. DPA can also be used to help scientists understand the nature of space and time, and to understand how the universe works. energy E and imparting kinetic energy T to another struck atom? That comes right from-- remember our treatment-- I think I've drawn this probably 50 times now. Our hollow cylinder treatment of a charged particle with charge little ze interacting with a particle a big ZE at some impact parameter? That's what we're trying to do here. We're going to try to do it in a way that doesn't cause a lot of damage to the atom. We'll see how it goes. B. We wanted to know well, for all possible approach paths, the area of this hollow circle, or the probability that this particular approach path is taken, is just the area here 2pi b db. With some constants in front of it, which actually is that cross section what's the probability of taking this particular path, we can get a better idea of what the probability is of taking that particular path. B. The probability that a particular path will be taken is determined by the fact that the path is a hollow circle. probability that our particle goes in with energy E and imparts kinetic energy T? It's directly related to that impact parameter B. And this is the same thing that you're seeing right here. You then multiply by this little function nu of T, which represents the amount of damage, or the kinetic energy of the particle. And that's what we're looking at in this picture. It's a particle that's going to go in and do a lot of damage to the environment. the number of displacements done, for each one of these reactions. And there are simple models, there are mostly linear models for-- if a particle comes in with energy E, leaves with energy T, how many displacements happen? It's a pretty simple linear piece-wise model, and that fairly well approximates it. It's not perfect, but it's a fairly good approximation, and it's not too bad, I think, for most of the reactions we see. the number of displacements that happen, but I want to get the idea of DPA versus damage. They're two very different things, and they're often equated. Much like the material properties of strength, ductility, hardness, and toughness are equated in colloquial speech, but that's absolutely wrong. So is the idea that DPA and damage are the same thing? I don't think so. I think the two are very different and should be considered separately. of DPA and radiation damage. Because DPA, again, just measures the number of times that an atom is displaced. Damage is some measure of the. number of messed up atoms at the end of the game, and they operate in very different timescales. It takes femtoseconds to picosecondS for a radiation blast to damage an atom, while DPA is a measure of how many times an atom has been displaced in the past few seconds. It's a very different process. damage cascade to happen. So the DPA is all over in less than a picosecond. But it can take years for all these different defects to diffuse, to cluster up, and to form these super structures, and actually end up causing the damage that can lead to material property degradation. The DPA can take up to a decade to work its way through a material. It can take as long as a decade for all the defects to be fully resolved, or more than a year for them to become fully resolved. So what sort of factors would affect the speed at which these different defects end up finding each other? What could you vary about a material or its environment to change the speed of these atomic diffusion jumps? MICHAEL SHORT: Temperature. Reading off my list-- well, the first thing that comes to mind is the temperature of the room. The temperature is a key factor in the process of atomic diffusion, as well as the environment in which it takes place. The speed of the diffusion jumps depends on the temperature. whole list jumped up. You got the first one. What were you going to say? AUDIENCE: I was going to saying temperature also. MICHAEL SHORT: Yeah, absolutely. Temperature determines diffusivities. It also can change phases or crystal arrangements, like for the case of anything iron-based. The dose rate, The dose rates, The amount of the drug, the dose rate and the amount of time it takes to get the drug into the body are all important. the rate at which those neutrons come in can change the rate atWhich the defects cluster up. Chemistry, if you have solute atoms, which I've drawn here. You may have let's say chromium atoms and iron, and thechromium atoms are a little bit bigger. Defects may be attracted to these bigger atoms. It's a very complex system, but it's a fairly simple one to understand, I think, and I hope it will give you some insight into how atoms work. to or repelled to those extra solute atoms, changing the way that they interact with each other. And then micro structure. Things that are bigger than on the order of atoms. Grain boundaries, dislocations, all of those defects that we talked about last time, just to refresh your memory of them. We'll be back next week with a look at some of the latest developments in the field of nanotechnology. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. what those are. We have been talking about zero dimensional defects like vacancies. We spent a while on dislocations, these one dimensional defects that other defects can be attracted to. We saw an example of a two dimensional defect, known as a grain boundary, where you can see this line. It is a one-dimensional defect that is attracted to other one-dimensional defects. It can be seen as a two-Dimensional defect or a three-D dimensional defect. It's a one dimensional defect that can also be attracted by other three-dimensional defects. between different arrangements of atoms. And there can be three dimensional defects. Like inclusions of some separate face sitting in the material. Like the manganese sulfide we found in the Alcator fusion reactors power rotor. And all of the presence and density of all those different defects can be quite quite quite different. And that's what we're trying to find out with this new technique. It's a new way of looking at atoms and how they interact with each other. We hope to learn more about how atoms interact with one another. strongly influenced. The movement in clustering of those defects can be quite strongly influenced by the presence of all those other defects. So again, the DPA actually tells us this part of radiation damage, and that's what we tend to simulate with these ballistic models of the radiation damage in the body. It's a very complex system, and it's very difficult to simulate. But we can get a good idea of what's going on by looking at the damage that's been caused by the radiation. binary collision approximation simulations, where we just say like billiard balls, how many atoms knock into each other? What it doesn't tell us is everything else, and it's the stuff that happens here that can tell us will our materials fail in nuclear reactors? And there's evidence for this. I'm not a nuclear physicist, I'm a nuclear engineer. And I think there's a lot of evidence that our materials could fail in a nuclear reactor. I think that's a very real possibility. not just ranting against it, no I am, but I'm doing so with evidence, so it's justified. So here's a nice experiment I like to show in every talk for this case. These folks took pure nickel and put it in the same reactor, at the same temperature, and got pure nickel. It's a very interesting experiment, and it's a good example of what can happen when you put pure nickel in a reactor with pure nickel, and then put it into a hot reactor. the same amount of swelling. All the conditions were the same. Same temperature, same materials, same microstructure, same reactor, same neutron energies. Just a different dose rate. A 30% difference in the rate at which neutrons arrived at the nickel, and they get the same result in void swelling, one after the other. One after each other. The result is the same: a void swelling of one per cent of the volume of the nickel. The difference is in the dose rate, which is 30%. of those bad things that happens, at two and a half times the DPA, which tells us that there's a very strong dose rate effect for material damage. So if you want to answer the question, well, how much dose does it take to reach 3% swelling in nickel? Can't. Can't answer that question because we don't know the exact dose rate for swelling. But we do know that it's at least twice as high as the dose rate of the drug, which is 2.5 times higher than DPA. answer that question, you don't have enough information. Even if you say, how much dose does it take with one of the neutrons at 600 Celsius in this one reactor? You can't answer that question. And a lot of the rest of nuclear materials data looks something like this. It's kind of tricky. And it's a very complex set of data to work with, so it's very difficult to get a clear picture of what's going on in a nuclear reactor, he says. like this. Now, I don't want you to worry about what the axes say. They're not readable because they're not important. What I do want to know is what's the quality of this data set you see? Would you be bold enough to draw a trend line through a data set like this? If so, I'd like to hear from you about how you would like to use the data set in the future. If not, I'll be happy to send you a new set of data. single data point? No. What about three where it doesn't actually match up with one of them? Or is there any reason why you think they made this parabolic instead of a linear line? I can draw a line that would fit between the error bars of these two right. I can't find one that fits between them. I'm not sure why they didn't make it a parabolic line. I think they should have made it a straight line. But I don't think they did. The MIT experiment involved throwing copper, aluminum, and nickel into the reactor. The experiment lasted for a month. The MIT reactor is located in the center of the MIT campus. The experiments are extremely difficult and expensive to carry out. The results of the experiment are published in a book called "The MIT Reactor: An Experiment in Science and Technology" The book is published by Simon & Schuster, and is available in paperback and hardback. For more information on the book, go to www.simonandschuster.com. that cost $40,000, and that did about 0.002 DPA, or about the dose that you'd receive in a normal power reactor in one day. If you want to actually say how long will it take to get materials to the end of their useful life, this tends to be anywhere in the world, not just in the U.S. It's a good place to start if you're trying to figure out how long it will take you to get to the point of no return. from 10 DPA in light water reactors, to hundreds of DPA for proposed fast reactors to 500 for TerraPower's traveling wave reactor. "I don't have 10,000 years to wait for the final answer," he says. "The best we can is the best we could do," he adds. "It's a long way off, but it's a step in the right direction. It's a good first step. We're not there yet. But we're getting closer." do right now is to stick them in a reactor called BOR-60 in Russia. I've actually been there. It's in the very Western edge of Siberia-- I don't know if you could call it that-- in a city called Dimitrovgrad. They have a sodium cooled fast reactor. For those of you who want to try it out, you can go to the website of the Russian nuclear power plant, which is based in the city of Novosibirsk. Russia has a fleet of sodium cooled fast reactors that can get you 25 DPA per year. And if your reactor is going to go, they are going to be built. Just not in this country, not very much. But Russia's got a fleet. of sodium cooling fast reactors. That can getYou 25 Dpa per year and can be built in a matter of months. But they are not built in the U.S. yet. But if you want them, you can get them in a few years. to 500 DPA, you have to know whether or not your materials will survive. So what investor is going to be like, all right, here's $10 billion, but I can wait 20 years for a return on investment. No. I can't. I have to wait 20. years for the answer. To 500 D PA, you. have to. know whether you will survive, and if you don't, you're out of business. You can't wait. 20 years to find out. wait 20 years to start building the reactor, which means 40 years for a return on investment. Chances are, if someone's got $10 billion to give, they're going to be dead by the time they get a return. So this is a no win proposition. So what we really need is a reactor that can be built in 20 years, 20 years at a time. That's what we need for the future of the U.S. nuclear industry. We need a reactor with the potential to last 40 years or more. to know is what is the full population of every single type of defect in an irradiated material? That's what I mean by damage. Did I show you guys this movie yet? The orange one? We've talked about vacancies in an abstract sense, but this is a movie of one. This is the movie of a vacancy in a nuclear reactor. That's the kind of damage we're talking about here. We're not talking about a vacuum in the sense of a hole in the ground, but a defect in a reactor. of them actually moving about on the surface of germanium. So this is a scanning tunneling microscope image-- I think that's what it stands for. And that right there, that darker orange thing moving about is vacancy diffusion. It's actually happening. And these are atoms on the Surface of Germanium, which is a type of uranium. It is the most common element in the Earth's crust. It also makes up the majority of the atoms in the human body, including the nucleus and nucleus. You can see it in real time. So I think this was-- yeah-- 30 frames a second, or so. Anyway, I don't remember exactly, but I'd say that's why I always reference everything in the presentations. I encourage you to do the same. I think it's a great way to learn about the world around you. I hope you'll try it out. It's a fun way to get to know people in the U.S. and learn about other countries around the world. guys to look it up. And then the only reason these slides aren't up yet is because they're 300 megabytes, and I didn't have the bandwidth to upload that from my house. Now that I'm on campus, I can get a 300 meg presentation up there because it's full of photos and videos. And I can't upload that because I don't have bandwidth to do it from my home. I can do it on campus because I have a lot more bandwidth. movies.com: What sort of things could happen to these defects? So radiation produces all these crazy defects, then the DPA description is over. What could happen next? [INTERPOSING VOICES] MICHAEL SHORT: Sorry, Jared, and then-- yeah. AUDIENCE: Material could crack. That would be the worst. That's what we're talking about, right? That's the worst thing that could ever happen to a material. And then, of course, there's the possibility that the material will crack. case scenario, but that is indeed what happens in the end, and I'll show you some pictures of that actually happened. Yeah? AUDIENCE: You mentioned that displaced atoms can find their way back? MICHAEL SHORT: Yep. So they could recombine with different types of defects and annihilate each other. If you want to see more of Michael Short's work, go to his website, MichaelShort.com. He's also on CNN, PBS, HLN and CNN iReport. you have a vacancy and an interstitial nearby, the interstitial can plug the hole of the vacancy and your left with another perfect crystal. But now what happens if two vacancies find each other? Then you've got the makings of a void, or we then call it a small vacancy cluster of two vacancies. So there is a thermodynamic driving force bringing them together, and then as those defects are created, they become larger. It's actually more stable for these vacancies or interstitials to find eachother and make these larger defects than it is for them to sit alone in the crystal structure. build up, then what Jared said could happen. You could crack the material because it could get weaker, less ductile, less tough. Weaker is the opposite of strong, and what's the other one? Toughness-- oh, and harder, actually. So the origins avoid swelling. I'll start with the humble vacancy. A vacancy is a place to start, and a vacancy can be a good place to stop. A. vacancy is an area to stop, and it can be stopped by a vacancy. void is nothing but a bunch of vacancies or a pocket of vacuum or gas in a material. As they cluster together, they reached this threshold in terms of free energy where putting a few of them together is not possible. void is nothing. But it all has to start with these single vacancies. as they cluster, they reach this threshold. where they reach. this threshold where they are no longer possible to put a few together and create free energy. This is where free energy is created. quite energetically favorable, but it's not so unfavorable that it never happens. So once in a while, you'll get a few vacancies to come together, and that cluster will survive for a little while. All theWhile, you're making more and more vacancies nearby, and if it gets to a point where it's too much, it's time to move on to the next thing. That's what happens when you move to a new city, and it happens a lot in New York City. certain size, that free energy goes negative. And so there's this process of absorption and emission of defects by larger or smaller void. And when the free energy go negative, it becomes stable on its own, and then that void will simply continue to grow, and grow,. and grow. So there's a process of absorbing and emitting defects by a larger or a smaller void, and so on and so forth, until the void reaches a certain size. And that's what happens in the heart of a heart. if you have a whole bunch of voids near each other, some of them can be emitting vacancies, which can be captured by the other ones. This is part of why they don't all just disappear at once. They have finite lifetimes, long enough that you can build them. They can't just disappear all at once, they have to be built over time. They're not infinite, but they are long enough to be used for a very long time. You have to build them over a long period of time. up to the size where they become stable. Then this free energy eventually curves down, becomes negative, and then they just stick around. We've actually seen these clusters or voids diffusing, so it's not like vacancies alone are the only thing that moves. We have seen clusters of defects and voids that have diffused in the past, as well as voids and cavities that have moved in different directions. It's not just vacancies alone that move, it's the whole system that changes. diffusing, mostly in one dimension, but what you're seeing here is a TEM, or transmission electron microscope image, of one dimensional diffusion of a vacancy cluster. That little black blob right there is a pocket of vacuum that's moving back and forth. And if it happens to find another pocket, that's when it gets a little bit bigger. That's what you see in this TEM image, a little blobs of vacuum moving around in a vacuum. It's called diffusion. of vacuum, it could then combine to a bigger pocket, becoming a bigger and bigger void. The other problem too is that most materials generate helium when you irradiate them with neutrons. Did we go over the what's called the N alpha cross-section? Does that sound familiar to anyone? All you need to know is that it's a way to make a bigger, more powerful version of the atom bomb. For more information, go to: http://www.nasa.gov.uk/news/features/top-stories. A pocket a vacuum is not that stable, but if you get a little bit of gas to stabilize that, you can get it to work. This is an important one to note. Because a pocket a Vacuum is Not that stable. But this is an Important One to Note. Because this is An important One to note, This is An Important One To Get It To Work. Let me show you what's going on. Right now, I'm going to pull up Janice like I do pretty much every class. pocket of vacuum, then that pressure differential goes down and that void becomes a bubble, and that bubble is more stable. Good. Because on the last isotope, where I was showing someone [INAUDIBLE] alpha cross-section. How convenient. So among the millions of cross sections that we've gone through, there is one that stands out. It's the one that's in the middle of all the other cross-sections. That's the bubble that's the most stable. this one right here called Z alpha. So what-- Yeah? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL SHORT: Got to clone the screen. That's right. There we go. So there's this one here called. Z alpha, which means neutron comes in, alpha particle goes out. alpha particle is just an ionized helium ion, and neutron is a neutron. neutron is just a neutron, and alpha is a helium ion. neutron goes in; alpha goes out; neutron goes into, alpha goes into; neutron comes out. which very quickly pulls in two electrons from anywhere else in the metal and becomes helium gas. And this cross-section is not zero, especially at higher energy starting around 2 MeV, there is a small, but non-negligible chance that a neutron will go in, and a helium atom comes out. The helium atom is then released into the atmosphere, where it is known as a helium- helium atom. It is then known as helium-helium atom or simply helium. Helium atoms have nowhere to go, they find the easiest place to sit, that happens to be pockets of vacuum. Voids. And what that actually does is stabilizes those voids so the curve I showed you back here. This is the case of free energy for a vacuum. And that's what's happening in this case. It's stabilizing the helium atoms so they don't move around too much. That's why the curve is so stable. And it's also why there's a lot of light coming out of it. pocket of void, and that free energy gets lower and lower as you start to fill that void with gas. As the voids fill with gas, they become more and more stable, and a lot of materials generate their own gas. So that's that, and they end up forming. The voids are then filled with more gas, and then they become stable again. That's what happens when you add more gas to a void. And that's how they form. They become more stable. these bubbles. You guys remember, last time I showed you a bunch of voids. They look like diamonds all aligned in the same direction. What do you see different here? They're not quite circles, right? But they're kind of round edge squares. They are also all pointing in thesame direction. It's not quite a circle, but it's kind of a round edge square. It looks like a circle to you, but with a circle edge on the edge, it's a square. direction. It's harder to see for the small ones, but for these three big ones, you can see that they're all rotated in the same direction, giving away the crystal orientation. If you look carefully at this one,. this one, the one above it. And the big one over there, you'll see that it's rotated in. the same way as all the others. It gives away the orientation of the crystal. The crystal is rotated in a direction that is perpendicular to the direction of the light. of the material. But the reason that they're starting to swell up from diamonds into bubbles, is they're full of gas and they stabilize the voids. You can also get dislocation buildup. Normally, you would have to deform a material to create and move dislocations, but when you apply radiation, it can be done without deformation. It can also be done with radiation, which can be used to create a new material, such as a new type of diamond. For more information on the project, visit: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/science/science-and-technology/dislocation-climbing-diamonds-dislocated- diamonds. you can just create dislocations. This is kind of cool. You've got a dislocation source right here. Every one of those lines you see is a dislocated, and you can see it's spiraling out and ejecting dislocation from this one little spot. Any combination of any combination of dislocation sources can be used to create a dislocator. You can create a dislocate source by creating a disocation source by using a combination of dislocators. small clusters can collapse into dislocations or the stress induced from irradiating things can cause more stress. You create what's called this network forest of dislocation that makes things a lot harder to deform. So let's see, I want to show a couple more videos of how we deform things. We deform things by moving them around. We move them around by moving things around. And we deform them by moving these things around, and so on and so forth. We create this network of dis Locomotives. of this because it's very clear in some of these. You can actually see along these lines right here a few different orientations of dislocations, and if you watch up here, you can see some dislocation moving, and then there's a source that emits more right there, and so all of this is very clear. It's a very clear example of what's going on, and it's all very clear to see, too, because of the way the light is moving. the time, you're creating dislocations that are being emitted from different places and colliding with each other. The trick that we didn't talk about yet, is when dislocation from different directions collide, they get stuck. And when they get trapped, they can't move, and so you shift. That's what we're trying to do here. We want to shift. We're shifting. We need to shift to a new state. We don't want to move to a different state. the balance from slip to fracture, which means, like Jared said, it's easier to just break something, rather than plastically deform it. And the effects of this are things like stiffening. An increase in the Young's Modulus. Because if you remove some of the compliance from the material or make it harder to break, it makes it more difficult to break. And that's what we're trying to do in this project. We want to make it easier for people to break things. it stiffer by injecting all sorts of different defects, it takes more stress to impart the same strain. That might not be a bad thing on its own. Your materials get stronger, that sounds like a good thing, right? Not always. Not always because it doesn't just come as stiffening. But now we know that it can be used to improve the quality of our products. It can also be used as a way to improve our quality of products. We'll have to wait and see how this works out. From an atomic point of view, why does this stiffening happen? Anybody have an idea? I'm going to jump back to the stress strain curve. So the stress, or the yield stress of a material, is usually defined as this point right here. When you go from elastic reversible deformation to irreversible plastic deformation. If something gets stronger, it means that this yield stress goes up. And if something gets stiffer, it mean the slope goes up too. These two tend to happen at the same time. This is when dislocations start to move. Dislocation movement is irreversible. You can't just snap it back when you relieve the stress. By making something stronger and stiffer, you make it more difficult for those dislocated to move again. And what actually physically happens at this point? This is when the dislocation starts to move, and it can't be snapped back when the stress is relieved. It's more like that. And by making it stronger and stiffnesser, we make it harder for dislocational movement to occur again. start moving. And you can do that by throwing any defect in their way. And since radiation creates pretty much any and all defects, it's a great way to stiffen and strengthen the material. So one of the reasons things get stiffer and stronger is, remember before we showed you how to do it? It's because of radiation. It's a way to make things stiffer, stronger, and more resistant to damage. And that's what we're trying to do here. that video of dislocation sliding through material? Folks don't remember. I didn't see a lot of shaking heads. This one, right? This one right here. So remember, before, we showed you the way that dislocations move. So the ways that materials can deform without without being dislocated. That's what we're trying to do here. We're trying not to be dislocated, but to be able to deform without being dislocated. We'll show you how to do that in a second. breaking. If you throw anything in its way, you're going to make this process a lot more difficult. And all radiation damage does is throw things in the way. So if you throw absolutely anything in the. way from solute atoms to interstitials to vacancies, all of a sudden, it's. all of the sudden, a lot of the time it's not going to work. It's going to take a long time to recover from the radiation damage, which is very, very bad. harder for that dislocation to move because some of those bonds are stretched out, or there's a few extra atoms in the way. And you can then start to create what's called little pin sections called jogs. Then you've got pieces of this dislocation that are not in this preferential slip plane, and they get stuck. So all of a sudden you go from a completely gliding-- or what we call glissile dislocation-- to one that's stuck, or sessine. the actual material science words that we use. And what it ends up leading to is a strong loss in ductility. At the same time as things get stronger and stiffer, they tend to get much less ductile. So what you're looking at here are fuel shrouds. These are fuel. shrouds are a type of material that is used to make fuel. It's a material that can be used in a variety of ways, such as as a fuel tank or a fuel cell. boxes that surround the fuel pins in a Russian sodium fast reactor. Usually what you do is you would grab onto this piece right here and lift up to remove this fuel from the reactor during refueling. What happened here is they grab that, they started to pull, and it fell out of the box and onto the ground. It's not clear what happened next, but it's believed to have been an accident. The reactor was refueling at the time, and the incident is being investigated by the U.S. military. they heard a little clink, and up came half the fuel box, and the fuel stayed down in the reactor with no way to pull it out. So this is the reason why radiation damage is such an important field of study. You might not know anything has happened until it's too late and you have to go back to the reactor and try to fix it. It's a very complex process, and it can take a long time to get it right. But it can be done. until you shut the reactor down and go to take out the fuel and realize that you can't because everything is as brittle as glass. This is actually a talk I saw yesterday. We had a summer visitor in our lab from Kazakhstan. And most of their radioactive materials came from there. Most of their nuclear material came from Kazakhstan, which is a nuclear power country. It's a very, very dangerous place to be, but it's also a very beautiful place to visit. It has a lot of history, and it's very beautiful. from this reactor that shut down in 1999 on one side of Kazakhstan, and they wanted to transport those materials to the other side. So they hired the cheapest truck drivers to go on the bumpy roads. And the scientists were freaking out, because only they knew that all of the materials were in Kazakhstan. And they were trying to get them out of the country before it was too late. And so they hired these guys to drive them to Kazakhstan, which is a very bumpy, bumpy place. the metal that all those guys thought was going to be ductile like metal was more brittle than glass. And any sort of bump would cause just complete shattering of this metal and catastrophic release of radioactive material. So this took them-- let's see-- I think Kazakhstan is smaller than Russia. I think Russia is bigger than the United States. Russia is larger than the U.S. and Russia is the largest country in the world in terms of population. Russia has more people in the military than any other country. the US. So who here has done a cross-country trip? How long it take you? AUDIENCE: Six days from Seattle to here. MICHAEL SHORT: OK, so this trip took them 13 days because they went slow. And I'm going to ask you again: How long does it take to go from Seattle, to New York, to Los Angeles, to San Francisco, and back again? And how long do you stop along the way? And I'll ask again: how long it takes you to do that? don't think the roads in Kazakhstan are as good as they are in most of the middle of the country. The coasts are terrible, but the middle is pretty good. So this trip went slow because the scientists said this happens. You should be careful. And luckily, there were no problems with the roads. It was just a little bit of a bumpy ride. It's not a big deal, but it's a reminder to be careful with the road in Kazakhstan. It can be dangerous. problems and no release of radioactive material. Pretty cool. What you want to happen is for dislocations to move on the easiest planes. And so what I have redrawn here is, let's say you've got a bar of some metal, some face-centered cubic metal. As you pull on it, as you pull, it moves on the face of the metal, like a bar. And that's what we're trying to do here. It's a pretty cool idea. this, it will actually deform at about a 45 degree angles. You might wonder, why does that happen? But if you look carefully here, what's the closest packed plane of atoms that you can see? It's not this plane normal to the stress direction. It's like this one or like like this. It will deform like this or like this, and it will deform in a different way each time it is stressed. It can deform in different ways depending on the state of the atom. This is one of the easiest directions for things to deform in a fusion reactor. Another example is this one, and so you actually end up getting deformation in what's called slip plains, or the easiest ways to deform things. This one is a little bit more complicated, but it's a good example of what can happen in the fusion reactor, and how it can deform things in different ways. It's a little more complicated than that, but the idea is the same, and it's the same principle. is a piece of rotor steel from the same Alcator rotor where we found that inclusion. We were pulling it in this direction, and look what formed. All of these slip bands at 45 degree angles, showing you that just because you pull in something in one direction, doesn't mean it's going to form that way. It's all about how you position it, and how you pull it, to get it to form. It can be a lot of different ways to get the same result. it deforms in that direction. It deforms and little slices in the direction that dislocations can move the easiest. So when you actually pull on something, to show you diagrammatically, it deforms something like that. You get a mixture of bending and rotation to make it look like the bar. It's a bit of a trick to get it to work, but it's a good way to show how it works. It can be used in a number of different ways. A crystal of cadmium is bending uniformly straight, but on the microscale, it's not. Every plane there, that's a slip plane. That's a plane where dislocations have been moving all the time. This is a pretty slick image of a single crystal of Cadmium being pulled in this direction, and you can actually see every plane there. It's not a straight line, but it looks that way because it's so thin. It looks like a line on the surface of the Earth. way to the outside of the material, which is pretty cool, and this is the process that you want to happen. Anything in the way of those dislocations, you don't start forming these slip bands, and you'd make it more preferable that the thing will just break and fracture. To see the full video, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. To read the rest of the interview, click here: http://www.cnn.co.uk/2013/01/29/science/science-and-technology/semi-tour-of-the-world-soul-matches. show you some extreme examples of slip, that's when you have to go nano. So these are some pillar compression test that used a focused ion beam, which we will be using to top off our study of electron interactions with matter and ion interactions to take a piece of material to the next level. We will be showing you some of the most extreme cases of slip that we've ever seen. We'll also show you some amazing examples of how electrons and ions interact with each other in a nano-sized way. metal and carve out a little cylinder. They came down and compressively pushed on the cylinder, and look how it deformed. Not in the way you might intuitively expect, if you don't know any material science. So itdeformed all on 45 degree angles, and all they did was smash the metal together and carve a cylinder out of it. It deformed on 45 degrees, not in the usual way you'd expect. It's a very different kind of deformation. If you don't push too hard, you can actually see these perfectly symmetrical slip planes at 45 degree angles to the axis of compression. Not actually weird, if you know what's going on. There's lots more neat examples of this. If you know every one of them, you know all about compression. And you know how to use them. If not, you'll have to wait until the end of the video to see them in action. And if you do, they'll look a lot like this. Nuclear materials are designed to deform a little bit before they shatter. This is what you want to happen to nuclear materials because you're really trying to balance this between slip and fracture. That means that something will deform alittle bit before it just shatters like those channel boxes.these pillars you see this happening. And this is whatYou want to do to nuclear material. It's a balance between slipping and fracture towards the direction of slip. And that's what you're trying to do. from the Russian reactor. Any questions on what I said before I go on to the macroscale properties? All right, and let's get into the real world stuff. What actually causes this embrittlement? Well, there's a few things. Remember we saw videos of those dislocations in a traffic jam. If you're in one of those traffic jams, you're going to have to get out of there. You're probably going to need to find a way out of it. CNN's John Sutter recalls a phenomenon called pileup. Sutter: "These dislocations are moving and feeling each other's stress, and so they can't move as easily as they used to" Sutter says the phenomenon is called a pileup, and it's a traffic jam. "There is the traffic jam," he says. "It's a phenomenon," Sutter adds, "and it's called the pileup" It's been a week since Sutter's last appearance on CNN. they would want to, so you end up with a phenomenon called pileup. This happens both near other dislocations and near any other defect that gets in the way, like a grain boundary. So for smaller materials you endup with more of this pileup, and they tend to be smaller and more fragile. For larger materials, the pileup tends to be larger and more stable. For bigger materials, it tends to get bigger and more complex. For smaller materials, there is more of a pileup in the middle of the material. of a fair bit stronger, and aFair bit-- they can be less ductile, with some exceptions. If you put anything in the way, notice, this just says barrier. Any other defect can act as a barrier. And this ends up shifting the shape of the body. It's not always a good thing, but it's not a bad thing, either, if you're trying to make a body more ductile or more resistant to damage or injury. It can be a sign that things are going to change. what we call the ductile-brittle transition temperature. This is the property that people worry about for reactor pressure vessels. You would want the pressure vessel, which in cases the entire core of the reactor, to always be ductile in the worst possible situation. The worst possible scenario is on a reactor core that is too hot or too cold for a pressure vessel to handle. The pressure vessel would have to be extremely cold or too hot for the vessel to work properly. It would need to be very ductile or very brittle. the absolute last day of operation at the coldest temperature it could possibly be. As you guys know, or you probably know, when you make something colder, it tends to be more brittle. So who's frozen stuff in liquid nitrogen and broken it before? Good. I'm glad to see a lot of people have broken stuff in the last few years. It's been a long time since I've been able to do that, but I'm looking forward to doing it again soon. few hands, so what do you guys freeze and break? So just like froze a bottle of Pepto Bismol and shattered it? Nice. That must have been a fun mess to clean up. Yeah, what about you, Sarah? AUDIENCE: A banana and a coin. MICHAEL SHORT: Cool, OK. And we're And we'll be back next week with another round of "What Do You Freeze and Break?" on CNN iReport.com. able to break the coin? There you go. Not when immersed in liquid nitrogen. What about you, Charlie? AUDIENCE: Flowers. MICHAEL SHORT: Flowers, OK. So take a rose. OK. Take a rose and bend it. You can bend a coin, or if it's a one yen coin, you can bite through it. But you can't bend a rose or bend a dollar bill. You cannot bend a penny or a dollar coin. You are not allowed to bend or bite through them. and shatter it. All these normally ductile materials become extremely brittle when they get colder. So do reactor pressure vessels. At the end of their life, they can be brittle at room temperature from room temperature. And they don't just get brittle when you get to liquid nitrogen temperatures. They can also get brittle at night. And at night they can shatter. And it can be very dangerous. It can be extremely dangerous at night when it's very cold. It's very dangerous when you're in a reactor. It could shatter. radiation damage. There is what's called a ductile-brittle transition temperature before a pressure vessels are irradiated. There's about this 50% line, whatever this temperature was where you have let's say, 50%, or 10%, or 0% ductility. Whatever measure you're using, you say, OK, we always want to make sure that we don't damage the pressure vessel in any way. It's a very, very delicate process, but it can be done. that it's got a certain amount of energy absorption capability, toughness, at a certain temperature. And as you irradiate that vessel, this shifts over this way, and this upper amount ofenergy, or what we call upper shelf energy, because this looks like a shelf, goes down. What happens is the energy goes down, and the toughness goes up, and so on, until it reaches a point where it can no longer be absorbed by the material. And that's what happens with a nuclear reactor. you want to make sure is that this change in ductile-brittle transition temperature never reaches room temperature. You might think, oh, it's OK, reactors run at 300 Celsius, and things are pretty ductile right there. Well, you usually have to shut the reactor down once you're done with it to keep it from overheating. It's a very, very complex process. It takes a long time to get to the point where you have to turn off the reactor. If something goes wrong, there's a pressure spike, you can have a condition called pressurized thermal shock, or PTS. In that case, you would have a sudden pressure wave from, let's say, from steam explosion or whatever. You want that vessel to be able to.refuel, and if something went wrong, you could have PTS. It's a very serious condition, and it can be fatal if it happens to a large vessel, such as a warship or aircraft carrier. to absorb that energy instead of breaking in half, because if you break it half, that's a radioactive release. The way you test ductile-brittle transition temperature is what's called a Charpy impact test. It's probably the highest tech, lowest tech test I've seen. You simply hit things with a hammer. You don't want to break it in half. You want to make sure it absorbs the energy and doesn't release it into the environment. It doesn't break in half because if it does, it's radioactive. A very well calibrated, precise hammer. Let me pause so you can see what the sample looks like. You have these little bars with a notch in them. The notch is to make sure that acts as a stress concentrator, and you know where the breaks going to happen. So you have a very wellcalibratedhammer that is very precise. It's very hard to get it right, but when you do, it's very easy to get the right shape. It looks like a very, very precise hammer, and it's a very good hammer. in a Charpy test, you line up this little sample, and you've got-- actually in your reactors, usually, you'veGot pieces of the pressure vessel in this form lining the inside rim of the reactor pressure vessel. So every time you refuel your reactor, you take off another few of these pieces of pressure vessel from the inside of your reactor. So that's what you get in the Charpy tests. It's a little bit of the inside edge of a pressure vessel, and that's where you're going to test the reactor. these out and you hit them with a very well calibrated hammer. And you can measure by actually turning this dial and letting the hammer turn it as it moves through the material. You can see how much energy was absorbed by the material as the hammer comes back up. These out are very wellcalibratedand you canmeasureby actuallyturning this dialandletting the hammerturn it. Youcanseehow much energywas absorbed bythematerial as thehammercomesback up. So it breaks right through the material, in this case, it's in a quenched or brittle condition. For some reason, they have a lot of footage of the guy standing and not breathing, but what I want to show you is what actually happens here. I didn't make the film. I don't want to make the movie. I just wanted to show what happens. I want you to see what happens when the material breaks through. I'm not going to lie to you. If the hammer were to move through air with absolutely no drag, it would come back to the zero position. If they had encountered some resistance, like with a piece of steel in the way, the hammer would have to go back to zero. Video courtesy of www.video, I just got it. There we go. We're back to our regularly scheduled programming. Back to the page you came from. The Daily Mail's weekly Newsquiz, where you can test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com. it then measures the amount of energy in joules that piece of steel absorbs from the hammer blow. The larger that is, the better. And by doing this test at a number of different temperatures, you can recreate this ductile-brittle transition temperature curve. So they'll take a few Charpy coupons, I'm sure they'll be happy with the results of this test. I'm looking forward to seeing what the results look like in the real world. I'll be reporting back to you in a few days. they will test them at, let's say, every 25 Celsius, get a bunch of points, draw the line through the points, and decide where is the material brittle. At what temperature will it become brittle? To show you what something looks like when it's not brittle. The same test is used to see if a material is brittle at a temperature of 25 degrees Celsius. It's the same test for glass, for example, to see whether it's brittle at that temperature. done in what's called the normalized condition, where you simply heat the steel to a high temperature, relaxing out most of the defects, and bringing back as much of the perfect crystal structure as possible. So the same test is used to test the strength of the steel. The steel is really good for letting dislocations move through it. The test is done in what is called the Normalized Condition, which is where the steel is heated at a low temperature to relax out defects and bring back the perfect structure. done by the same awkward feller who likes to stand there and not breathe, but you'll notice a very different result of this test. Doesn't look like it, but if you actually look at how much energy was absorbed, much, much higher. So something like 18 times more energy, and that's not a typo. That's a lot of energy. And it's not even the same person. It's the same guy who stands there and doesn't breathe. And that's a big difference. you can qualitatively see the difference between these two conditions by looking at the fractured surfaces. Something that's ductile would tear more like taffy, where something that's brittle would cleave or break in half much more smoothly. So these are the conditions that are most likely to cause a fracture or cleave in the first place. This is where it starts to get intuitive, and this is where we start to see the differences between ductile and brittle surfaces. It's the difference that makes the difference. two pieces of metal that we just showed. One that absorbed 180 joules by lots of defamation, and the one that absorbed 10 joule by fracture in a brutal way. This is what you want your reactor vessel to behave like, but the problem with these ductile-brittle transition is that they can be very difficult to control. We hope you have a better idea of how to make your own reactor vessel that is ductile and ductile, and that you can control. temperature curves, is this not just this part that you're worried about, it's that part. So even at high temperatures, things get less ductile. So it's a combination of temperature and number of defects. And if either one of these criteria fails, if you become too brittle at low temperature, then it's time to change the part you're working on. It's not just the part that's at risk, it is the whole thing that is at risk too. or your total ductility at high temperature goes down too much, that's the end of life of your reactor vessel. This is one of the biggest problems in life extensions of light water reactors. They were built for 40 years and they originally had license for 40. years. How do you extend the life of a light water reactor after 40 years? It's a very complex process, and it takes a long time to get it right. It's not just a matter of extending the license, it's also about extending the life. many of you guys have heard of the license extensions going on now, to 60 or 80 years? Yeah, so a few of you Guys. I've heard heard, why not run the reactor longer. Not build a new one, but keep getting all this clean green cheap nuclear energy? This. This. That's what I'm talking about. I'm not talking about building a new reactor. That would be a waste of money. That wouldn't be a good idea. That'd be a bad idea. is why. You have to be absolutely sure that your vessel, your primary containment, will survive. And we're not so sure because well, we jump to the part of the video that's got the Charpy coupons. Those. We ran out. We only plan to put these vessels in service for about a year, and then they'll be put on hold for a year or two, and they'll go back to being used as containment vessels. And that's why we're doing this. 40 years, and folks put 40 years worth of these coupons, plus some extras, in the reactor vessel. Now, in order to prove that it's actually safe to continue operation, you have to have some amount of material to test and say, OK, this vessel is still ductile, it's still safe. It's been 40 years since the first reactor was built in the U.S. in the mid-20th century. It was the first nuclear reactor in the United States. Michael Short: What do you do when you run out of coupons? Anyone have any ideas, because I'm sure the industry would love to hear them. Audience: Would you have to start using material from the vessel itself? MICHAEL SHORT: You could start using Material from the Vessel itself. Going to work. What happened? What do we do when we run out? What did we do? What are we going to do? It's time to go to work, Michael. vessel. That's actually what I plan to do too, but with some very strong caveat. So if you were to scoop out a piece of the vessel, you then create a stress concentration. In addition, reactor vessel looks like a gigantic forging of really thick carbon steel with a very thick carbonsteel with avery strong stress. It's actually a very strong forging ofreally thick carbon Steel with aVery strong stress, which is why it looks like it's going to be a very big vessel. thin liner of stainless steel. And the stainless steel is there to prevent corrosion from the reactor water. That thin, quarter inch bit of Stainless steel is what actually saved what could have been one of the worst nuclear accidents in US history, the Davis Bessie plant, where there was a nuclear accident in the 1970s and 1980s. The liner of Stainless Steel is what saved what might have been a nuclear disaster in the 70s and 80s, the U.S. Department of Energy says. a crack in the vessel. Boric acid actually ate through a whole chunk of the pressure vessel, leaving the stainless steel intact. And it's that little quarter inch stainless steel that saved the plant. But if you were to take something out from the inside of the vessel, the part would be gone. The part would have to be replaced with a new piece of stainless steel. But that would take a lot of work to get the steel back to its original state. The plant was shut down for more than a month. that gets the most damage, you'd be taking out some of the stainless steel, which is a problem. You could take a piece out from here, maybe the outside, but then you've got a stress concentrator. Any sort of chunk that is missing is where a crack is going to be going to form. It's a very, very dangerous thing to try and remove it from the inside out. It can be very dangerous if you're trying to get it out of the building. preferentially form, so you would weaken that vessel by taking a piece out. A new vessel means a new reactor. So the license for the plant is intimately tied to the license. Anyone else have any ideas? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Is it impossible to just replace the vessel? MICHAEL SHORT: Yes. It is impossible. It would be very difficult. It's very, very difficult to replace a vessel with a new vessel. But it is possible to replace the reactor. for the vessel. Any other ideas? Yeah? AUDIENCE: The creation of the vessel, just put extra in there and then take that out. MICHAEL SHORT: That's what they're doing. So that's why these Charpy coupons were there, but what do we do about the vessels that we already have?Yeah? Audience: Can you make Charpy coupon or coupons that are similar to the status of the ones most recently taken out of the Vessel, and then just put them in? They break them, so let's say this region's all garbage, and then they cut a little mini Charpy coupons out of the last piece, and they're putting those back in. So that's absolutely right. You've just probably recreated a year's worth of licensing work and ideas and in a class. It's a very, very difficult task. It takes a lot of time and effort to do it. But it's worth it, because it's a great learning experience. But I just want to get back to Charlie's idea because that's what I think has to happen is you'd like to be able to take a piece out from the actual vessel and run a test on it. The only way to do that is to go nano. Take that idea and go nano, I think that's the way to go. I think it's a great idea and I'm looking forward to working with Charlie on that. I'm sure he'll be a big help to us. the tiniest, t tinyest little piece out, and perform some other sort of measurement. So this is the idea that our group has had in using what's called stored energy of radiation damage. So I don't mind telling you about it, even though it's not like funded or papered yet because it's still in the prototype stage. It's not a finished product yet, but we're working on it, and it's going to be a big step forward. Every kind of defect takes energy to create. Defects don't just create themselves. You either have to raise the temperature of a material or in our case, irradiate it. And it's the energy of those incoming neutrons that bounces around different atoms and creates all these different types of defects. So those defects are storing energy in the material. And so if you think about how much energy does it take to destroy something, it would have to be the energy that it's already stored. the test can reach the failure energy. What if you could measure the stored energy? What if there was a way to know how many of each of those defects there actually were in a material? We think there is. It's called differential scanning color. Well, we know there is, we just need to find out how many there are. We can do that with a technique called differential Scanning Color (DSC) which can be used to detect defects in materials. It can be done by scanning the material in a variety of ways. "This is just for fun. It's a way of measuring the change in heat capacity of a material," he says. "You take two small furnaces, put your chunk of your material on them," he adds. "It's a very simple way to measure the heat capacity" of material, he says, adding that it's not a scientific test. "We're not trying to prove anything. We're just trying to find out what the material can do," the scientist adds. one, and you apply a lot of heat to both of them. And you look at the difference in the amount of heat you have to put in to keep the two at the same temperature. So normally, you would get the heat capacity of a material, how much heat you need to put into it to keep it at the right temperature. But in this case, it's much more than that. It's a lot more than you would think, and that's why it's so important. can extort per degree Kelvin. If this material's got a bunch of defects already in it, then you should release that defect energy by heating it. That would take a little less energy to heat it up, but there's a lot of problems with calorimetry, so we're actually using more energy to keep it cool. We're using the energy that the defect energy would otherwise be released by heating the material to release the energy from the defects in it. We are using that energy to maintain the temperature of the material. what's called nanocalorimetry. We're doing this process on nanograms of material and seeing if you can irradiate something and measure its stored energy. If you could, you could take a tiny little razor blade, take out the smallest sliver of the vessel-- smaller than a grain of sand. Not a big deal, but it's a step up from what we've been doing. It's a new way to look at energy stored in a material, and it could be used in a variety of ways. enough to cause a crack-- enough to measure its stored energy. And I want to show you guys what this process looks like. So I'm just going to deviate from the actual lecture, and jump into the topic I'll give tomorrow. I think it's more interesting and more relevant. There is a process that causes a crack -- enough tocause a crack. and I want you guys to see what it looks like, so I can show you what it's like. I'm going to give a talk about it tomorrow. It's what we call the ultimate snipe hunt. I'm going to skip through some of this stuff, but it's within the last five minutes, I'll try to get through this, see if this is a record. Has anyone here been on aSnipe hunt? What's a snipe Hunt? What is a Snipe Hunt, and how do you go about finding one? Here's how to go about it. We'll be back in a few minutes with more snipe hunting tips. Michael Short: Snipes don't exist, but they are a real bird. He says you can look for them in the woods, but it's a hoax. Short: They are real, and you can find them if you go looking for them. They are called snipes, and they are real. They do exist, he says. They're a bird, but not a fake one. They exist. They were created by humans, not by nature. The real snipes are in the forest. British people hunt snipes for sport, and apparently, they're delicious. The size of the sniper compared to the sniper is about that. If you can shoot that bird, you're a snipe. You pretty much have to be British to know it, because they hunt them there for sport. They hunt them for sport in Britain, and they apparently, are delicious. That's actually where we get the term snipe because the actual size of. the sniperCompared to the Sniper is about. that. with a gun, you are an expert marksman and deserve the delicious and tiny treat that you've then blown apart with your bullet. So you can you know rain bird dust on whatever meal you've already prepared. That's what I like in finding these. that's what he likes in finding. These are the kind of things that I like to find these days, he says, because they're so easy to make and easy to use. And they're fun to shoot. radiation damage defects too. As the defects get bigger, the number of them decrease. So most defects are very, very small, and it turns out that-- first of all, the resolution of the screen is much better than it used to be, so it's easier to see them on the screen. It's a very simple process, but it can take a long time to get the results you want, because the screen resolution is so much better, so the defects are so much smaller. is funny. Clone the screen and then jump back to presenter mode. That usually-- that's not what I wanted. Most of the defects that cause these reductions in material properties are too small to see, even in the best of conditions. I think I know how to fix that. That's what he wanted, great. That was what he was trying to do. That is the way to do it. It's not the way you want to do things, but it's the only way to get it. We took some inspiration directly from the Manhattan Project. Luckily, I have an uncle who works at the DuPont Library. So I don't have to tell you this stuff again, that I dont like the DPA, I showed you that. What we want is that.the transmission electron microscope. We want to be able to take pictures of the inside of the human body with the help of a microscope. Thats what were trying to do. Dupont was quite responsible for the Manhattan Project. So this memo between Eugene Wigner and Leo Szilard-- one of whom won the Nobel Prize, the other one probably should have-- said, hey, radiation stores energy by neutron collisions like cold working and amorphization. So we've dug up this original memo and put it on the web. It's called "Radiation Stores Energy by Neutron Collisions," and it's on the Internet. Click here to read it. from the 40s, and said, let's do this for everything. Every defect has its unique amount of energy that it stores and creating it in some different amount of eV per defect. "We've done some molecular dynamics simulations to show that this amount ofenergy stored is pretty pretty," he says. "It's pretty amazing," he adds. "I've never seen anything like it. It's a really exciting time for us. We're in a great position to make a big difference" When you irradiate something, we predict that it stores about 2% of its energy in radiation defense. So if you know the number of neutrons that hit, and you know that the amount of energy per neutron, you know how much you're looking for. You know what your signal is, and how much energy you need to get it. That's what we're trying to do at the University of California, San Diego. We're working with the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology to improve our understanding of the universe. should be. And to jump through to the whole idea of differential scanning calorimetry, it's like what I drew here, but a lot more legible. You simply heat two materials, one of which contains your sample, measure their temperature, and look how much energy it takes between them to keep them to the same temperature. It's a lot of fun, and a lot easier to understand than I thought it would be. I hope you've enjoyed the video, and I'll see you on the other side of the year. them at the same temperature. We did some of these measurements on a piece of steel from the nuclear reactor, and we got a whole bunch of interesting looking peaks for the red curve compared to the blue curve in the other irradiated conditions. So we think there's something there, and it could be a sign of something to come in the next few years, says Dr. H.A. van der Wiel of the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The study was published in the journal Applied Physics Letters. So we tried a more controlled experiment irradiating aluminum with helium ions and the accelerator in Northwest 13. And we were encouraged because the initial time that we heated this material, we got some stored energy out of it in some funky spectrum. That might tell us what the defects are in this material. We're still trying to figure out what these defects are. We don't know what they are, but we're trying to find out as much as we can. We'll keep you posted on our progress. are. The bad news is we got that with the control heat too, and the really bad News is that when you normalize all these curves, you get something that you can't tell if I drew it or my son drew it. Looks suspiciously like the doodles that he does, and it's not even the same shape as the one I drew, it just looks like he did it too. It's a little bit of a mystery as to who drew it, but it's definitely my son. not scientific data. DSC induces a lot of artifacts in the signal that we couldn't separate from the noise. So our solution was to go nano. To use a nano a DSC, or nano differential scanning calorimeter, that can heat about 10,000 degrees. That's a temperature of about 1,200 degrees F (0.4 degrees C) A DSC is a differential scanning Calorimetry, or DSC for short. It's used to measure temperature, pressure and other parameters. times faster than a traditional DSC. So you can get your energy out from smaller materials way faster than these artifacts can manifest themselves. Every one of these peaks here is going to correspond to one type of defect that's released. We think it's going to happen is that every one of those peaks here are going to coincide with one kind of defect. It's a big step in the right direction, but it's still a long way from being able to do it on a large scale. at a certain temperature. And by extrapolating, or say, integrating the area under those curves, you get the energy in each type of defect. And if you know which defects you have and if you can extrapolate to a zero heating rate, you should know which type of defects they are. That's how you get an energy-efficient heating system. It's a very complex process, but it's very, very simple to get the information you need to make the right decision. how many of each one, you know the full defect properties and material, you should know it's material properties. So we start off by-- we use a different kind of calorimeter. Because we already know if you have this many dislocations, it's this brittle, the question is how many disLocations. So, we start out by using a different type of Calorimeter, which measures the amount of dislocation in the material. Then, we try to find out how brittle the material is, and how many of them there are. It actually fits on a chip. There's one that we put our material on, and one as a reference that we both put in the accelerator being irradiated at the same time to control for that effect. This is what they actually do. It's not just a chip, it's a set of chips. It has two parts. It is a chip and a reference. It can be used to make new materials. And it can also be used as a chip to make a new material. look like. The scale bar here is 100 microns, and that transparent spot is a little bit of aluminum that we vapor deposited onto the calorimeter. Right there. And so the way this process works, is we take our DSC chip, we put a mask over it, vaporize some aluminum, and then put it on the scale bar. And that's what the DSC calorimeters are supposed to look like. right there. The DSC is a chip that's supposed to be used to measure the diameter of water. to deposit on one of the calorimeters, take the mask away, and irradiate the whole thing. Then finally put it in the nanocalorimeter, and I'll show you what happens slowed down by a factor of 1,000. That pulse right there. That whole thing just went from zero to 450c, that whole thing went from 0 to 450C in a matter of seconds. That's what happens when you irradiate something at a rate of 100,000 times a second. a millisecond. And the reason it took a second is because I've slowed down the video by 4,000 or by 5,000 times, and that little pulse of heat actually released some of the defect energy. We were able to see very clearly, the first time we heated the sample, that this was the case. And that's why it took us a second to heat the sample. It's because we had to slow the video down so that we could see what was going on. extra area corresponds to some sort of energy release. We then heated that same sample a whole bunch of times, and made sure that it was always the same, which meant we had a fully relaxed material. And it shows some kind of a trend. If you note this data, you can see that the material is getting more and more relaxed, and that's a good sign. It's a sign that it's getting closer to being a fullyrelaxedmaterial, which is what we're looking for. was taken like two months ago, it's pretty fresh. Not published yet, so hopefully by the time this video comes out, it will be. And we see some sort of trend between the amount of irradiation it gives and theamount of stored energy you can get out of it. It's not clear if the video will be published yet or not, but we're hoping for the best. We'll let you know when it is. We hope it's not too late to get your hands on it. So this is what we hope can be used instead of those Charpy coupons. We can go much, much smaller and just take out tiny pieces of the vessel and get the same information as you would from a Charpy test but on the nanoscale. So the question then is, what do we do with the information we get from this? We don't know the answer yet, but we're working on it. We'll let you know what we come up with in the future. where is the defect fingerprints? Where are those individual defects that we were looking for? Well, I think they're just popping up right here. The reason for that is we picked a very fast heating rate for our experiments, and doing these sorts of measurements on other materials shows that they're there, too. We're just not looking for them, we're just looking for the fingerprints of them, which are right here, right in front of us, right now, right at this moment. at 10,000 Kelvin per second. So in a millisecond, something heats up by 10 K, which is ridiculous. You don't really see any peaks. The heating is so fast that the defects don't even have time. The defects are so far away that they don't have time to react to the heat. The heat is so high that the defect doesn't even know it's happening. It's so fast, you don't see it at all. It just heats up and heats up, and then it cools. to find each other, annihilate, and release their stored energy. So we need to repeat the experiments at some lower temperatures, see what the peaks are, but if you go too low, you end up getting a lot of noise in your signal. So there's going to be some sweet, sweet results from this experiment," says Dr. David Boulden, a physicist at the University of California, Los Angeles, who is leading the research. "We need to find the peaks," he says, "and then we can see what they are. spot that we haven't yet found in order to see this stored energy. So we're just at the very first experimental stage of trying to see can we extend reactor lifetimes. After doing simulations for a year that probably no one believes until you do an experiment, including me. But we've done it and we're going to continue to do it for the rest of our lives. It's a very exciting time for nuclear power and for the future of nuclear power in the UK and around the world. for now, it actually shows some sort of a trend, so it's just enough justification for us to buy one of these nanocalorimeters and start looking for real. So if you want to see, now I've taken you from basic material science, to where's the field going to, how do we get there? You can go to CNN.com/soulmatestories to find out what's next for nanotechnology and how it's changing the world. We'll be back in a few days with a look at the latest in nanotechnology. we keep our reactors running in about two hours. I think that's the most compact introduction to nuclear materials I can possibly give you. So any questions on what you've seen today? AUDIENCE: Is that roughly the trend you would expect? MICHAEL SHORT: Yes, I would expect an up. That's what I'm looking for. that's what we're looking for, and I think we're going to get it," he says. "I'm looking forward to seeing what the future holds" the best I can say. As far as is it actually a line? Is it a curve? I am not as brave or stupid as some of the other folks that will draw an arbitrary shaped line through a single data point. So I'm not drawing a trend line yet. The best I could say is that it's not a line, it's more like a line with a line in the middle of it. It's a line that looks like it's going to go up or down, depending on how you look at it. Yeah, any other questions? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Is it-- or I guess you're making the assumption that one little spot in the reactive pressure vessel to say what the rest of the vessel has been exposed to? MICHAEL SHORT: Oh, not at all. Take a whole bunch. Then, instead of just taking a little spot, take a whole lot of spots and see how they react to each other. That's what we do. We take a lot of pictures. doing Charpy coupons of one place, which is what we do now, you can get a map. We don't have that information now, but if you take pieces from all over the vessel, then you get an actual 3D map instead of a single point of saying all right, well, all right. That's what we're trying to do. We're not going to get there right away, but we're going to try and get there as soon as we can. It's a long way off. we picked what we think is going to be the worst condition. How do you know? You don't. You make measurements like these. Any other questions? Yeah? Audience: What would a peak in this graph correspond to in terms of like-- How does it look? How do it work? How does a peak look like in this case? What do you think it would look like? How would it look like if it were in this condition? How did you get it to look like this? relate to some sort of damage effect? MICHAEL SHORT: We would expect that a peak would relate to a certain type of defect reaction occurring. When some type. of defect gets high enough in temperature that it goes from stuck to mobile, and as that. moves, it encounters anything else. As that happens, the temperature of the object rises. And as it rises, it becomes more and more mobile. And that's when the peak occurs. The peak is when the temperature rises high enough to cause the defect to move. it will in the material, and will react with all the other defects nearby, decimating the population of that defect and slightly depressing that of the others. And as you go higher, and higher in temperature, the slower and slower defects start to move. Yeah? So you can get to the bottom of the problem. You can get into the top of it. It's very, very simple. You just have to go to the top. And it's very easy to get to. rid of the defects by heating it quickly? MICHAEL SHORT: Mm-hmm AUDIENCE: Would there be a way to self repair our radiation damage to pressure vessels themselves? That would be awesome. But the properties of the vessel are highly dependent on, not just its composition, but the heat treatment that went to make it. So you would have, if-- again, if you let's say, replace the vessel you have a new reactor. If you heat that vessel, you both remove the radiation damage and remove the strengthening put in by the forging and heating process. the vessel too much, it's no longer a code stamp vessel. Pretty tricky spot that we're in, huh? But we're trying to science our way out of it. I don't want to keep you longer, but I'll open on Thursday with a little story. It's a couple minutes after. Well, we're going to have to take a break for a few minutes. But we'll be back in a minute or two with a story about how we got to this point. about how mass attenuation coefficients can get you out of apartheid South Africa. And then we'll move into dose and biological effects. I'm serious. I mean it. I really am serious. We're going to talk about this for a while. It's not just a joke. It can be used to help you get out of a bad situation. We'll talk about it for a long time. We've got a long way to go, but it's a start. I'll be in touch.