Now that we've described the displacement of our object-- remember that our displacement vector delta r in this time interval was x(t) plus t minus x( t) i hat, which we denoted as delta x i hat. Now, let's just remind ourselves that this distance here, that's delta x, and this is the distance between our object and the object in the time interval we're looking at. This distance is called the distance from our object to the object, or delta x. whole distance from here over to there-- that's what we mean by x(t) plus delta t. And now what we'd like to do is describe what we call average velocity. And our average velocity depends on our time intervals. So this is for the time interval t to t plus t, and we call it the "average velocity" of a time interval. We call this the "velocity" of that time interval, and this is called the "mean velocity" delta t while the person has displaced a certain amount of vector delta r. And our definition for v average -- it's a vector quantity, so we'll write v average-- will use three bars to indicate a definition. It is the displacement during a time interval delta t. So, as a result, v average is a function of the time interval t, which is the number of times a person has moved in a given time period. It's a function that can be written as a ratio of 1 to 2.  vector, we have delta x over delta t i hat. And this component here is what we call the component of the average velocity. And, again as before, this component can be positive, zero, or negative depending on the sine of the  velocity. So this is the  component of the average velocity. The average velocity can be negative, positive, or zero depending on the sine of  the velocity. This is the component  of the average velocity, and it can be zero or positive. Average velocity depends on whatever time interval you're referring to. So that's our definition of average velocity. And now what we want to do is consider what happens in the limit as delta t becomes smaller and smaller and small. And the key point here is that average velocity is a function of the time interval that you're talking about. And that time interval is called delta x.delta x. Delta x is the amount of time that has passed since the beginning of the universe. that will enable us to introduce our concept of instantaneous velocity. That will be the first step in the development of a system that will allow us to move at speeds of up to 100km/h. We hope to have a prototype of this system by the end of the year. We will then be able to test it out on a larger scale and see if it can be used as a prototype for other types of technology. We are currently working on a prototype that can reach speeds of 100m/s in the future.