Iceland is one of the world's most active volcanic hotspots crafer has erupted 30 times in a thousand years and last blue in the 1980s. Scientists are now preparing to drill into it the is to learn more about how volcanoes form and how they erupt. The aim is to find out how volcanic activity in the area has changed in the last 1,000 years and how it could be used to predict future eruptions in the future. The volcano is located in the north west of the country. volcanoes behave so that we can better predict eruptions and also tap into a super hot source of energy volcanoes can be spectacular but they're also devastating around the world. millions of people live close to them here in Iceland residents of grindvik have had their lives appended by a volcano. The eruption of Iceland's largest volcano, Eyjafjallajokull, has claimed the lives of more than 1,000 people. The volcano is expected to continue erupting for the rest of the year. string of eruptions but researchers here hope their work will change that helping to save lives and money while also pioneering a form of volcano power. We have about 40 Wells spread around the geothermal field producing a mixture of hot water and steam this plant supplies electricity to about about 1,000 homes and businesses in the area. It is hoped that the work will help to save money and save lives by reducing the number of people who are killed by volcanic eruptions in the region. It's hoped that it will also help to reduce the amount of damage caused by the eruptions. 30,000 homes soon after it began operations five decades ago crafer began to wake up again. We started to have volcanic eruption only 2 km away from where we are standing now. This was was a very strong indication about where the heat was coming from. Using those new Clues we can now find out more about the cause of the eruption. We can find out where the lava is coming from by using the Clues below. The Clues can also be used to find out about the source of the lava. scientists began Drilling in this spot where in 2009 they stumbled across an extraordinary Discovery a shallow pocket of magma. We were aiming to trail to 4.5 km and we absolutely not expecting to hit magma only 2.1 km depth closer to the surface than scientists ever imagined. Scientists ever imagined the extreme that they would find in this area of the Earth. We absolutely not expect the extreme. that we found in this region of the earth. Scientists never imagined that we would find this extreme. heat from this molten rock destroyed their equipment. We were able to measure the power that comes out of it this well produced about 10 times more than the average well in this location. This is a very strong indication of the extremely powerful resource that we may be setting up. We are very optimistic about the future of our country. We have a lot of work to do, but we are very excited about the prospect of what we can achieve. We will continue to work on this project for the rest of our lives. 2 km down is a red hot magma chamber and scientists are preparing to drill down into it starting in 2026. In 2026 they'll begin work on the first ever underground magma Observatory. The craft magma test bed project want to find it again right here 2 km down. The project is called kmt.up now a team from kmt the craft Magma Test Bed Project. The team is based at the University of California, Los Angeles. It is the first of its kind in the world. we are basically standing on the spot where we are going to drill what we want to do is to basically revolutionize the way we monitor volcanoes plan is to place sensor in the magma temperature and pressure sensors this will allow us to predict with more accuracy volcanic activity so this will change uh how we predict uh uh eruptions with the second well they'll harness that extreme heat developing what's called near magma geothermal the plan is for them to drill just short of the Magma itself possibly poke it a little bit. just above the magma body we believe that is around 5 to 600° C just two ball holes of this kind could match the output of this entire plant. We now today need to feed the power plant with 22 Normal Wells so there is an obvious uh Game Changer. Just two balls of this type could matchThe output of the entire plant we now need to supply the power power plant. There is an obviously uh GameChanger. just twoball holes of these kind couldMatch the output. of this whole plant. and there's the exciting possibility a potentially Limitless cheap clean energy. This is a big part of how we are going to take geothermal to the next level and also of course a huge part in the green energy transition. The drilling will be technically challenging at the University but the University will go ahead with the project. The University will continue to work with the geothermal energy industry to develop the potential of the region's geothermal resources. It is hoped that the project will be completed by the end of the year. of Iceland lab work is underway testing materials to withstand extreme heat and pressure this is carpon steel. Typical material used in the geothermal Wells lose strength quite quickly after 200° C and they are also not corrosion resistant so we have to explore this material. The material is used in Iceland's geothermal wells to cool the water in the wells. The water is heated by a process known as geothermal heating. The process is called geothermal boiling and is used to heat the water to a temperature of up to 2,000C. new materials and more corrosion resistant Alloys they're working with temperatures of up to 500° and corrosive gases. We have been focusing on uh highgrade Alloys nickel Alloys and also titanium Alloys but there's still one question I need to ask from the outside all this sounds you know just from the inside. What do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments section below or tweet us @CNNOpinion. We'll feature the best responses in a weekly Newsquiz. a little bit risky is it going to be safe to do this we believe that sticking a needle into a huge magma chamber is not going to create an explosive effect this happened in 2009 and they found out that they had probably done this a few times before without even knowing it so uh we believe it's safe. The team here think this could be replicated around the world there are indications about shellow magma bodies in East Africa in the US and in Hawaii possibly this kind of geothermal power production can be applied in many places. many other locations around the world where we have active volcanoes so this crazy sanding plan may actually have huge potential e. Many other locations in the world. where we has active volcano so thiscrazy sanding plans may actually be a huge potential. e. Back to Mail Online home. Return to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the site you came From. Click here to read the original article on The Daily Mail Online. Back into the Daily Mail home.