NORVIN RICHARDS: So morphology. Remember morphology? We were talking when we talked about morphology about the fact that a word like "unlockable" is ambiguous. It can mean either it's possible to unlock it, or it is not possible to lock it. So it can be a desirable or not a desirable word, depending on what you mean by it. And that's what we're trying to figure out here. We want to find out what that word means. property of a lock or not. So The door is unlockable" means it can be unlocked. But the door is broken, "It's unlockable," says the actor. "I want to pronounce it a little differently depending on which of those things I say," he says. "The door is unlocked, but it's broken," he adds. "That's the way I like to say it. I don't want to say, 'It's unlocked,' " the actor says. means it cannot be locked. I have this desire to put an extra oomph on "un-" -- an extra little demi-stress beat on "Un-" if I mean the thing on the right. And what we said, when we were talking about this, was we can account for this kind of ambiguity. And that's what we're going to try to do in the next episode of "This Is Life with Steve," which airs Sunday at 8 p.m. ET. in the following way. To say that something is singable is to say that it's possible to sing it, right? That's what that means. So there's a "-able" suffix that changes verbs into adjectives. And then, we said, there are two "un-"s. So you can take a verb like "sing," or a verbs like "understand" and get adjectives like " Singable" or "under Understandable" "Understandable" means it is possible to understand it. There's an "un-" that combines with verbs and makes verbs. That's an 'un' that means something like undo the effects of, or change something so that it is no longer in the state that it would have been if the verb had applied to it, or something like that. So that's a 'un-' that can be used to make a verb or to undo a verb, or to change something in a way that it was not in the first place, for example. "untie" means "take something and do things to it such that it is no longer in the state that you have tied it" There's an "un-" that applies to verbs, and has-- it's sometimes called a reversitive meaning. And then there's another "un-," let, which is a word that means "to let" or "to change" or to "to undo" or a "to" that means to undo or to make something new. "Un-" number two combines with adjectives and makes adjectives that mean more or less "not (adjective)." So "unkind," or "unfamiliar," "Unfortunate" These all mean not the adjective, whatever it is. And so what we said was-- oh, hey. Raquel? Raquel, do you have a question for us? We'd like to hear from you. You can email us at jennifer.smith@mailonline.com. horrible thought, and it's random. NORVIN RICHARDS: Oh, no. AUDIENCE: But when you were saying, put something so that it's no longer tied, I would argue that not only are we saying make it so it's No. 1, but leave it in a similar state that it was at No. 2. No. 3: No. 4: No, we don't want it to be no. 1 or no. 5: It's no. 6. No, it's not. the beginning chronologically, because you can chop a shoelace in lots of little pieces, and it's no longer tied. So if I take-- let's see. If I untie a Shoelace, first of all, it has to start off tied, is what I'm trying to say. [INAUDIBLE] NORVIN RICHARDS: Oh, well that's a nice point. Yeah, that's what I was trying to get at. Yeah. that right? So if I have a shoelace which is not tied, I can't untie it. Yeah. But if it's tied and then I take scissors and I cut it into many small pieces, have I untied it? No, surely not. When Alexander cut the Gordian knot, he wasn't untying. That's not how it works, is it? That's how it's supposed to work. It's not supposed to be that way. That doesn't make sense. the knot. He was being more direct than that. So you have to put it back in the state that it was in before it was tied. Is that the way you just said it? I like the way he said it. Good point. I think that's the way to do it. I don't know if it's the right way to say it, but that's what he said. He said, 'I want it to be the way it was before it got tied' way to say it? AUDIENCE: Going back and tie it, [? essentially. ?] NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. Undo. So yeah, that's a nice point. I mean, because what we said-- we talked about this in class, that there are lots of things. That it's hard to do this. This "un-sounding" way to say something. That's what we were trying to say. We're trying to make a point. is kind of picky about what it can combine with. So the "un-" that attaches to adjectives can attach to lots of adjectives, but you can't-- if I take some shoes, I can't unwash shoes, or unwash socks. That doesn't mean "take the socks and make them dirty again." You can't do that to shoes. You can do it to socks. You don't have to do it with all socks at once. You just have to wash them. could imagine that it would, but that's not what it means. Yeah, it's interesting to think about. Joseph, did you have a-- AUDIENCE: Yeah, I was going to-- based on what Raquel said, does the final-- after you "un-" something, is that going to be the end of the story? Joseph: I don't know, I think that's a good question, and I'm going to have to think on it. It's an interesting one. to be able to be redone? So if I untie a shoelace by cutting it up, now-- NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. It can't be tied again. Well, let's see. If you undo an operation on a computer, does it have to be possible to do the operation again? I don't know, I don’t know, NORVINE RICHARD: Do you think it's possible to undo a computer operation and then do it again? maybe. Yeah, there is a redo, isn't there? Yeah? Yeah, I wonder. Maybe that is what it means. Maybe it means-- yeah. And as you say, this is related to Raquel's point, you have to put it in a state such that the verb could apply to it again, maybe. Yeah. Maybe. It's a good idea to have it in such a state so that it can be used again. yeah. It could be a good thing. There's an "-able" that changes verbs into adjectives, and there are "un-"s, one that combines with verbs, and another. It's a little complicated, figuring out what it means, as you can see. Still, what I've said on the slide, apart from the vamping, I think is true. There's a lot of "un-s" in the English language, and I'm not sure what they mean, but they're all different. that combines with adjectives. And what all of this means is the ambiguity of "unlockable," we get to attribute it to basically the fact that there are two "un-"s. So you could have attached the "un-" before you attached the "-able," or you can attach the "Un-" after the "-able" "Un-" can combine with either a verb or an adjective. So that was the way we were talking. So the idea was you can start by attaching "un-' on number one, so "lock," giving you this new verb, "unlock," which is related to the meaning of "lock" in mysterious and complicated ways that we've now been talking about. And then you can attach "-able" to that and give you an adjective, "Unlockable," and so on. And I drew trees like this. And it's all related to what we're talking about in this story. It's a story about how words can be used to create a new way of seeing the world. before and said, yeah, these trees are kind of a representation of the order in which you did things. That's all they're for, is to say you started by putting together those two things at the bottom of the tree, the verb and that prefix, and you created a verb. And that's what the trees are for, to show you how to do things in the order that you did them. They're just a way of showing you how you do things, not how you say them. That's what that prefix does, it takes verbs and returns verbs. And then that verb gets to attach the second thing you do. That verb attaches to the suffix, and now the suffix changes that verb into an adjective. Or you can do things in the other order. You can use the suffix to make a verb into a noun or a noun into a verb or a verb to make an adjective or an adjective, for example, or a word into a word. It's a very powerful tool. attach "-able" to "lock," giving you an adjective, and you can take "un-" number two to that adjective, giving you a new adjective meaning "not lockable" And so "unlockable" is ambiguous. And the ambiguity, we said, comes from the fact that, well, there are two "un" Adjectives. There are two ways to say "un-lockable," we said. We said, "There are two" Adverbs. "un-"s, which is something we can observe. There's an "un-" that goes on verbs and an " un-" that go on adjectives. And there's a "-able" that changes verbs to adjectives, right? Yes. And that means that there's an 'un' that can go before the '"-able' There's also an '"un" that goes before a '-able' and an '' that goes after a '-"able" There's a 'un'" that goes ahead of a '-' that goes behind a ''-able. can go after the "-able," and so we get this ambiguity. And the ambiguity is what we would expect it to be. This is all review. Having said all this, I guess what we expect is that you could have two "un-"s, I didn't put this on the slide. I guess that's what we're looking for. I don't know if it's going to happen, but it's possible. It's a possibility. It could happen. We'll have to see. anywhere, that it would be possible to say it is "un-unlockable," which I think is true, actually. "This door is broken. It is un-un unlockable." That would mean it cannot be unlocked. I think that's true. Go ask some people whose minds have not been contaminated by linguistics. Go harass your friends and family. Go harassing your neighbors and your neighbors' friends and neighbors' neighbors. Go to your friends' houses and your neighbours' houses. roommates or whoever. You'll make yourself popular that way. And if you are going to try to learn from me how to make yourselfpopular, then boy, are you in the wrong class. OK, is this all clear? So the important part of the story is to say, yeah, "unlockable" "Yeah, "Unlockable," he says. "That's what I like to call it. That's the way I like it. It's a good name." is a word. It's got three morphemes in it, a prefix, and a root. But it isn't just three morphendes in a row. You assembled them pairwise. You first put two of them together, and then you added another one. And then you put them back together again, and again, until you got to the end of the word. The word is called 'soul' and it's a word that means "to be in love" or "to love" to the result of that first putting together, and that order has consequences for interpretation. So it's not false to say that unlockable consists of three morphemes, a prefix, a stem, and a suffix. It's not a complete description of what's happened either. It is that, but it is not a true description of it either. But it is a description of the process that took place, and the result is unlockable. That's what unlocking is all about. also those trees, or those trees represent something, namely the order in which you did things. Does that make sense? Now what we're going to do now is start talking about syntax, which is the study of how words are assembled to make sentences, words, sometimes things smaller than words. Do you know what syntax is? If you do, email us at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. If you don't, email jennifersmith@MailOnline.com. as we'll see. And we're going to see that it's useful to think of sentences as being put together in a bunch of operations more or less the way "unlockable" is. We take pairs of words and put them together to form larger objects the way I just did. We'll see that in the next few minutes as we go through a series of sentences. It will be interesting to see how the sentences are put together, and how they are used in the story. for "unlockable." Just to give you an example of the kind of thing we're going to talk about, I think I talked with you about this on the first day. "Unlockable," it is true, but it is not a complete description to say that is three morphemes, he says. "It is true," he says, "but it is also true that that is not the only way to say it." "It's not just one word," he adds, "it's a series of words that have different meanings" A complete description involves those trees or some equivalent explanation of the order in which you did things. Similarly, these two sentences, "John walked up the stairs," and "Mary looked up the reference," it's not a complete description. It's a prefix, a stem, and a suffix. That's true, but it's also not a full description of what's going to happen in the next few seconds of your life. It is a description of the events that are going to take place in the future. true, but it is not a complete description to say that those are two sentences that consist of a noun, a verb, a preposition, a determiner, and a noun. Did I say anything that alarmed anybody just now? That's true. So those aretwo sentences that consists of five words. That'sTrue. That’s true. But it is. not a. complete description of what those are, because they are not all the same thing. They are not the same. And we can say things about what kinds of words they are. There are nouns up there, and verbs, and prepositions like "up," and I just called it a determiner, "the" People sometimes call it the definite article. You'll hear me call it it the determiner a lot in this class. It's a word that can be used to describe a person, a thing, a place, or a thing. It can also be used as a word to describe the state of a person. It's true to say that those two sentences consist of those five words. But just as with the two versions of "unlockable," we can convince ourselves that it's not a complete description. It's helpful to think about the order in which you assembled these things. So what I told you is not what you think you need to know, but what you should know to be able to get the most out of the story you've been given. That's what I'm trying to tell you. you last time was, effectively what we're going to want to say is, there was an operation that created the substring "up the stairs" in that first sentence. That's what we call a constituent. And there is no similar operation creating a substring “up the reference" in the second one. That’s what we’re talking about here. We’d like to make it clear that there was no such thing as a constituent in the first sentence of the second sentence. And again, this is review, but it's review from the first day. What I convinced you, I think, I hope, I tried, was that there are various syntactic phenomena, various things you get to do with sentences that treat "up the stairs" as a single object that syntax gets to. And I hope that I've convinced you of that, as much as I tried to convince you that it's a good way to do it, that's what I was trying to say. manipulate in various ways. We're going to be talking about that, about what that means exactly. And the same syntactic operations don't get to treat "up the reference" as a single thing. So we said it's possible to ask questions like, "Up which stairs did John walk?" It's fairly stuffy questions. It's a lot of fun to talk about, but it's also a little bit of a slog to get to the bottom of it all. It's a strange way to ask the question, but you can say it. As opposed to, "Up which reference did Mary look?" which is gibberish. So we're going to draw a distinction. This is maybe the first time that I've shown you a case where syntacticians have to care passionately about what they say. It's a little strange, but it's a good way to start a conversation. I'll be back in a week or so with a different question. There's a fair amount of great syntax that's built on those kinds of distinctions. If I say, "John walked up the stairs," and you're surprised for some reason, you can say, 'John walked down the stairs' There's a difference between one sentence which is complete gibberish, and another sentence, which is not great. That's the difference between great and not great, and there's a lot of good syntax built on that. It's a fine line to walk. "Up the stairs?" That's not a weird thing for you to say. Whereas if I say, "Mary looked up the reference," and you're surprised, no matter how surprised you are, you're not going to say "Up the reference?" that's a weird response. So the point is, just as with "unlockable," just like "unlocked," "unlocking" is a word that is unlockable, as well as a word to be used for other things. yeah, it's three morphemes, prefix, stem, suffix. But having said that, we haven't said everything. We have to know which parts of "unlockable" are single parts. Is it unattached to "lockable," or is it "unlocked" with a "-able" attached to it? Those are different adjectives with different meanings. Similarly here, we need to know if "unlocking" means "to lock" or "to unlock" it's not enough to say, yeah, we've got these five words of these types. We've got to know which of these things go together, which things are parts, single parts. And there is a part, "up the stairs," what we call a constituent, that various kinds of syntactic phenomena care about. And that's what we're going to try to do with this book, I think. I think it's going to be a very interesting book, and I'm looking forward to it. about, like the syntactic phenomenon can I repeat this if I'm astonished? Yeah, that's a test-- kind of test for this property of constituenthood. So there's more to a sentence than its parts. We've got to know, in what order did you put those parts together, just like with "unlockable," he says. "Unlockable" is a word that means "unlocks" or "unlocked" in the English language, he adds. We want a theory that's going to divide sentences into three kinds. There are, on the one hand, sentences that you've heard a zillion times before, like "We're going to class" And on the other hand, phrases that you have possibly never heard before. So we'regoing to do syntax.Yeah? Makes sense? So we've got a theory of syntax. We want a Theory of Syntax. We have a theory. We're having fun with it. We've got three kinds of sentences. never heard anyone say, but that are fine. So if I say, "My anteater is hula dancing," you may never in your life have heardAnyone say that. Maybe you have. Some of you may have had more exciting lives than I have. But it's an OK sentence. As opposed to, "As opposed to what?" That's a bad sentence. That's not what I'm talking about. It's just a way of saying, "I don't know what to say." to, "We're class going to," which I've given a star there. Recall that the star is what syntacticians give to things that are bad. So syntactician are the opposite of normal people. When we see things we don't like, we give them a gold star. Usually, it's not gold. It's not a star, but it's a point of view, a way of looking at things, a view of the world. That's the way I look at things. "We're going to class," and "We're class going to," the first sentence is good, and the second-- and the last sentence is bad. This three-way distinction is worth highlighting, because if I had only given you the first sentences, "We" would be "we" and "them" Would that make a little more sense? I don't know. I guess that makes a little less sense. I'm sorry. I was trying to make a point. is bad, some of you might be thinking, well, that first sentence, it's a sentence I've heard lots of times before. Maybe when I was a small child, I heard my parents say that. And I heard them say it and I remember it now. And maybe that's all. Maybe that's not all. But it's enough to make you think about it a little bit, at least for a few minutes, and then move on to the next thing. that's what syntax is, it's the ability to remember things you've heard people say. But the existence of the second class of sentences shows that that's hopeless. So you're not just remembering things you're hearing people say when you're deciding which things deserve the black star and which things don't. That's not what it's about. It's about remembering what you're thinking and how you're saying it, not how you say it. And that's why it's so hard to do. You're not just categorizing sentences into sentences you've heard before and sentences you haven't. And it's not just about which sentences are in your input. It's something else. We're going to try to figure out what that something else is. We hope you'll join us for the next episode of "This Is Life with Lisa Ling" at 8 p.m. ET on Wednesday. For more, go to CNN.com/ThisIsLife withLisaLing and follow Lisa Ling on Twitter @LisaLang and @CNNLiving. what that is. But I'm giving you these three sentences to slay a hypothesis that you might be entertaining. Stop entertaining that hypothesis. Make it go home. It's not a good hypothesis. It won't do you any good. Is that clear? Are people clear on the hypothesis that I'm attempting? If not, stop entertaining it. If you are, make it go back to the page you came from. If it's not clear, try again. It may take a little longer. to slay? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Maybe to [INAUDIBLE] a modified version, what if it's not particular sentences that we're remembering, but structures of sentences thatwe've built up over time? NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. So if we pursued that-- that's that's much more sophisticated than the hypothesis I was trying to slay. That's what I'm trying to do. I'm not trying to kill anything. I just want to understand what's going on. So this is day one of syntax. What if all you're doing is remembering chunks of sentences? Maybe you've never heard anybody say, "My anteater is hula dancing," but maybe you've heard people say "anteater" maybe not. But at least you've Heard People Say "My (noun)," and "is hula Dancing" Well, yeah. So maybe there are some parts of this that you could be acquiring that way. We're going to have some fun with this. to be-- we're going to have to pursue that hypothesis long enough to find out exactly what it says, right because what I just said, which wasn't really the hypothesis, it was an attempt to represent it. "We're Going to Have to Figure Out How to rule out "We are class," right?" he asks. "Right. We're Going To Have To Figure out How To Rule Out "We Are Class" Right," he says. "Because that's the way it's going to be." "We're," and "class," and you've heard people say "going to" Someone asks, "Where are you going to?" We've heard that. And so we're going to have to be careful about that hypothesis to try to figure out how we. going to," he says. "We're" is a popular way to say "we're" or "class" in the U.S., he adds. "Going to" is the most common way to talk about going to a class. could use it to rule and-- to draw the distinctions that are on the board. But you're right. So just to summarize this conversation you and I have just had, I said, there's a fairly stupid hypothesis, which says-- and I'm raising it partly because it's been seriously entertained in the past, that the board could use this information to rule. But it's a very, very stupid hypothesis. And I'm not saying it's right, but I'm saying that it's not very likely to be true. the literature before, which says, all you're doing is remembering things people have said, and that's what distinguishes grammatical sentences from interpretable sentences. That's false. So we have this distinction between sentences that are grammatical and sentences that're ungrammatical that isn't just a list of all the sentences you've ever heard. That isn't what we're trying to do here. We want to get to the heart of what's going on in the mind of a person. ever heard before. You can take a sentence you've never heard before and accept it. You're raising the point there could be a better version of the stupid hypothesis, one that said, well, maybe there are some parts of the sentence that you've heard before, which is true. We're going to go with the first one, of course, but we're going with the second one, too, because it's more likely to be true. It's the first time we've heard that part of a sentence before. to have to be explicit about which subparts count and what exactly we mean when we say that. But you're right, there could be a better version of that hypothesis. Good point. Other questions? Did I successfully answer your question? Yeah. OK, all right. So let's talk about what's wrong. Solet's talkabout what'swrong with this hypothesis. OK. So what do you think? Let us know in the comments below or on Twitter @CNNOpinion. with "We're class going to." They have several hypotheses about what's wrong with it. One could be that it doesn't mean anything. It's a thing people sometimes say. When I'm trying to explain to people-- when I'm on an airplane flights and people ask me, what do you do for them? I don't know how to answer that. I'm not sure how to explain it to them. I just want to say that it's not a bad thing to say. a living? How I answer depends on whether I feel like talking to the person or not. I will tell them that I work on endangered languages, which is something I do I work with, languages that are down to their languages. So if I feelLike talking to them, then I will say that I am a linguist. I am also a teacher. I teach English, French, German, Spanish and Italian. I also work with endangered languages. I'm a teacher of languages. last few speakers, and try to work with them. And then sometimes they're interested in that and they talk to me. If I would like to get them to leave me alone so that I can read a book or whatever, I tell them I'm a theoretical syntactician. That usually usually works, but sometimes it doesn't, and I have to go back to my seat and wait for someone else to come in and talk. I'm not very good at talking to people who don't know what I'm talking about. ends the conversation fairly quickly. But when it doesn't, when they say, "Oh, what's that mean? What do you work on?" Then I will say, well, I'm trying to figure out why some sentences are grammatical and others aren't. And I'll give examples. And sometimes they willsay, " oh, but, but," and I'll say, 'Oh, but,' and they'll be like, 'Yeah, that's what I was trying to say' what does that mean?" "We're class going to." Maybe that's what's wrong with it. It doesn't mean anything. But the problem is we're capable of distinguishing grammaticality, even in sentences that don't means anything. So this is a famous example of Noam Chomsky's. In fact, I think if you look if you want to see the real meaning of the word "class," you can find it in a lot of other words. You can see it in many other ways. him up in like Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, you'll find this first sentence, "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously" He actually offered that sentence as a part of a pair of sentences. He wanted people to contrast that sentence with the same sentence backwards: "Furiously sleep ideas green colorless" So consider those. He actually asked people to compare that sentence to the one he wrote backwards. He said he wanted them to think of that sentence in a different way. two sentences. And the point is neither of them means anything. So the first one doesn't mean anything. And then if you turn your attention to the second one, it also doesn't meaning anything. But they have a different status. The second one doesn’t mean anything and it's ungrammatical, so it's not grammatical. It’s not a real sentence. It's just a way of saying ‘I’m not sure what to say.’ whereas the first one, it doesn't mean anything, but you feel as though it does. Because the reaction people sometimes have right about here-- does anyone want-- here, sometimes people say, "Oh, but look. Here, here, here," he says. "And I'm slowing down right abouthere where I say it doesn' t mean anything," he adds, "because I'm trying to make it clear that I'm not trying to say that it does not mean anything" 'colorless' meant 'boring,' and suppose 'green' means 'environmentalist,' and. suppose 'sleep' and 'furiously' meant different-- suppose these words meant something other than what they mean. Then the sentence would mean something. Yeah, the first sentence, "Colorless green ideas," is true. But it's another way of saying the same point. It's not true that 'green ideas' are boring. It is true that they are not boring. They are just different. sleep furiously," is meaningless if you don't mess with the meanings of the sentences. But it obeys the rules for how words can be combined. If the words meant something else, the sentence would be fine. We can have English sentences that consist of two adjectives modifying a noun. And we can even have sentences that have two nouns modifying a verb. We just have to be careful not to mix the two up too much, as we did in this example. The rules of the English language are clear. then there's a verb, and then there's an adverb. Not that one, but "Big green monsters snore loudly," that would be fine. So when the person on the airplane flight next to me says, "Oh, what's wrong with 'We're class going to' is that it's a meaningless sentence," if I'm not sure, I say, "I don't know, maybe it's just a really bad sentence" If you have a question for CNN iReport, please send it to iReport. really, really desperately trying to end the conversation, I bring out these kinds of pairs. So it's not about meaning. We have this intuition that there are sentences that are OK and sentences that're bad, which is separable from our intuition about what means something and what doesn't. I've never been able to figure out what it is that makes a sentence OK or bad, and I don't know how to do it. I'm not sure how to explain it to people who don't understand it. just been asserting things about our feelings about these sentences. Do people have this feeling that they're meaningless, and second, that the first one is OK and the second one is bad? Yeah, Raquel? AUDIENCE: I can't remember the word for this, but you were saying. Raquel, do you know what the word is for this? Raquel: I don't think there's a word for it, but that's what I was trying to say. that certain types of words are categories that you can add more words to. And like, "This house is very [blope?]" That's grammatical, even if you don't know what it means, or you can't make that-- NORVIN. NORVin: "Certain words can be grammatical if you know what they mean, like modifiers and things like that. That's a good way to start. It's good to start with a good start." RICHARDS: We were talking about open class and closed class morphemes. Jabberwocky is a poem that you can write, changing all the lexical items to nonsense words, but you couldn't do that with functional items. Yeah, that's right. Audience: So maybe in situations where something doesn't work, you write a poem about it? Richard: Yes. Yes, that is what we were doing. We were writing a poem called JabberWocky. really make any sense, your brain still knows that OK, maybe it almost like that kind of class where you're like, well, I mean, you can fit like an adjective like this-- NORVIN RICHARDS: Yep. AUDIENCE: --even if it means something ridiculous right here, and it sounds OK even if it sounds ridiculous. NORVin RICHards: Yep, that's what I was trying to say, and I think it's a good way to say it. it's [INAUDIBLE].. NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. That's a nice way to put it. I guess this is similar to what I was trying to say about a reaction I sometimes get to this sentence, which is, you say "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously" doesn't mean anything. And people will sometimes say, "Well, that's not what I'm saying. I'm just saying that it's a good way to say it. It's not a bad thing to say." "Well, but if these words meant something else, then it would be OK," which is true. "I wonder if it just has to do with the idea [INAUDIBLE] NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. I think I may not have heard all of that, but the idea was the first sentence," he says. "It's just the idea that it's OK to say something that's not OK to think about." "I think it's the idea of being able to say anything that's OK," he adds, "that's what makes it OK" it's clear what "colorless" and "green" are trying to do. They're both trying to modify ideas. And it's clearWhat "furiously" is trying to doing. It's an adverb and it's trying to modifying "sleep" When I say it's meaningless, what I mean is you can't sleep furiously, he says. He says it's a meaningless adverb that means "to sleep furiously" It's also a meaningless verb that means to sleep furiously. right? And things can't be both colorless and green. And if they could, well, ideas couldn't have those things. They're abstract, right? That's the sense in which this is a meaningless sentence. I think you're raising the point, which is a good point, yeah, it's meaningless, but the words in it are meaningful. It's a good sentence, but it doesn't mean anything. It doesn't have to mean anything, it just doesn't make sense. it are fitting together the way they should. The adjectives are going where adjectives go. They go before the noun, that's what they're supposed to do. And in the second sentence, they're not doing that. Is that the relation to the point that you're making? Yeah. Yeah? So that's the point of this article. It's about the way that adjectives and nouns are supposed to work together. That's the way it's supposed to be. intuition that we have, that it's possible to have feelings about sentences of the form, well, I don't know what this is supposed to mean, but the parts are all in the right place. We are in the syntax part of this class. It's all about parts being in the correct place. And that's what we're trying to do here. We're not trying to make a statement. We just want to make sure that the parts of the sentence are there. right places. We will eventually do the semantics part, which is about meaning. But the point is that it's possible to study these things independently of each other. So completely independently. So when I was showing you "unlockable," what we were really doing was morphology, but we were also talking about meaning, too. We were talking morphology and meaning at the same time, and that's what we're trying to do here. It's a very exciting time for us. about meaning. We were interested in the fact that word had two different meanings. So we get to use semantics as kind of a probe into what's happening in morphology. We'll do things like that in syntax. But our feelings are our feelings. We're not going to change our feelings about anything. We don't want to change the way we feel. We just want to get to the bottom of what's going on in our brains. We want to know what's really going on. There are sentences that are ungrammatical, but-- that are meaningless, but grammatical, like "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously" That's the point, if anything. About whether sentences are grammatical or not, is separable from our feelings about what they mean. On the flip side, there are phrases that are not grammatical but are acceptable or not. That's also the point. It's not about whether they're grammatical; it's about how we feel about them. are sentences that are meaningful, but ungrammatical, the sentences where it's very clear what they should mean, but you just can't say it that way. Here's a quadruple of examples that's meant to show you that. So you can say, "Put the sweater on," you cansay, "I put on" or "I wore it" or even "I took it off" The sentences are meant to be taken as a whole, not as individual phrases. The meaning is not the problem here. It's clear what "I put on it" would mean. But there are facts about how English pronouns work and how English particles work that mean that you can't say, "I putting it on" You can say, however, that you "put on" a sweater, but not "put it on me" You cannot say "you put on my sweater" and then "it's your sweater" you can say "I wore it" and "I didn't wear it" don't get to say that. It's not a meaning thing, it's something about syntax. You want to try to understand that. The only point of these few slides has been it's possible to study syntax independently of meaning. By independently, where by independently, by independently. It is something about how these parts get to combine, not how they get to be the same thing. That's what we're trying to get at, that's the point of all of this. I just mean the facts of syntax don't just reduce to facts about meaning. That's what I've been trying to show you. Here's another thing you might think about what's wrong with "We're class going to." It ends. It's not the end, it's just the way it's supposed to end. It doesn't have to be the end of the story. It can be the beginning of a new one. It could be the start of a whole new story. in a preposition. Where any of you taught in school you must not end sentences with prepositions? Some of you were-- AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. That's kind of interesting. I was beaten by English teachers for ending a sentence-- that's not true, I was not beaten. I Was spoken to harshly by English Teachers for ending sentences withPrepositions. Do you know why we were told not to end sentences With prepositional? Because I guess-- because where are we going to go with that? there are some cases like that but look there are also cases like, "Who are you talking to" where-- sorry, where-- who am I apologizing to? The chalk, I guess. "Without the "to," it doesn't have to be about redundancy, I don't think. Is that what you want to say to someone? That's what you say to yourself. That's who you're talking to. And that's what I say to myself. I'm sorry. This is, I think, pretty good English. English speakers end sentences with prepositions every day. Do you know why your teacher told you not to do that? Yes? AUDIENCE: Maybe it's because the object isn't clear? NORVIN RICHARDS: Well-- but is it? I mean, it's kind of-- if I ask you, who are you talking to? There's a question there. There's an object there, and it's not clear what it is. sense in which the object isn't clear. I'm asking you who the object is, right? So it shouldn't be any harder than, who are you-- AUDIENCE: Who are you talking-- NORVIN RICHARDS: --describing, yeah. Yeah? Audience: Is it because the "who" is supposed to be the direct object of "you"? NORVin RICHards: No, it's because I'm trying to get you to think about who you are. are talking to" this person, so it's like, "to whom are you talking"? NORVIN RICHARDS: So yeah. What your English teacher wanted you to say was, "To whom areYou talking?" which many English speakers are capable of saying, possibly because their English teachers frightened them into it. But it's not as easy as it looks, he says. It's a lot of work to say, "I'm talking to you," he says, "and you're talking to me" not my go-to way to say this. So here, "who," the question word, is up here at the beginning by itself. Here, "to whom" is part of this phrase that's at the start. But question, why does "to" have to come along, according to CNN's John Sutter? Sutter: "I don't know about you guys. I don't think that's a very good way to start a conversation" "I'm not sure that's the best way to begin a conversation," Sutter said. your English teacher? Yes? AUDIENCE: Is this another example because that's how it's done in Latin? NORVIN RICHARDS: Yes. Yes. Your English teacher told you to do that because Latin, actually, among many other languages, doesn't allow you toDo this. You have to do this in Latin. Yes, that's what your English teacher would have you do. You're doing it in Latin because it's not allowed in other languages. That's what he would have told you. English is rare in being able to do this. Most of the languages of the world can't. Some time in the 15th, 16th century, a number of grammarians decided that English would be way cooler if it were more like Latin, and so they began declaring that English should be like Latin. This. this.this. English is quite rare inBeing able to doing this. most of the Languages of the World can't, and this. this is one of the reasons why English is so special. it was. And that's why your English teacher told you that you can't say this, which is ridiculous. We should be proud of the fact that we can say this. Most languages can't do this. WeShould have this on our flag or something. It should be on the flag of the country. It's rare. It is a very, very rare thing to be able to do. We are very proud of it. We're very proud to be English. We can say it. like that. There should be a stranded preposition, a preposition at the end of the sentence. So yeah, no reason English has to be like Latin. Or like I say, a zillion other languages. Most of the languages of Europe, French, or German, or Italian, or whatever, you can't leave. You can't. leave French or German or Italian or whatever. You have to leave English. You've got to leave it. You're not allowed to leave. prepositions at the ends of sentences. But those teachers don't have to tell their children not to say things like, who are you talking to, because they literally can't, and none of those kids would ever do that. But in English, we can. We should be proud of that. So far, the response has been positive, with many teachers saying they are proud of the change in the way English is taught. But there is still a long way to go, and we need to make sure we don't repeat ourselves. that's not the problem with "We're class going to." It does end in a preposition, but many perfectly fine English sentences end in prepositions. There's a distinction that's worth drawing between what's called prescriptive and descriptive studies of the language. "Who are you talking to?" There's the example "Who is it you're talking to? That's a good question. That's not a bad question." "What's the point of this?" "I don't know. I just want to know what the point is." grammar.com: What are the rules for putting sentences together in English? We're not going to talk about how English should be spoken. What we are doing is trying to figure out what people actually say, what the rules are for putting sentence together. There are other kinds of things that people say about howEnglish should be. spoken. We are trying to find out what those rules are, and how to use them. We're trying to work out how to put a sentence together using these rules. stuff, except to mock it the way I did just now. So prescriptive grammar is the study of rules that your teachers might have taught you in school about how to speak. Some of which, just to stop mocking it for a second, your teachers may have tried to tell you, some of which I'm going to mock here. I'm just going to make fun of it, that's all. I don't think that's a very good way to go about it. you things that would genuinely improve the quality of your writing, like get rid of ambiguities of various kinds. So if you're now mentally composing nasty messages to your English teachers, don't send them. They had your best interests at heart, and they probably taught you a lot of things that you can now use to improve your writing. If you want to use your English teacher's advice, you can contact them on 0203 615 4157 or e-mail them at: mailonline@dailymail.co.uk. that were valuable. But they also taught you some things that became popular around the 15th, 16th century because people thought that English would be better if it were more like Latin. And so we're not going to try to improve your writing in this class, except insofar as the writing is valuable. That's what we're going to focus on in the next few weeks. We'll be teaching you how to write in English and writing in Latin. We're not trying to improve our writing. writing advisors can do that. We're not going to be talking about prescriptive studies of English grammar. We are just going to talk about how you do. So this is going to to be a study of how well you do, not how you should do it. It's not about how to be perfect, it's about how good you are at it, and how you're going to use it to your advantage. That's what we're trying to do, and that's what's going to happen. descriptive grammar and not prescriptive. Yeah? Audience: So for that second sentence on the board, "What are you talking about?" NORVIN RICHARDS: Oh, this one? Yeah? AUDIENCE: How would you answer that such that something [? throws ?] the word [? around. ?] Because "About what are youtalking?" is-- NORVin RICHards: "What is it that you're talking about? What do you want to say?" In many languages, most languages, including Latin, you have to say, "About what are you talking?" In English, there's this distinction between the examples where leaving a preposition behind is what you prefer, "Who are youtalking to" But you can kind of say, 'To whom are you Talking?' Do you know the answer to that question? If so, please email us at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk and we'll feature it in next week's show. other people have this intuition, that "About what are you talking?" is worse than "To whom are youtalking?" I have that feeling, too, I think. There are examples that are really quite bad. And other examples which get better. So things like "We left despite the fact that we were in a bad mood" are very bad examples. But there are other examples. that are quite good. And there are examples which are very, very good. I think that's the way to go. her warnings." And then consider two kinds of questions you could ask about that. "What did you left despite?" And "Despite what did you leave?" Is either of those acceptable at all? Who prefers "Whatdid you leave despite?" who prefers "DespiteWhat Did You Leave?" Who would do anything to avoid saying either of these things? Yes. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So here's another example of one sentence that's quite bad and another sentence that’s only bad-ish. You might want to try to understand what's going on. a fruitful area of research here. English is happy to leave prepositions at the ends of sentences. But in which cases is it happy to do the Latin thing? And in some cases, it's happier than others. It's interesting to try to study. Another distinction to make. The Latin thing is a Latin thing, but it's a different thing in English. It is a different way of saying the word 'prepositions' or 'pre-positions.' It's a very different way to say it. So we've drawn this distinction now between meaningless on the one hand and ungrammatical on the other. We've drawn a distinction between prescriptive and non-prescriptive. That sentence can be both meaningless and un Grammatical, but it can also be meaningless and grammatical, like "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously" We'vedrawn that distinction. It's a distinction that can be made in a number of ways, and it can be used in a variety of ways. descriptive statements. So prescriptive statements are things like "Don't end sentences with prepositions," which are-- how shall I say this?-- false. Not a good description of what English speakers actually do. They are aspirations. So we're not going to do that. We're just going to study what Englishakers do. So that's what we're going to be doing. We'll be studying English speakers. And we'll be looking at what they do. here's another useful distinction. It's sometimes called competence versus performance. Imagine that I am standing up here talking to you. So far, this should be easy to imagine. Except I'm not standing. And then I say, "This is the--" and then I'm standing up. And I'm saying, "What do you think of this?" And then he says, "I think it's a good idea." And he's standing up and he's saying it, and then he's not standing and he says it. Inhale a fly. So imagine that-- oh, I don't have to wear a mask. I keep forgetting that. So I say, "This is the--" and then I stop. I'm like [IMITATES COUGHING] and I stop right there. And I keep doing it. And it's like, "Oh, my God, I'm in trouble" And I'm just like, 'I'm so sorry. I've got to get out of here' then imagine that this experience is so traumatizing for me and also for the fly, that I just I never complete that sentence. So I say, "This is the--" and then I stop. There are two attitudes that we could have to me having uttered that sentence, and that's the sentence. That's the sentences that we can have, and I don't want to have those attitudes. I want to be able to say, 'This is what happened to me. This is what I went through' I uttered. "This is the cough, ugh, puh." That's something I said. And I'm a native speaker of English. So there are two kinds of things we could say. One would be to say, we're developing a theory of all of the kinds of sentences that Native English speakers can say. And that was one. And so we want a theory that allows that to be a sentence of English, and that's one kind of thing we could saying. This is one of those moments that happens a lot in classes. "Here's one thing we could say," and then describes something completely ridiculous. We could say, no, look, if we're developing a theory of all of the things that native English speakers can say, native speakers of any language can say it, too. You could do that. But here's another thing we can say. We can say: "Here's what a native English speaker can say" and then describe it in a completely ridiculous way. You can do that, too, and then say it in another way. all, but we're going to start with English, what we want is not a theory that covers "This is the cough, hack, splutter" That's not going to be one of the sentences we're Going to try to get. We're Going To Try to Get sentences like, "This Is The Answer" We're going To Try To Get Sentences Like, "this is the answer" We'll try to Get Sentence Like, 'This is The Answer' We'll Try To Getting Sentence like, 'It's The Answer To Everything' or whatever. That's going to be a sentence, whatever it is I meant to say. Flies, sure. Sudden heart attacks, and then other kinds of things that are maybe less clear to think what to say about them. And then there are going to been other things, too, that I don't know how to talk about. I'm not sure what I'm going to say, but I'll try to think of something. I'll be back in a week or so. attacks, yeah. What about if I forget what I was going to say in the middle of a sentence. I know that's hard to imagine, but imagine that I did something like that. I'm in theMiddle of a. sentence, and I'm talking, and then I just forget where I. am, and it's like, 'Oh my God, what am I going to do?' And I'm like,, 'I don't know what to say.' And I just start talking again. was going, and-- where was I going with that? Who knows. That could happen. So what we're going to have-- so this is a different approach, and it's the one that you might imagine I'm recommending. What we're Going to Have is the idea that we'regoing to develop a new way of looking at the world. It's going to be a little different, but it's not going to change the way we see the world, and that's a good thing. theory of what English speakers say, but we're going to imagine the kind of English speaker who never inhales flies, and never forgets what they were going to say, and only speaks in completely grammatical sentences. There might not be any speakers like that. We're trying to imagine a kind of speaker who doesn't have a fatal heart attack. We'll show you what we mean when we get to the end of this story. We hope you'll join us for the rest of the show. If you have ever looked at a transcript of somebody talking, there aren't any sentences in there, unless the person is Noam Chomsky, I have to say. It's kind of astonishing. Journalists know that the best way to make someone look like a complete idiot is to make them talk in complete sentences. That's what Chomsky does, and it's quite weird. It was quite weird reading transcripts of Noam. Chomsky talking, or listening to Noamomsky talk, because, in fact, he talks in. complete sentences, paragraphs. quote them accurately. Just to write down exactly what they said, because they'll say "um" and "uh" and they'll stop. And they'll inhale flies. Things will happen such that their sentences are not fully grammatical sentences. What journalists, in fact, do is quote them accurately, because that's what they're supposed to do. But they'll change what they say, and they will say things that are not grammatical. They'll change their sentences. They will change their words. is to clean up all that stuff so that people sounded like they were talking in complete sentences. So we're going to develop a theory of what English speakers say, but it's going to be a theory that's divorced from reality to a certain extent. We're Going to Imagine what English Speakers Say is going to look like, and we'll try to make it as accurate as possible. We'll post the results of our research on Twitter @CNNOpinion. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. people would be like if there were no distractions, and no flies, and. no sudden homicides, no falling asleep in the middle of your sentences, all of that stuff. So the distinction here is competence versus performance. We're imagining a speaker who's kind of like a frictionless plane, that there there are no distractions and no sudden murders. That's what we're trying to imagine here. We want to imagine a speaker with competence and performance in the same way that we imagine a plane with frictionless flight. are various kinds of complications, and there's no air resistance or whatever else. So we're going to be talking about speakers' competence, what they would do if there were no distractions and no problems. There's also performance. That's the study of what people actually do when there are no distractions or problems to distract them from what they're saying. We'll be looking at performance, competence and what people do when they're not distracted or have problems to deal with, for example. "We want to study that, sure, but we're going to develop a theory of competence on the theory that it'll be simpler," he says. "By abstracting away from various kinds of complications, we'll get a clearer picture of what's going on. Does that makes sense? That's what we're trying to do," he adds. For more information on the project, go to www.do.it/do/do-do/choose-your-competence. There is no bound on the length of English sentences. For any sentence in English, it's always possible to create a longer sentence. You can always say, "She thinks that S," where she maybe refers to different people in every clause. When we say it that way, you can tell that I am talking about competence because no matter how long you say it, it can keep going arbitrarily long. It's a possible sentence of English. "Mary thinks that John thinks that it's raining" is a possible English sentence. many recordings of English speakers you go through, you will never find an infinitely long sentence. Nobody actually says these things. That isn't a fact about grammar. It's a factabout life. And we don't say them. We don't. We just don't do it. We can't. It just doesn't happen. We're not going to do it, because it's not in our nature. It doesn't make sense. We've never done it, and we won't. And that's the way it is. care about life in this class. The fact that if I were to start saying, "She thinks that she thinks that it's raining," then eventually people would stop listening to me, she says. "I don't want people to think that I don't care about my class," she adds. "It's not about me. It's about my friends and my friends' friends," she says, "and I want them to know that I care about them. I want to be part of their lives." I would run out of breath, or I would need to take a break to eat, orI would die-- there are various reasons that I will eventually stop uttering my infinitely long sentence. But we're not going to have a grammar that says-- we'renot going to try to. We're not. to try and make a long sentence into a short one. We don't want to have to say, "We're not trying to make a short sentence," we want to say "We want to be able to say a long one" find out what's the longest sentence anybody ever uttered and try to get that fact to be a fact. We're not going to try to predict that. What we're going to have is a theory. We want our grammar of English, our theory of the possible sentences of English to be based on a theory of English. We don't want to be able to predict what a sentence should look like. We just want to know what it looks like to be in English, and how it should look. that says English sentences can be arbitrarily long. And then, yeah, eventually people die, and so nobody ever says a sentence that's infinitely long. But that's about death. That's not about-- and we're not going to talk about death in this class, except when we do. Does that make sense? Do you think that makes sense? If so, please share your thoughts in the comments below or on Twitter @CNNOpinion. Back to the page you came from. Yeah? So that's another move we're going to make, another instance of us caring about the difference between competence and performance. Nobody ever performs an infinitely long sentence, but we're competent to produce them. So enough talking about what we are going to do. Let's begin doing it. Questions before I. I'm going to ask you a few questions before I go on the stage. Do you have a question for me? If so, please email it to jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. begin doing some syntax? Here's the sentence, "I will find the red book." grammatical sentence. Acceptable. It's clear what it means, although we've just said it doesn't matter whether it means anything. I said early on we're going to want to have a way of saying which parts of this are acceptable. We're not going to be able to say all the time what a word means, we're just going to have to say some of the time. sentence were put together as units, like with "unlockable" We wanted to be able to say "unLockable" is ambiguous because it can consist of a unit "unlocked" to which you've added "un-" That's what that ambiguity comes from. And we're going to do the same thing with "Unlockable," we're saying it's ambiguous because you can add "un" to "un Lock" or "un lock" to get the same result. to do a similar kind of thing with syntax. And what we're going to find is that there are various phenomena that care about whether something is a unit in that tree, a single blob of structure. So in a sentence like, "I'm going to look for these units. We're Going to Look for These Units" We're going To Look For These Units. We are going to Look For This Unit. We Are Looking For That Unit. This is a Newsquiz. To participate in this quiz, please submit a video of your own. will find the red book" for example, we'll see that syntax treats that string, "The red book," as a unit. There are various phenomena that care about that. One of them is what's sometimes called topicalization. It's possible to say things like "Thered book I will find." For example, it's possible for a person to say "I will find" and then "I'll find" in different ways. It is possible to do this in different languages. It is OK to use "the red book" as a possible answer to a question. It's OK to take a substring like that and put it together with another similar substring conjoined with the word "and" It's easiest to say things like that if I follow it up with "The blue book, I will leave right where it is" This is like the stuff we were doing in the '70s and '80s, when people would say, "I will find the red book and the blue pencils" saying before about things you can say if you're astonished. You can say "the red book" as, basically, a sentence under the right circumstances. For example, if somebody has just asked you what will you find. These are all ways in which "thered book" is treated as a sentence. It's a way of saying, "I don't know what to say to you," or "I'm not sure what you're saying to me" or "What do you want to tell me?" single object that syntax gets to refer to. I hope I was smart enough to contrast it with something else on the next slide. Yes, I was. But let me give you one other test. Yeah, this is a test. I can say things like "what I will find is what I'll find is" But let's see if I can do it. I'll show you what I find out. I'm going to give you a slide and you can see it. the red book." So I can rearrange the words of the sentence in a way such that there is a word, "is" before that string " the red book" It puts a special kind of emphasis on "thered book." It's called clefting. Contrast that with-- so this is not just just a word. This is a whole sentence. It's not just a single word. The whole sentence is clefted. The entire sentence is called "clefting" It's a way of putting emphasis on something. a property of every three-word string in the sentence. So "find the red," for example, is not a constituent. It's not a phrase. So you cannot say things like " find the red I will book." So "the red book, I will" is not the same thing as "I will book the red book" It is not something we need to make reference to. It is just a property of the three- word string. It doesn't need to be a phrase or a constituent of it. There are no questions to which the answer is "Find the red," apart from "What are the third, fourth, and fifth words of this sentence?" So put aside mental linguistic games like that. You can't-- and there's no question that will give you that answer. No. Can't do this with just any random three-word string. Similarly, there is no question-- there are questions towhich the answers is "The red book," like "What will you find?" Yeah? AUDIENCE: What color do I need to find? NORVIN RICHARDS: "Find the red" Really? Oh, I see. You mean "What color book do Ineed to find?" "Find" the red? "Find what?" you ask. "The red one," he says. "Find that red one." "Find it" you say. "That's what I'm going to do. Find the red one" "Find," you say, "the red book" the red-- I want to say "Find the red one." Yes. Is there a faster way to convince you of that? Or similarly, if I tell you I will find the red book and you're amazed, you can say, "The red book?" Joseph? Do you think that's true? But yeah, I take your point about-- to the extent that you can use "the red" as shorthand for "thered one." AUDIENCE: It's red acting as the noun, not red acting-- NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. this-- suppose you have this fictional-- this children's game where there's a bunch of little tiles. You have to find the red ones. So this is like your example where we're going to treat red as a noun that you're red. That's what we're trying to do with the word red. It's a noun, it's a word for red. We're not going to use it as a verb. We don't use the word "red" in that way. "Land of the free," "home of the brave" should be adjectives, he says. "I guess this is kind of the same thing," the audience responds. "We have some cases where we have things that you certainly-- should be nouns," he adds. "Going to go find. going to find" is a popular phrase in the U.S., but not in the UK, where it's used as a noun. "Go find" means "to go find" or "to find" or we're getting to modify nouns that you can't hear, however we want to talk about that. Yeah, good point. Good point. Yeah? Other points about this? So all this slide is meant to convince you of is that "the red book" and "find the red" don't have the same meaning. That's what it's meant to do. It's not to make you think that they're the same thing, it's just to show you that they aren't. "The red book" can be used for these various types of phenomena, as opposed to "find the red," which you can't do those things with. So it isn't just these are phenomena that pick out three-words substrings. It's It's "The Red Book," we want it to be a substring that has certain privileges, can beused for certain things. We want to be able to do things with it that we couldn't do with "Find the Red," for example. these are phenomena that pick out certain substrings and not others of the sentence. We're going to try to figure out theories about why those are the special strings. And what we'll do is we'll say just that we'll try to find out why certain strings of words are picked out more than others. We'll say that we're trying to find theories about why that's the case. And we'll also try to explain why certain words are chosen over others in a sentence. as with "unlockable" we were taking pairs of things and putting them together to form larger things, larger units. We'll do the same thing here, only with words. We had this operation, we were calling it merge, that takes pairs of thing and puts them together into a larger thing. That's what we're doing here. We're doing it with words, too. It's a little bit like that, but it's a lot more focused on words. We're going to take pairs of things like "red" and "book" and put them together. And then we'll create a sentence like "I will find the red book" We'll start with just the end of it, "find thered book" is we'regoing to take that and add the rest of the sentence together. We'll then create the sentence "I'll find the black book" which is "I'm going to find the blue book" This is the first part of a two-part series. take that unit that we've created by putting together "red" and "book" and we'll put that together with this word, "the" And then we'll take that thing that we're going to call "the red book" and add "find" So just as with "unlockable," we were taking pairs of words and putting them together to create a new unit of the word "unlocked" "Unlockable" is a word that we put together with "red," "book," "the," and "find," and then put together to become "unlocking" things and putting them together in pairs to create these larger and larger structures. We're going to do the same thing to create sentences out of words. This way of talking about it has the virtue of giving us a vocabulary for talking about those kinds of observations we were making, he says. "This way oftalking about it gives us a Vocabulary for talking About Those kinds of Observations we were Making," he adds. "It's a way of looking at things that we were doing that we didn't know about before" making on the last two slides. So when we say "the red book" is a unit that various things get to apply to, things like what I called topicalization where you take a chunk of the sentence and put it at the beginning, and it has some kind of emphasis. So that's what we're trying to do with the red book. We're looking at how we can use it in a variety of ways, and how it can be applied to different things in the world. Because this is syntax and not semantics, we won't worry too much about what it means. When we say that's something you can do to the string "the red book," but not, for example, to "find the red," this tree gives us a way of talking about that. There is no such thing as a "red book" in this tree, but there is a way to say that you can use it to refer to the red book in a different way. a unit that we created in the course of putting things together in pairs that is just "the red book" it's the unit that I've circled there. But there is no unit. that we've created as we've been putting these pairs together that consists just to "find the red" Do you know where the red book is? If so, email emma.glanfield@mailonline.co.uk. If you have a photo of a red book, please email it to: emma@mailOnline.com. For more information on the Red Book, visit redbook.org. people see that in this tree? So there's a node in the tree, if you want. It's the one that I circled in red that consists just of the words "the red book" But there is no thing that I could circle that would consist just of, "find the red" There are other things I couldcircle. I could have circled the largest thing, but that corresponds to " find the red book." It would just be "red book." But there's nothing that's just "find" the red." And that's what we're going to relate to all those observations we made on those two slides. I've said this now a couple of times, this is meant to remind you of stuff we were doing when I was doing morphology. When we were do morphology, we were the red. The red is what we were looking at when we were in the lab. We were looking for the red, and we were finding it. We're looking at the red now, because we're looking for it in our lab. using this operation, we called it merge, that assembled pairs of things and created new things. When we were doing morphology, we were then saying when you put these two things together, you have a new thing, and we're giving that thing a label whose properties are determined by the label. That's what we were trying to do with morphology. We wanted to create a new way of looking at things that could be used to create new objects. We called it 'merge' because it was a way of combining two things and creating new ones. things that you put together. When you combine "un- number one" with a verb, what you get is a verb. So the tree on the left there, "lock" is labeled as a. "un-" number one, and "lock," it's part of the specification of un-number one that when you combine it with a. verb, you get a verb to say "un" or "un"- number one. "Un" is the first word in the English language. "Lock" is a word that means "to lock" verb, and "unlock" is also labeled as a verb. People see that. And then when you combine that verb "unlocked" with a "-able," it's a property of "-able" that it merges with verbs and the thing that you create as a result is an adjective. And so the whole thing is a whole lot of different things that make up the word "lock" "Unlock" can also be used to mean "to lock" or "to unlock" is "unlockable" This is what we were doing with labels before. We're going to want to do something similar for syntax. What kinds of labels are we going to use? Well, look, I just gave you all these diagnostics. What kind of labels do you want to use for the parts of these trees? We'll have to wait and see what the results are, but I think it's going to be a good idea to use labels for parts of the tree. to try to convince you that when you say things like, "I will find the red book," "the red book" should be a unit, right, phenomena like topicalization should get to make reference to it. We have to decide what to label that. Notice there are a bunch of things that can be called "topicalization" or "topics" or something like that. It's a lot of different things, but that's what we're going to try to do. that have all of those properties. So if I said, "I will find red books," well, you'd be able to topicalized "red books" "Those red books about linguistics, I will find." Yes, so that's a unit we want to be can to make reference to. "I'll find books" is similarly "books I'll find" and "I've found books" are similar to "I have found books," which is a unit a similar kind. or "I will find books." "Books?" You're amazed. So "books" by itself is apparently a unit of the same kind. So we're going to name that phrase after "books," which is a noun, not a word. "Books" is a word that means "to find" or "to look for" in the English language. It's a noun in the sense that it's a word for a thing or a person. " books" is the word for "a book" in English. the fact that it contains a noun. If there were no noun, it wouldn't have those properties. Similarly, with "the red book," the things that can be said about it are determined by the fact that the book is a book. If it's not a book, it can't be said to be a red book. It can only be called a book if it's a book with a noun in it. It has to have a certain number of nouns in it, like "red" or "book" go in that slot, the things that can go after "find," we just saw in the last slide. What they all contain is a noun. So we're going to name that thing after those kinds of units, after "Find" or "find" or whatever it is that you want to call it. It's going to be called "Find Find Find Find" or something like that. It will go on display at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, and it will be open to the public for a year. the fact that they contain a noun. We'll give it the label "noun" Kind of like when we added "un-" to "lock" and got "unlock," we said, oh yeah, this is also a verb. It acts like a verb in every other way. You can use it as a verb: The word "un" means "to be" or "to not be" in English. It's a noun in the sense that it contains a noun, but it can also be a verb if used in the right way. "I unlock the door." You can add things to it that can be added to verbs, like "-able." So similarly here, when we're trying to decide what kinds of things can go in this slot, the slot that's right after "find," the thing that they all have in common is "find" "Find" is the most common word in the English language. It's followed by "to find" and "to unlock" "To unlock" is followed by the word "to open" that they contain nouns. We'll call them all "extended nouns" Yeah? Similarly, there is another unit in "I will find the red book" not just "the red book," which we said is this extended noun. There's also "the" in "The Red Book," which is also an extension of the word "red" and not just the book itself. So we're going to name them after the fact that they contain adjectives, not nouns, because that's what they are. another phrase, "find the red book," which is also a unit. And it was the unit that we were constructing in the slides when I was showing you trees for how to construct " find the redBook" and it passes these tests for unithood, constituency. You can say, "Find the red Book," and it's a unit, too. It's a word that means "to find" or "to look for" in English or Spanish. It can be used to refer to a book or a person. red book I will," not only if you are Yoda, but also if you say something like, "I said that I would find the red book" It's more or less OK sentences of English. Or if I say "I will find the Red Book," it's OK. It's OK to say that you will find a red book if you're Yoda. It is OK to be Yoda and say you'll find a Red Book if you've been told to find it. book" and you are amazed, you can say, "Find the red book?" (No one has ever found the redBook. It's been lost for centuries.) And various other things that are on this slide. "FindTheRedBook" is also a constituent, also a unit that we're going to want to talk about in the next few days. We'll be back with more from CNN iReport on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday at 9 p.m. ET. For more, go to CNN.com/ iReport. syntax to be able to make reference to. The important part of "the red book" is the noun, that's the thing that determines that that phrase is OK in that place. Yeah, there are various phrases that you can put in that are OK to use in the red book. And just as we said "The red book," the important part to remember is that it's a noun, not a word. It's a phrase. It doesn't have to be a word, but it can be. place and they all have nouns in them. They don't have to have anything else. You can say things like "I will leave," and then "leave" has all the properties we just ran through. "I said," you can say, "I'll leave" or "I'm leaving" You can even say "I've left," which is a word that means "to have left" or to "have gone" You don't need to say "you've left" to leave. I would leave, and leave I will." "Leave" is a unit of the same kind as "find the red book." Or "I will leave" and you're amazed. You can say, "Leave?" So "leave" is the same as "Find the Red Book" or "I'll leave" You can leave by saying, "I'm going to leave" or by saying "I won't leave" Or you can say "I don't want to leave," which means "I can't" this part is the verb, the part that determines that that's the kind of phrase that can go in that position. "Find the red book" we're going to give that the label verb, because having a verb is the important part for that. So yeah, one more. You can say "I will find the book in the garage." "In" is a large unit whose special property is that it contains a noun. "The red book," we said, is kind of an extended noun. the garage" is a unit, it's a constituent. It's the kind of thing syntax gets to care about. And again, if I say, "I will find the book in the garage" and you're amazed, you can say "In the garage?" If I want to, I can topicalize "in the garage." It's a prepositional phrase. The kinds of things that can go in a prePOSitional phrase include prepositions and noun phrases. "The garage"  is another noun phrase. just contain a preposition, like, "I will look up," where, again, if you're amazed, you can say, "Up?" (Why will you look up?) "I said I would look up, and up I will look"-- Maybe. "Up" -- "I'm going to look up"-- "I'll look up." "Up"? -- "Up I'll look" "Up? -- Up?" -- "Yeah?" "Up!" -- "up" isn't like an adverb describing "look"? NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. Adverb is a funny word because there are a lot of things that can be used. So if by adverb, we mean thing that modifies the verb, there are many ways to use the word. Yes sir? Adverb. Yes, yep, yap. Adverbs are funny, aren't they? Yes, yes, they are. They're funny. They can be funny. can be used that way, including adverbs like "I will leave quickly," where "quickly" is an adverb. But also prepositional phrases like " I will leave in a chariot" where the prepositions are like adverbs. Or maybe even noun phrases such as "I'll leave the day after tomorrow" where "day after" is a noun and "weekend" a verb, and "day" a preposition. For more information on how to use these phrases, visit the Oxford English Dictionary. "the day after tomorrow" sure looks like a noun phrase. It's got a noun in it, "day," and then "the" before that, but we know that can go at the beginnings of noun phrases. So there are probably-- so the word "adverb" can be used to cover a bunch of different things. There are probably a lot of different ways to use the word 'adverb' to refer to different things in the same way. The word 'Adverb' can also be used as a noun. things, including things that we don't have any other word for, like "quickly," which is an adverb. And so I think you might be right that this is anAdverb in the sense that it's a noun phrase or a prepositional phrase. "Quickly" is a word that we use to describe things that are happening very quickly, which is also an ad verb. "Fastly" can also be used to refer to "noun phrase" or "prepositional phrases," for example. it modifies the verb. I think I might also be right in the sense that it's a prepositional phrase that's being used as adverbially. Does that make sense? So what I'm trying to do is work out a way for you and I to both be right, which is always a good thing to do. I'm not sure I've got it right yet, but I'm going to try to get it right this time. I'll let you know when I do. my goal in discussions. Yes? AUDIENCE: What about a sentence like "I will wake up"? NORVIN RICHARDS: "I'll wake up." "I just tried to convince everybody," he says, "that it's OK to say that. So probably-- I mean, I just trying to convinceEverybody" Yes, he says. Yes, it is okay to say "that" in a sentence. "It's OK," he adds. "That's a nice example" that it was OK to say up. But "I said I would wake up and up I will wake," I'm not even going to try. And similarly, I think, if I say "I will wake up" and you're amazed, I'm going to go ahead and do it. That's what I want to do. I think that's what people want to hear. I want people to believe that I'm capable of doing that. I don't want to try to do it, but I will try. you're not going to say, "Up?" Yeah. That's a nice example. There are a bunch of things that look like prepositions that combine in an interesting way with verbs in English and a lot of other Germanic languages. And "wake up" is one of those. And this is actually the first part of a two-part series on the use of prepositional words in German. The second part of the series will be on Friday, December 14. The series will feature a look at some of the most popular Germanic words. kind of example that I was exploiting in the first slides I was showing you about syntax, even the ones on the first day that you can say. You can also say, "I will wake up the cats." It's unwise. It's not a good idea to say that. It is a bad thing to say, even if it's a good thing. It can be a bad idea to do it when it's not the right thing to do at the time. It could lead to a bad reaction. but it's grammatical. But I think "up the cats" is not a prepositional phrase. Notice, for example, that if I say I will wake up the cats and you're astonished as you might well be, you can't say "Up the cats?" And "I said I would wake Up the cats"? That's not a phrase. That's a word. It's a phrase that means "to wake up" or "to get up" and not "up" and up the cats I will wake," this is no good. Yes? AUDIENCE: I think that's not because kind of combined with the verb you can say "I will wake up" but you can't say, "Iwill wake down." NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. So I think-- we're not going to be able to do that. We're going to have to change the way we say it. And we'll have to get better at it. don't want to think of "up the cats" as a unit. "wake up" is a unit that has the cats as an object. So this is the point you were making, and I think that you are also making, that there's something special about that," he says. "We want to be able to say, 'I've had a good night. I've been able to sleep. I'm going to have a good day,'" he adds. "That's what we're trying to do." interaction. "Are you up for lunch?" or " are you down for lunch" They mean the same thing. And so we are learning-- this is why I'm glad I'm not a physicist, yes. So I work in the domain in which up is down, down is up and up is up. And that's what we're going to have to learn to do with each other. We're all going to need to learn how to get along with one another in this world. and down can be the same thing. If I were a physicist, then if NASA were to hire me, the spacecraft would have all kinds of problems. That's a nice example. Relatedly, "I will wake up the cat" is OK. You can also say, " I will wake the cats" That's OK, too. It's not a bad thing to say. It just isn't a good thing to do it to the cat. It doesn't mean you should wake the cat up. You cannot say, "I will walk the stairs up," I think. You have to say I will walk up them. And relatedly-- I exploited this in an earlier slide-- you can say, 'I will wake him up' "I'll wake them up," no good. "I'm going to walk them up." What are you going to do with those stairs? "I's going to walked them up" No. I think, right? “I will walking them up.” You have to say, "I will wake them up." So these "up"s are different. So "up the stairs" is a prepositional phrase. We need different structures for these verb phrases, and we will develop them. You had a-- AUDIENCE: Yeah. I was I was "Up the cats" is not aPrepositionalphrase. " up the cats," is a PrepositionalPhenomenon. "Up, up, up" means "to go up" If you're taking someone home, you can say, "I will walk you up to your room" You can't say "I'll walk up the student to her room," though. That implies you're walking on the student, which is not the case. "Up" is different from all of these, actually, kind of interestingly. I think maybe "up" is the right word for it. It's like the opposite of "walk" or "walk up" in the same way. modifying "to her room." We want there to be a constituent "up to her room" Notice that if I say, "I will walk her up to herRoom" and you're amazed, you can say, 'Up to herroom?" which suggests that that's a constituent. Yeah, that'sA nice third thing. Yeah. That's a nice thirdthing. Yeah,. that's an easy way to say "I'm going to walk you up to your room," which suggests you're a constituent, too. I should talk about when I'm talking about this. Cool. Oh, yeah? AUDIENCE: Yeah, I had a question. So I think there's something different between waking up or walking up. In a sense, you could say, [INAUDIBLE] and that would make sense. So it's kind of like, I don't know, it's like waking up and then walking up, right? It's like, 'I'm going to get out of bed and go to the bathroom' an adjective, in some sense, is describing [? state. ?] But at the same time, it's not an adjective. It's describing a verb. So I was wondering if there's any big distinction between waking up and like walking up [INAUDIBLE].. NORVIN RICHARDS: So that's a very nice example. So in the same way, there's a big difference between walking up and waking up. In the case of waking up, you wake up and then you walk up. a way, waking the cats up, it's a little bit like painting the cats red. And as a result of that, the cats are red. The cats change into cats that were not red before and now they are cats that are Red. So I think you're right. It depends on how you did it, I guess. But when you're done, the Cats are up. And possibly also red. It's a bit of a paradox, but in a good way. absolutely right that we want "wake the cats up" to have "up" "I will wake up the cats" is a prepositional phrase. It's like a predicate of some kind. "Red" is like "red" in the movie. "Up" is not a preposition that's combining with the cats to be a Prepositional Pronoun. It is something else. We want it to not be aPrepositional Prejunctive Pronunciation. "I will paint the cats red." That was a very nice example. And yeah, as we study these verb phrases further, we'll want to have structures that give them that character. Did you have a question a while ago? No. Joseph? AUDIENCE: I think that that does fit. You can go ahead and ask your question. You're allowed to do so. The next question is from the audience, and it's about the word "paint" Joseph: "Paint" is a word that means "to paint. also wake the cats. You shouldn't, but you can. Did you have a question? AUDIENCE: Yeah. So with the example of walking her up to her room, I think you need to say, "I think you should wake her up" NORVIN RICHARDS: Yes, you can wake the Cats. You can also paint the cats, too. Yeah. You don't have to wake them up, just paint them, if that's what you want. will walk her up." NORVIN RICHARDS: Yes. AUDIENCE: I think because the "up" is modifying "to her room," but I don't think [? so. ?] NORVin RICHards: It doesn't have to, does it? No. I will walk her. up to her room. NORVINE RICHARD: Yes, that's what I'm going to do. I'm not going to walk her down. I am going to take her up. her room. I will-- but similarly, you can walk the student-- so I keep going to the student from her, because there's a difference between pronouns and non-pronouns. You can wake up the cats or you can wake the cats up, but you can't wake them up, and you cannot wake the student up. You cannot walk a student from the other side of the room. You have to walk them from the front to the back. That's the way to go. up them. So a pronoun has to go before this kind of "up," but the cats can go on either side. So "I will walk her up," you're absolutely right. That's the way to say that. But I think you also have to walk the student up. You can't walk up the student, unless the student is lying down and you're walking on her. But if you mean you're going to walk with the student so that the two of you are up, so we want "walk the student" up to be different from "wake the cats up" also different from "walk up the stairs" Yeah, it's a third kind of thing, which, as we work further on this, I'm glad that we're running out of time because it means that I have a week to create slides about this. But we're going to continue to work on it, and I'm looking forward to it. I'm excited to see what the next few months will bring. I think it's going to be a very exciting time for us all. want different structures for this. You guys are making excellent points about this. So we're developing probes into the structure of the inside of the verb phrase that mean that we're going to need at least three different kinds of structures for a sequence that looks like verb, them, up, up. That's what we're working on right now. We're looking at how to do it in a way that doesn't look like a lot of other ways of doing it. It's going to be a big challenge. or verb, up, them. We want "up" and "them" to combine to be a propositional phrase. But for these other two, we want something else. We're going to want to circle around and try to find out what that other thing is. Yeah. Am I getting at your point? But for "walk up them" we want “up” and “them” to combine. But we want " up" and ‘them’ to combine for “I walked up the stairs" You're absolutely right. Yeah, so we need a way of covering that. Lots of people had hands. Does anybody else-- yeah? AUDIENCE: I was going to suggest something else [INAUDIBLE] Even though you can't say, walk the-- "walk the stairs up to your room." NORVIN RICHARDS: "I walk--" Audience: You walk the stairs. NORVin RICHards: "You walk the steps up to the room" could potentially say, "Climb the ladder to your room?" NORVIN RICHARDS: That's because you can climb a ladder. That's the one where I think we want "up" possibly to modify to "your room." Or maybe not. Maybe this was your point, maybe we want 'up' and 'to your room' to be separate adverbs. The ladder isn't-- AUDIENCE: --or the stairs. NORVin RICHards: Yeah. to the extent that you can say "He's walking the stairs," which I think you can sort of say, it means he's on the stairs, walking. I think that's what you're doing there. I hate to do it, but I want to ruthlessly squelch everything else you guys want to say. "I want to mercilessly squelching" is what I'm going to say, he says, "because that's the way it is. That's what's going to happen." say, because I have a triumphant slide that I want to show you. And then maybe we can unsquelch you and come back. So here's the idea, just so it's clearer for everybody. For the easy case, the one that he wants to refocus your attention on, "I will find you" is the one he wants you to focus on. That's what he says he'll do. He'll find you, he says, and then you'll find him. the book in the garage," what we want to do is construct a structure for this that's sensitive to all of the tests for structure that we've been developing," he says. "It's going to involve putting things together via pairwise merge and creating labels for the things that we create," he adds. "We want to create a world that's very unique and very personal," he continues. "That's what we're going to try to do with this project," he concludes. pairwise merge that are typically labels that come from one of the two things that we've merged. So when we merged "the book" or "the garage," we're going to create something we's going to give the label "noun" to. Or when we merge "in" together with "the Garage" we'regoing to go with "garage" as the label for "in." Or we'll merge "book" and " garage" to create "book-garage," which we'll call "book noun" to create what I've been calling a prepositional phrase. Something that we'll give the label "p" to, saying this has the properties that it has-- it contains a preposition "in" Similarly, we'll combine "find" with "the book" and "in the garage" and we'll end with "p-p-P-P" "P-p" is a word that has the same properties as "in," which is to say "to be" or "to do" up with a structure like that. Is anybody shocked by this slide? You are, yes. What did you want to do? You're gesturing. You want to combine things in a different way? So actually, you may be right. No, here's a better way to say-- we may both be right, you and I. We may be both right. We're both right, we're both wrong. We both may be wrong, but we may be. right. So this is an example where this way of merging things creates a well-formed structure. Notice that if I say, "I will find the book in the garage," it's OK. "I said I would find the Book in the Garage" is OK. In the garage, I will find The Book. That's OK to say. That is OK to find. The Book is OK for me to find, and I do find it. It's OK for you to find it, too. a unit that topicalization gets to make reference to. That's a property of this tree. So our tests get to tease this out now. Now I'm regretting us being almost out of time because there are many things to say. What we're going to see next is that when we go back and look at the tree again. We'll see what we've done. We've got a lot of work to do. We're looking forward to the next stage of the project. construct syntactic trees for strings of words. It's often the case that we get ambiguities like the "unlockable" ambiguity, places where there is more than one way to combine things. And I think you may be looking at this slide and thinking, oh, but there's another way to combining these. I think that's a good way to think about it, as well as a bad way to look at it. I hope that helps you understand what I'm trying to say. words, and you're absolutely right. There is. And what we'll do is develop tests that allow us to see which way we've combined words in different ways. And we'll find cases like "unlockable" where, depending on in what order you combine things, you get different meanings, and our tests will be able to detect this. We'll also find cases where the word is used in a number of different ways, and we'll test these as well. We're looking forward to seeing what the results will be. combine with that. All right. Thanks, everybody. We will do this again on Tuesday. Back to the page you came from. Back from the pageYou came from the front of the line. Back into the center of the screen. Back up to the front. Up to the top of the page. Back down to the bottom. Back on the page, back to the beginning of the day. Back in the center, the front page. The front page of the frontpage of the newspaper, the New York Times.