The boss of the cyber security firm responsible has said it could be some time before all systems are back up and running. Banking and health care has been affected including the NHS. Thousands of flights have been cancelled and thousands of people have been left without internet access across the world. It has been described as a 'day of chaos' for people across the globe who have been affected by the outage. The outage has been blamed on a breach of a computer system in the U.S. by a cyber security company. The firm responsible for the breach has not commented on the claim. NHS and some TV channels have been taken off air millions of people have been affected the problems are first reported in Australia before spreading across the world. The American cyber security firm crowd strike did finally come forward the problems have been reported in the U.S. as well as Europe and the Middle East. The problems have also been reported around the world including here where there were delays and big cues at airports the American cyberSecurity firm crowd Strike did finally came forward the issues were reported in U.K. and Europe. Microsoft admits a defect in a software update it had issued which crashed Windows devices. The company is deploying a fix but not before widespread Mayhem tonight we'll be looking at exactly what happened and how it's affected patients passengers and businesses. Our first report is from our technology editor from ourTechnology editor from tonight at 10pm on BBC One and 11pm on Channel 4. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Zoe Kleinman the world woke up this morning to Global chaos massive Tech outages are impacting Airlines businesses offices. Thousands of flights grounded globally long cues frustrated passengers. There was nothing on the boards there was nothing there's no G staff in the UK doctor surgery is forced to let patients out of the hospital. There is no G in the hospital there is noG in the doctor surgery. There are no G's in the hospitals there is nothing in the doctors surgery there is No G. down patients we going to have to cancel your appointment businesses unable to serve customers we'll try to receive a credit card payment and just would not accept it credit card and debit card and TV programs abruptly taken off air the cause at crowd strike. We monitor trillions of trillions of dollars worth of goods and services that are lost or stolen. We will not accept payment for goods or services that have been lost or damaged. We are not responsible for the loss or damage caused by the actions of a small number of people. cyber events a single update from this us antivirus company you may have never heard of the cyber security firm crowd strike before. Crowd strike has nearly 24,000 customers around the world many of them huge organizations like Airlines and Banks. We stop a lot of bad things from happening we stop a many of the bad things that happen in cyber events from happening. We are the only company that can stop the spread of malicious software and malware. We have the world's largest network of antivirus software. we're deeply sorry for the impact that we've caused to customers to Travelers to anyone affected by this including our uh companies. So um we know what the issue is uh we're resolving and have resolved the issue now it's recovering uh systems that are out there so what went. So what went? We're sorry. We're very sorry. It's recovering systems that were out there. We know what it is and we're fixing it. So we're resolved it. Now we're recovering it. A faulty update meant millions of Microsoft users saw this screen pop up if you know it it'll make you shiver the blue screen of death it pops. This was not a hack or Cyber attack you don't need to change your passwords you just need a new password. This is not a cyber attack it's a faulty update. It's not a hacker it's just a bad software update. You don't have to change any of your passwords. You just need to replace your passwords with a new code. Microsoft's Windows software has a critical error affecting the operation of your PC. Every single machine affected needs a manual reboot in safe mode which is not as simple as turning it off and on again. Microsoft says some people have had to do it 15 times so it could take a while spare a thought for it departments there will be someone there to help you with it. It only affected machines running Microsoft but there are a lot of them and what's the fix? It's not straightforward every single machine needs a Manual Reboot. In Crowd strike who will be in a lot of trouble right now for not getting this right. A lot of people working this weekend in businesses all over the world to try and fix this problem and to patch it up um but at the end of the day it's not going to be perfect. In Crowd strike there will be a lot to fix this weekend and to fix it up it's going to take a long time but it will be worth it in the long run. in Crowd strike we will be able to show you how it's all going to work. same time you know this is the price we pay for being so reliant on digital infrastructure from travel chaos to grocery shop payment problems. There'll now be tough questions about the Damage Done by one faulty update. How did it slip through Microsoft safety nets the cyber security world and how did it manage to get past the cracks of the company's security system? We're all paying the price for our reliance on digital technology. We'll all pay the price if we don't take steps to protect our digital infrastructure. still advises that it's a good idea to keep on top of software updates although perhaps today is not the day to bang that particular drum Zoe kimman BBC News as we heard the firm behind the outage crowd strike has held up its hands but admitted that it'll take a while to get things back to normal. Zoe kKimman, BBC News, Monday, October 1, 2013. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter. time for things to get back to normal our correspondent Emma vardi is outside their Headquarters in Austin Texas and as Zoe said not many people will have heard of this company Emma but it's accidentally created such chaos well crowd strike based here in Austin has gained a strong following. Emma is outside the headquarters of a company called Crowd Strike based in Austin, Texas. Emma will be on hand to report back to you on how the crowd strike went and what the future holds for the company and the city of Austin. reputation in a relatively short space of time for providing very strong top it security solution so it's relied upon by lots of different companies. It operates in more than a 100 countries around the world and as well as it security uh it also gets called in to investigate. It's based in London and has offices in London, New York, Paris, Madrid, Berlin, Barcelona, Nice, Milan, Paris. It has a team of around 100 people who work on a daily basis. Chief executive says he's deeply sorry for what happened. But as to why a routine software update caused so many problems the question the answer to.hacks and it does some of the det detective work about who the hackers are uh behind major cyber attacks so the chief executive today has said he is deeply sorry. The chief executive said he was deeply sorry and that he is very sorry for the damage caused to the company. The CEO also said that he was very sorry that the company had been targeted. that isn't exactly clear some experts have speculated that perhaps it was a lack of testing which led to some weaknesses slipping through but clearly crowd strike is now going to face some credibility problems. uh its stock price has fallen and there are going to be questions over what. Some experts have speculate that perhaps a lack. of testing led toSome weaknesses slip through. But clearly crowd Strike is nowGoing to faceSome credibility problems uh itsStock price has fall and there is going to. be questions about what. we percussions software firms like this should face when flaws cause major disruption thank you very much Emma vardy reporting there the outage has wreak havoc on people's travel plans with thousands of flights cancelled around the world at UK airports. There have been huge cues and delays all on the UK airports there have been massive delays and cancellations across the world. There has been a huge cue and delays across the UK at airports there has been huge delays and cancelled flights across the globe. There is a huge amount of traffic in the UK as a result of the outage. Passengers forced to wait out delays so people are tired they've been handing out water. Day which is supposed to be one of the year's busiest here's our transport correspondent Katy tin what a start to the summer holidays at Gatwick Airport passengers should have been on planes were forced toWait out delays. People are tired so people have been handed out water the airport has seen a rise in the number of people handing out bottles of water to people waiting for flights. The airport has also seen a increase in the amount of passengers handing out bottled water. boards don't really say anything so it tells you where to go but there's no departure. Like times of flights many airlines found themselves unable to use their normal systems. We've had to revert back to pen and paper basically and manually check each of our boards. It's a bit like times of flight and we're all trying to get to the same place at the same time. We're trying to make sure we're on the same flight but it's very difficult to do. We'll keep you updated as we learn more. customers in of course that takes longer for our customers so we've seen a good operation but it's a slower operation. We expect that operation to continue today from chaos at Amsterdam to planes stuck on the ground at Newar in the US cancellations and delays spread around the world. "We've seen an operation that has been very successful and we're looking forward to continuing that today," says Air France chief executive Alain Delbridge. "It's been a very busy day for us and we expect that to continue" World Edinburgh stopped accepting incoming flights delayed passengers tried to figure out their options a little bit stressful hopefully it'll be okay now but the staff at the airport have been great here at hether Airport Terminal 3 for a time this morning passengers were turning up to be told passengers were waiting for their flights to arrive. World Edinburgh stopped accept incoming flights delays passengers trying to find out their flight to arrive at Edinburgh Airport. World Airport stopped accepting outgoing flights delayed. World airport stopped accepting arriving flights delayed in Edinburgh this morning. People whose flights have been cancelled should be offered rebooking or a refund. Most Services have been running but there's been some disruption and problems with passenger Information Systems. They couldn't drop off their bag and they just had to go away and wait for more information on Britain's Railway. They were told they had to wait to be reunited with their luggage and go back to the station to collect it. They also had to leave their luggage at the station and were told to go back and collect it again. Aviation began to recover as the afternoon went on but the knock on impact of the system reboot was still felt. Aviation will count as extraordinary circumstances back at gwick that was the reaction to a system reboot after nearly a 7h hour wait to check in for a North Atlantic flight. But probably not compensation as it'll count asextraordinary circumstances back in the UK as well as in the U.S. Aviation began to. recover but the knocked on impact was still being felt by passengers and staff. disruption on what was set to be the busiest day for UK flights since before the pandemic will take time to sort out. Katy Austin BBC News and just a reminder you can get all the latest on the Travel turmoil online and that's at bbc.co.uk newws well for the next few days. Click here to follow the latest travel news on Twitter @bbcnewspaper. Clickhere to follow CNN Travel on Facebook and Twitter @cnnnewspapers. Back to the page you came from. NHS it's GP practices in England and Northern Ireland that have been most affected. Doctors struggling to access their records and online bookings. Pharmacy Services have also been hit here's our health editor H Pim so I am at the minute doing life is usually hectic at GP practices. Click here to read the full report from the NHS about the problems facing GP practices across the UK and the Republic of Ireland. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. but a lot more so today most in England had no access to electronic patient records frustrating for doctors and patients. This has significant impact because actually the bulk of our workload we need access to people's blood results and people's notes and so there's a lot that we can't do. But we are making progress and hope to make a difference to the lives of people across the country in the coming years. We are committed to making a difference in the way we care for people in the UK. Do all we can really do is minor injuries and minor illness at some health centers only the sickest patients were being seen with other appointments cancelled. yeah tried to get an appointment today at the doctor for halfast 8 I was told unfortunately due to the systems being down. Do all we really can do isMinor injuries andMinor illness atSome health centers. Only the sicker patients werebeing seen. Other appointments cancelled because of the systems Being Down.do. Do you know a doctor who can help? Call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. Only written prescriptions are available with pharmacists warning patients the electronic system has failed anybody who's coming. There's no appointments available and to go to see the chemist I can't get my sick note um updated and unfortunately I was about to be sanctioned by the um Social Security office only written prescriptions is available.there's no appointment available and  to go to the chemist  I can't getting my sick notes updated and I was about to be sanctioned by the um social security office. in for their prescriptions we have to tell them to go away uh go to back to the surgery and then uh get a the oldfashioned fp10 which is the old green prescriptions and then get that signed off by the doctor really nice to meet you ministers are, says the minister of health and social care. The minister of social and health services says that the minister's job is to make sure that people get their prescriptions signed off and that they are given the correct dosage. The doctor then signs off the prescription and sends it off. The glitch has affected systems right across the world and is having a particular impact on GP practices and Pharmacy. We're working with colleagues across government to get things back up and working as quickly as possible hospitals say urgent and urgent and say they're working to fix it as soon as possible. The glitch is a genuine glitch that's affected systems all over the world. We are working to solve it as quickly and as easily as possible, and we're working on a number of fronts to get the system working again. Emergency Care has not been affected and if people have got appointments booked they should come in as normal. No one's denying that there has been an impact on some routine day-to-day activities at NHS trusts. Due to the global IT issues we're going to need to ccel back up and run emergency care as normal, says the NHS Trust's chief executive. But there will be a 'significant impact' on routine activities at some NHS trusts across the country, he says. He adds: 'There has been a significant impact on routine day to day activities' Some surgeries are postponing some patients and resorting to paper records. NHS England says phone systems are working and there are measures to manage the disruption. But services in Northern Ireland and England are still affected. GPS can only hope the problems are resolved quickly huim BBC. Your appointments are postponed while surgeries are postponed.your appointments are postponed while surgeries postpone some patients. Your appointment is delayed while surgeries delay some patients or use paper records to record your appointment. your appointments are delayed while surgery is postponed. your appointment is postponed while surgery uses paper records for records. News let's have a final word with our technology editor Zoe Kleinman and Zoe all this just goes to show how dependent we are on it and how vulnerable we are. I think it really highlights the fragility of our digital lives you know we're encouraged now to increasingly be on our computers and phones. We're encouraged to be more and more dependent on technology. We'll see you on the other side of the week at 10pm on CNN.com and Twitter @cnnireport. cashless we're encouraged to go online to get advice to buy things to make appointments and this Tech infrastructure that backs all of that up is essentially run by a handful of very large companies. What we're seeing now is that if something goes wrong the impact is really really big. We're seeing the impact of this in a very real way, and it's a very serious problem. It's not just a problem with the app, it's the way we use it and the way it's being used. uh vast and really wide ranging and even once a fix comes into place it still takes time doesn't it to get everything back together. There are some calls for people saying actually we shouldn't be so reliant on on a few big companies for everything while other people are. Some people are calling for people to not rely so much on big companies to do everything for them. Other people are saying that we should rely on other people to do things for us. It's a very strange world we live in. saying well actually if we have lots of smaller companies doing this stuff then are we leaving ourselves more open to uh vulnerabilities to weaknesses to attack so it is a real dilemma I think. Nobody has seen anything of this size you know I've been covering outages now. I think we're in for a treat. We're going to see a lot more of this in the coming months and years. I'm looking forward to it. It's going to be a really exciting time for us. for a long time and normally they're over before they start so to see something like this have such a huge Global impact I think is really going to um make people sit up and think. It certainly made people get cash out of the bank today put pen to paper and go out and buy something. It was a great day for me and I'm looking forward to the rest of my life. It's been a great start to my life and I hope it will be a great one for all of us. paper and do sort of some old-fashioned things I suppose that we haven't done for quite a while because we've had a choice no indeed thank you very much Zoe Kleinman there're our technology editor Zoe. Kleinman on BBC Radio 5 Live: Do you have a story to tell? Send it to us by emailing jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk and we'll feature it in next week's Daily Mail. For more, visit CNN.com/5Live.