There are five basic metals that are used in cookware. aluminum copper stainless steel cast iron and carbon steel aluminum pots and pans are the ubiquitous pans that you'll find in most every kitchen. In this module of tools and equipment we're going to explore cookware and storage wear there are fivebasic metals that is used in Cookware aluminum copper Stainless steel Cast iron and Carbon Steel Aluminium pots and pan are the universal pans that are found in most kitchens. In This module of Tools and Equipment we're Going to explore Cookware and Storage Wear. cheaper lightweight commonly used and conduct heat fairly well. They can have hot spots lose heat and just as fast as they gain it. They cannot be used with acidic food as acid in food will react with aluminum and cause a toxic reaction because of this. They are also not to be used in hot places as they can lose heat very quickly. They also can't be used on hot surfaces as they lose heat just as quickly as they regain it. The aluminum can be used to make a lighter version of the aircraft.  copper is one of the best conductors of heat it heats and cools rapidly whenever necessary and it's fairly heavy weight. If it is cheap or if it's thin it can have hot spots and you can't use it. They don't work well with induction cooktops because they're not ferromagnetic copper is a good conductor of heat and can be used in a variety of ways. If you are using an induction cooktop you will need to use a different type of cooktop. it with acidic foods just like the aluminum soft metal however it's also easily scratched it can be easily damaged what you see in the picture is a product that just came from the factory after about a year's worth of use it will not look like this and it will be much better after a few months of use. It's also easier to clean than the other two types of soft metal. It can also be easily scratched and damaged if it's left to dry out for too long. It will be better than other soft metal soft metals when it comes to cleaning. doesn't necessarily retain its heat very well stainless steel is the preferred cooking utensil for most kitchens it's heavy duty easy to clean surface typically clad which we'll discuss later. resists pitting and metal reactions with acidic foods works with induction cooktops and holds its heat well if clad however. We'll discuss how to use it in the next section of this article. The next section will focus on the use of induction cooktop with stainless steel utensils. The final section will look at how to work with induction ovens and induction range hoods. Cast iron has been preferred for many years. If seasoned correctly it can also be non-stick. It gives a unique flavor to foods and promotes browning better. It holds onto its heat very efficiently however it's somewhat fragile. It's much more expensive than the aluminum varieties of cast iron. It can be very heavy duty if seasoned correctly. However, it's very fragile and can burn very easily if not properly seasoned. It has a very high temperature and is very hard to work with. and if you drop it things like the handles and even the lids or even the pan itself can break it may require seasoning or re-seasoning before use. You should never soak this in water using soap and a mild abrasive like kosher salt works very well to clean. If you drop this it can require seasoning and re- seasoning before use and you should never soaking this inWater using soap. Ifyou drop it it can need seasoning and may require re-Seasoning before using. it dry thoroughly and lightly oil before putting away much like cast iron carbon steel is heavy duty if seasoned correctly can be non-stick. It'll provide a unique flavor to foods and promote browning better. It holds onto its heat very efficiently and is less fragile than cast iron. It's also more resistant to wear than other types of steel. It can be used in a variety of ways, such as as a frame or as a cookware. It is also used in the construction of aircrafts and warships. is relatively inexpensive the cons may require seasoning or re-seasoning before use and just like cast iron you should never soak in water and follow the same cleaning instructions. An amalgam of several different metals cladware sometimes referred to as allcloud because of its brand name is using different layers to create the look of the cast iron. It can take up to a year to fully use and may need to be re-searched or cleaned every few years. It is not recommended to use it with other cast ironware as it can be difficult to clean. in of metal including stainless steel copper and aluminum to be able to provide the benefits of each one of those metals with the durability and cleanliness of the stainless steel on the inside of the pan. The pros of this is using these levels you get the best of. each of the metals to get the most out of your pan. For more information on how to use these levels, or to order your own, visit www.samaritans.org or call 0203 909090. Non-stick coatings like teflon terracotta which is used in cooking things such as tangents glass such as corning ware enamel wear which is also used in things like crock pots and things. Additional cooking materials include things like non-stick Coatings like Teflon Teracotta. Non- stick coatings are used to make crockpots and other cooking things moresticky. The cons is it can be very expensive and can take a long time to develop. that are cast iron that have been coated with enamel and baked on in silicon in the case of sil pads or even in molds that are used in baking and pastry. A saltus also known as a skillet and a satwa also know as a sautepan are almost used. A satwa is a cast iron skillet that has been coated in enamel with a layer of silicon and baked in silicon. The saltus is also used in pastry and baking and is called a saltus. interchangeably in many ways but believe it or not though there is a difference between these two. Does it make a difference in your cooking if you use one instead of the other. A saute pan or satwa is one with the straight sides and has has straight sides. It is one of the most popular pans in the world and is used to make soups, stews, sauces and other dishes. It can also be used as a pan to make sauces and sauces for meat and fish. a larger surface area which makes it ideal for tasks like searing meat or reducing a pan sauce. We also like it because we're less likely to slosh things over the side a sawtooth or skillet has a slope side and is used mainly in sauteing the slope sides providing a larger surface Area. A sawtoooth or skillet is used to cook meat, vegetables and other foods in a pan with a large surface area. It is also used to saute the slope side of a skillet. The perfect angle for flipping your food or as it's referred to as saute or to jump a rondeau is a favorite staple in a chef's arsenal. This wide somewhat shallow pan is sometimes called a brazer or brazier. The ample and perfect angle to flip your food is also known as a saute. It's also known to be a favorite of chefs and home cooks as well. It should be in any home cooks and should be a staple in any kitchen. similar to a stockpot or dutch oven but not nearly as deep the pan has slight sides that are straight usually has two loop handles for easy carrying and nearly always comes with the lid. generally it is made of stainless steel copper or combination of clad metals. range of metals from stainless steel to copper and stainless steel or combination. of clad metal range of copper to stainless steel, stainless steel and copper. often comes with a lid, but sometimes comes with just the pan and a lid. The rondo's allure is its versatility its shape lends itself well to searing brazing oven roasting frying poaching pan roasting and simmering or boiling. This shape is deep enough to hold liquid for poaching or braising but shallow enough that it can evaporate to make a make a rondo.possibilities include part of the allure of the rondo is it's versatility. It's shape lends himself well to roasting oven roasted frying poaching Pan roasting. cooking liquid more intensely flavored when shopping for a rondo look for one with a heavy base which will conduct and retain heat well. You also want a tight fitting lid and an oven safe construction so you have the option to finish or even fully cook dishes in the rondo. The rondo can be used to make a variety of dishes including soups, stews, sauces and stews. For more information on how to make your own rondo, visit the Rondo Company's website. oven also make sure the pan is not too wide it should not be more than a couple of inches in diameter larger than your burner or it won't heat properly like stock pots or dutch ovens rondos come in a variety of sizes choose one that will accommodate the size of your oven and make sure it's not too big or you'll end up with a too small pan. For more information on how to make a rondo, visit www.rondos.com. number of servings you usually prepare a six quart or seven quart version should be sufficient for preparing four to six servings a saucepot is a cooking utensil that is round and shaped with high straight sides and a longer handle equipped for a tighter fitting lid a saucepan can be used to make up to seven servings. A saucepot can also be used for making up to four servings of a dish of meat, vegetables, fruit, vegetables or a variety of soups and stews. range in sizes to hold contents from one pint or in sizes up to four quarts they are made of materials such as stainless steel copper anodized aluminum glass and enameled steel or cast iron a saucepan has many uses including preparation processes such as boiling water or making sauces. A saucepan can be used to make sauces, soups, stews and other dishes. It can also be used as a measuring tool to measure the amount of water to be used in a dish. Saucerpans are similar to a saucier pan as both are used to perform similar tasks. Saucer pans provide easier access to stirring contents around the edges of the pan and a wider opening it is easier to make with wide arcs of the spoon spatula or whisk. Both pans work equally well for the preparation of sauces and various foods. choosing a saucepan or saucer pan is typical typically a personal preference as both pans are used for different tasks. In soups or for braising foods saucepans can be used to make sauces. stockpots are deep pots used for simmering stock and soups. They have long bodies and slope sides they're typically taller than they are wider. They come in various different sizes to accommodate various different stocks or soup sizes and can even have a spigot at the bottom for easy draining. They can be used to make stock, soups, stock pots or even stock pots for other types of stock or soups such as stock and stock cubes. They are also used to cook soups and stock pots. There are various different kinds of specialty pans including crepe pans which are shallow and thin and flat and used to make a crepe using the method of smoothing out the batter across the bottom roasting pans are used for roasting meats and vegetables they're heavy duty and can be used to roast vegetables and meats. There are also various different types of frying pans including frying pans, frying pans and frying pans for frying meat and vegetables. There is also a frying pan for frying fish and fish fillets.  paella pans are specialty pans from spain used to make a spanish dish called a paella. These pans can be used to accommodate multiple pieces in large quantities. Whole turkeys and whole cuts of meat can easily fit into these pans. They're often accompanied by a drain pan in the bottom of it to drain the food. They are also used to prepare a traditional Spanish dish known as a "paella" this is a dish made with rice, pasta, vegetables and meat. cooked rice dish usually with seafood and woks are used for cooking and chinese cooking and asian cooking. Woks are typically designed for a much higher much faster heat process [Music] one of the first steps in setting up your kitchen is choosing the right cookware cooking and cleanup are a big part of the job. The best way to start cooking is to start with a basic recipe and then work your way up. For more information on how to use woks in your kitchen, visit woks.com. a lot easier when you have the right pots and pans for each task though you don't have to purchase the most expensive brands. consider investing in a good quality set that will last let's take a look at some of their different uses. large stock pots are taller than large stock pans and are better for cooking large amounts of food at a time. Large stock pots can also be used to cook large quantities of food for a long period of time. They can be used for a number of different purposes including baking, cooking and cleaning. they are wide and have a capacity of at least eight quarts with two strong grab handles. We use these for cooking or boiling soups stews stocks and pasta. This pot is great when you need to feed a crowd or make large quantities of food like potatoes or corn. They are great for cooking soups, stews, pasta and other large amounts of food. They can also be used to make a large batch of soups or stews. They have two grab handles so you can use them to make large batches of soup. on the cob most sets of pots and pans also come with a smaller version which is a handy size for everyday cooking a small saucepan is really versatile you can use it for cooking smaller portions steaming or reheating when shopping for pots there are a few common features to look for when buying a new set of pots or pans. The most common features include: a smaller saucepan, a smaller pot and a smaller pan for cooking on the cob and a small pot for steaming and reheating. to look for these are stainless steel pots with thick bottoms they allow for even heating without scorching or burning. At the side here notice the handle look for a pot with a welded handle instead of one with rivets. A weldedHandle lasts longer and in any good pot than one with a rivets handle. This pot has a stainless steel bottoms and a thick stainless steel handle. It is made of stainless steel and has a thick Stainless Steel Handle. It has a Stainless Steel Bottom and a Thick Stainless steel Handle. quality set of pots you want tight fitting lids the lid helps bring things to a boil much faster which saves both time and energy when buying pots and pans pay attention to the handle i prefer a metal handle that way the pan can go from the stove top. You want a tight fitting pot lid you want to make sure it doesn't leak. You don't want a pot that is too big or too small. You also want a lid that fits over the top of the pan so that it can be easily removed from the pan. right into the oven just be sure to use a pot holder when you take it out now for saute pans commonly called frying pans. We have two non-stick pans here it's nice to have at least one large one this one is great for making about four or five. We also have a large non- stick pan that is great to use for making a large batch of soups and stews. It can be used to make three or four different types of sausages. pancakes in this smaller pan maybe two eggs again the metal handle is great for moving from the stovetop to the oven to cook omelets or frittatas. You should also have a good sized roasting pan this will hold about two maple leaf primed chickens a pan this size is a good size for roasting chickens. You can also use this pan to cook pancakes or other types of breakfast dishes such as omelet and omelettes or even pancakes and eggs. These are the basic pots and pans you need to get started in the kitchen. There are a lot more you could add but the best rule of thumb is quality over quantity. Make sure you invest in good quality pots. Also good for a roast or a turkey so these are thebasic pots and pan you need.also good for an evening meal or even a day in the garden. The basic pots are also good for cooking a roast and a turkey. They can be used to make a variety of dishes including soups, stews and sauces. Heavy duty polycarbonate food storage containers often referred to by the capacity in the trade name cambro. These containers are the workhorses of the restaurant kitchen and are some of the most common and useful storage containers in the world. They will last for years and can be used for a long period of time in a restaurant kitchen. They can also be used to store food in the home for up to 10 years. They are also used in a wide variety of other industries such as construction and manufacturing. kitchens they can store produce in the cooler liquids in the freezer and dry goods at room temperature. They are versatile enough to go from environment to environment. They come in round or rectangular designs ranging in size from 4 6 8 12 18 and 22 quarts and they often come in a round shape or rectangular design. They can be used in a variety of ways, from a kitchen to a dining room or even a living room. They often come with a range of cooking utensils such as pots, pans, cutlery and cutlers. come with matching or size lids to accommodate them. They wash well by either hand or dishwashing and can stand up to years of usage. Other food storage options include what is often referred to by polycarbonate's trade name lexan or by the company trade name cambro consists of large large food storage containers. They can be used to store food for up to a year or more. They are also used for storing wine, beer, spirits, and other alcoholic beverages, as well as other foods. food boxes they come in full and half sizes three and a half inch deep six inch deep and nine inch deep. They also have drain pans that can be used in conjunction to prevent water from draining product such as when icic fish ingredient bins come in a variety of sizes and shapes. They come in  full and half size 3 and half sizes 3 and-a half in deep and 6 inch deep. they also come in full and half sizes 3 and a half inch deep 6 inch deep and 9 inches deep. of different shapes and materials they are used to store dry items such as flour grains beans rice etc they are often on casters so they can move around in the kitchen bringing the food to the workstation and not the other way around. They are required to have lids to keep the food safe and dry. They can be used for a variety of purposes such as storing food in the freezer or in the pantry. For more information on how to use these lids, visit www.lids.com. Polycarbonate and stainless steel containers called hotel pans are designed to be used to store small amounts of ingredients on a refrigerated make table such as a sandwich station. Polycarbonate will not react with acids and foods like metal containers will and they will not get so cold as to damage the food. stainless steel will not reacts with most acid foods and are often used where the temperature needs to be kept very cold. metal is better conductor of cold than polycarbonate. they come in sizes ranging from small to large. from full size hotel pans two-thirds pans half pans third pans fourth pans six pans and ninth pans and various other sizes each size is available in six six inch four inch and two inch deep models. The name of the pan refers to how many of each would it take to equal a full size pan for example the nine it takes nine of the one-ninth pans or ninth pans to make one full-size hotel pan here you can see various different configurations depending on the usage needs many of the configurations require the use of a spanner bar. to prevent the pans from falling in [Music] if you want to get a job in a professional kitchen as a prep cook you have to first understand the basic terminology of some equipment in the kitchen. This is where all cooks and eventually chefs start off at. to prevent the pan from falling into the dishwasher. this is what the prep cook uses to make sure the pans don't fall out of the pan and into the sink. this. is how you use the pans to keep them in the sink when you are preparing a dish. will also help you if you're a home cook you just want to pick up some stuff at your local restaurant supply store. Hotel pans are defined by their depth so here we have a two inch hotel pan that has a two inches depth also called a 200. You have a four inch hotel pans which is a fourinch depth also known as a 400. Then you have the deepest hotel pan which is this the six inch or the 600 and these can be used for any meal. These can also be used to make sauces, soups and stews. number of things like brazing or holding food depends on the application that you want to use now you also notice that some four inch hotel pans will have a wider brim than others. These are used on buffet lines to hold a two inch hotel pan and you'll be able to use them for a variety of purposes. You'll also find that some hotel pans have a larger brim than other hotel pans and these are used to hold food on the buffet line. You will also find some hotel pan that have a smaller brim that others. notice that this two inch hotel pin will fit directly into this and it'll fit snugly. This is because you'll have water underneath in your four inch hotel pan that will be simmering. It will keep whatever product you have hot in your twoinch hotel pan and it will keep it hot in this pan. The pan will also keep the product hot in the two inch pan and the pan will keep the pan hot in its two inch size. This pan will be used to make a large pot of hot soup. you do this by using sternos and these sternos will go in those little indents on the bottom and you'll fit this whole thing into a stand. Now you also have perforated hotel pans which are basically hotel pans with holes in them and these can be used as steamers. These can also be used to make steamers out of the bottom of the stand. You can also use these to make a steam cooker out of a bed frame or a bed sheet. You also have a variety of other types of steamers you can use. you can use them to drain things in a steam steamer setup. You're going to place your perforated hotel pan into a larger hotel pan that has water underneath it that's simmering. There's a couple different lids you have a lid with a lid. You can also use the lid to cover the bottom of the pan when you're using it as a pan cover for a pan that's being used as a steamer. The lid can also be used to cover a pan when it's being cooked. no hole on the side that traps in steam and then you have a lid with a hole. on the sides that will allow a spoon to stick out. You'll commonly see this on either buffet lines or like half brows any restaurant that is executing off of a buffet line or half brow. No hole in the side of the lid that traps the steam and allows the spoon to sticking out. no hole on a side that trap the steam so that the spoon can stick out and then a hole that lets the spoon stick out on the other side. steam table now we also have service pans also called mise en place pans because this is where your mise in place will go all your prep for your line. They come in the two inch four inch and six inch depth and so here we have a sixth pan on the table. We also have a service pan for the kitchen. We have a six inch pan on our kitchen table now and a servicepan for the dining room. We've also got a sixth pans on the kitchen table for the living room. pan and it's called a sixth pan because you can fit six into a hotel pan the same with the nine pans or ninth pan. There are also half hotel pans which are simply just half the size of the hotel pan still coming in a two inch four inch and six inch depth. You also have these large sheet trays which are also called large sheet pans or large pan trays because they are so large. You can fit nine ninth pans into a Hotel pan and obviously same thing goes with a third pan. which can be used for any number of things roasting reheating baking whatever you want to use them for and then you also have half sheet trays which are literally half a sheet tray now before we go one last thing you'll normally see these roasting racks were just a roasting rack. They're just a way to get the most out of your roasting pans. We'll be back next week with a look at some of the other kitchen gadgets we've been using this week. rack insert for large sheet trays and this is good for resting meats anytime you want a product to be elevated above the pan so it's not sitting in its own juices now for more information including posting questions and comments for this episode head on over to stellacloney.com kp14. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @Stellaclone and @KP14Stella. Back To the page You came from: Stellaclose. Sip top bags often referred by their trade name ziploc are an indispensable storage device for kitchens. They allow the storage of dry goods and other small quantity items. They can be used in the freezer or refrigerator as easily as they can be in dry. For more information on how to use sip top bags, visit the Ziploc website. for the show notes visit the Ziploc website. For the full episode of The Sip Top Bag Show, visit http://www.ziploc.com/sip-top-bags.  sheet pans are necessary in the kitchen. They come in a variety of different sizes but most common sizes are the full size and half size. They can be used for storage organization baking and a number of other uses.storage and they can even be used in sous-vide cooking a plethora of sheet pans can be needed in a kitchen. For more information on how to use sheet pans in your kitchen visit www.cookingwithsheetpans.co.uk or go to Cooking with Sheet Pans.com. The speed rack is essential for storage and movement within the restaurant. It can fit full size and half size sheet pans readily. They can be left open wrapped with plastic for transportation and air protection or draped with a towel. The speed rack can also be used as a food storage container for different purposes. It has been used for a number of different dishes, including pizza, burgers, soups, salads and desserts. It is also used to store food in a variety of other ways, including ice cream, ice cream containers, ice cubes and even ice cubes. Not all cookie medals are identical cheap cookware often translates into cheaply made and burnt product. You want to pick cookware based on your budget but also your budget.specially designed shroud let's summarize and take and look at some of the takeaways for this lesson. Takeaway number one is not all cookie medal are identical. Takeaways number two is you want to choose cookware that is appropriate for your budget and your budget, as well as the product you are making it out of. by its intended use you don't necessarily need copper pans to saute most foods takeaway number three specialty cooking surfaces allow for more versatility in the cooking process and different results takeaway number four just like metals choosing the right pot or pan is essential for the job you should be doing and is essential to getting the best results from your cooking. For more information on how to buy a copper pan visit copperpan.co.uk or go to www.copperpan.com. For information on buying a specialty cooking surface, go to specialtycooking.com or call 1-800-273-8255. for more information about cooking on a specialty surface, visit the SpecialtyCookingShop.org. never use a rondo to simmer stock for a long time because evaporation will be more significant use a stockpot instead takeaway number five the right size storage bin is essential why store two quarts of stock in a 22 quart container it simply doesn't do the right job and never use a 22 quarts container for more than one quart of stock. Never store stock in the same container for longer than two weeks. Never use a 32 quart container to store more than two quart of stock for two months. it takes up too much room in your coolers and takeaway number six you can never have enough hotel pans no matter what size you have. This presentation will attempt to give an overview of the different small wares and pieces of equipment that you'll experience in a restaurant environment. It will also attempt to show you how to use the different types of hotel pans that are available to you in different sizes and sizes. It is intended to give you a basic idea of what hotel pans are and how to get the most out of them. however it's not an exhaustive list for more information i suggest ktom.com which can be accessed at the link on the screen. It's a good place to start if you want to find out more about your local football team. It can also be used as a starting point for a discussion about the game. For more information on the game go to www.nhs.org.uk/sport/football/index.html. For a list of all the football teams in the UK, go to http://www.sportstats.co.uk/. For more football news, visit Sportsmail's football page.