Professor Steven Smith: I want to begin today with concluding Aristotle, part three. Before I do, however, could I just ask the people--yes, thank you so much. And your neighbor, too? Would you mind? Thank you somuch. Just out of respect to Mr. Aristotle. It's mister to you. I I I. I am Professor Steven Smith of the University of California, Los Angeles. We are happy to have you with us for the rest of the day. want to talk today about Aristotle's discovery of America. This will probably come as a surprise to some of you that Aristotle discovered America, but I will get to that in a minute. In many ways for Aristotle, as it is for every student of politics, the most serious, the discovery is crucial to understanding the history of the United States. For more, go to CNN.com/Heroes and follow us on Twitter @cnnheroes and @jennifer_newton. most difficult issue one confronts is the problem of faction. How to control for conflict between factions. That is the issue addressed especially in Books IV and V of the Politics. Aristotle goes on to describe by the term polity, the regime that he he he describes in the Politics, as a regime that must be controlled by the people. He describes the polity as the regime which must be ruled by the majority of the people, not by a minority of the minority, as in the Middle Ages. believes most successfully controls for the theme of faction. The essential feature of this regime, the polity, which in fact he gives the name politea, the generic Greek word for regime. The polity is the regime that represents, for Aristotle, a mixture of the principles of oligarchy and democracy. Therefore, therefore, the regime is called politea or the regime of politea. This is the name Aristotle gave to the regime he believed was the most successful in controlling faction. he says, avoids dominance by either extreme. By combining elements, as it were, of the few and the many, polity is characterized by the dominance of the middle class. The middle class, he says, is able to achieve the confidence of both extreme parties where at least at least some of them are in favor of a middle-class solution. He says: "The middle class is the key to the future of the country" and that it must be represented by a middle class that is confident. it is sufficiently numerous to avoid the problems of class struggle and factional conflict. "Where the middling element is great," Aristotle writes, "factional conflict and splits over the nature of regimes occur least of all" So Aristotle, in a way, has discovered long before James Madison's famous article in Federalist. The Federalist was written by James Madison and published in 1787. It was the first article in the Federalist to mention the term "class struggle" in the context of a political dispute. Number 10, the remedy for the control and containment, so to speak, of faction. You remember, many if not all of you who have read the Tenth Federalist Paper, that Madison outlines a scheme for an extended republic, he says, where numerous factions, in many ways, check and check and balance each other. That's number 10. It's part of the plan for a republic where factions check each other and balance out each other, and where the people have a say in what happens. balance one another, compete with one another and therefore, avoid the dominance of a single faction leading to the tyranny of the majority. Aristotle's proposal for a mixture of oligarchy and democracy seems, in many ways, to anticipate, 2,000 years before the rise of the U.S. government in the early 20th century. The U.N. General Assembly is set to meet in New York on January 25 and 26, 2015. The event will mark the 100th anniversary of the founding of the United States. fact, Madison's call for a government where powers must be separated and where, he says in Federalist Number 51, ambition must be made to counteract ambition in order to avoid, in other words, the extremes of both tyranny and civil war. The inevitable conclusion that I reach and I believe, is that the U.S. is headed for civil war if we don't make a change in the way we run our government. I believe this is the inevitable conclusion, and it is what Madison would have wanted. any sensible reader of Aristotle would reach is that Aristotle, in fact, discovered the American Constitution 1,500 or 2,000 years before it was written. This may seem surprising to you, since of course Aristotle lived long before. But that may simply be our own prejudice to think that my friend at the CUNY Graduate Center, Peter Simpson, has argued in a paper that I found quite convincing. I say, it may be our prejudice that he didn't. Aristotle writes, in Book II of the Politics that the world is eternal. and everything in it has been discovered. The earth experiences, he says, certain periodic destructions and cataclysms, civilizations are reduced to barbarism only to recover and grow again. If this theory, you might say, of sort of cataclysmic change is true, we cannot rule out the possibility that a constitution may have been created by the end of the last century. And if that is the case, the world could be in for a very long time to come. And that would be a very exciting time. like ours or even identical to ours existed at some point in the ancient past, in the far distant past that Aristotle knew about. Do you think that's possible? Well, why not? But Aristotle's mixed constitution differs from ours still in certain important respects. Aristotle understands the mixed constitution as being as similar to ours as it is different from ours in some respects. But he doesn't understand it as being the same as ours in other respects. He doesn't think it's possible to have a mixed constitution like ours. a balance of classes--the one, the few, and the many. He doesn't so much insist, as you will see in your reading, on the actual separation of functions of government, putting them into separate hands. It is enough for him, he says, if each class shares in some aspect of the government. It's not enough for each class to be in charge of all the government functions, but to share some of them with the others. He says it's enough for them to be part of each other's government. We tend to think of the separation of powers doctrine as necessary for the security and liberty of the individual. But that leads to a further difference. We usually think of individual freedom and security as the purpose of separation of power. But it is the governing power. It is the power of the state to decide who is free and who is not. And it is that power that is the problem in this case. It's the power to control the media and the internet, not the other way around. when political functions become concentrated into the hands of, again, the too few hands that we risk arbitrary government. But for Aristotle, it is not the liberty of the individual so much as the functioning or functional well-being of the city. It's not the individual's liberty that is at risk, it's the city's functioning orfunctional well- being that's at risk. That's the real threat to the individual, not the political power of a few people in a handful of hands. that is the highest priority. Individual freedom may be, at best, a desirable byproduct of the Aristotelian mixed regime, but individual freedom is not its defining or principle goal. For anyone interested in this difference, I suggest you contrast or compare Aristotle's account of mixed government to Book XI of the Book of the Law of the Romans. That is the only book in the Bible that gives a clear picture of what mixed government would look like in a democracy. It is the book of the Laws of the Republic, not the Bible of the World. Montesquieu's Spirit of the Laws or to some of the central Federalist papers to see the way in which Mr. Aristotle revised, in some ways, the wisdom of Madison. You could compare them in some way that I think would be valuable. Not only did Aristotle understand the importance of Madison, but he also saw the value of the Federalist Papers as well. It's a very interesting time to be alive, I think, and I'm looking forward to seeing what the future holds. the separation of powers doctrine and the kind of balance of factions as a way of controlling conflict and struggle. But he also understood the importance of property and private property and commerce for a flourishing republic. We didn't really pause to talk much about this, but in Book II, in Book III, we talk about the role of property in a republic. It's a very important part of the history of the U.S. and of the American Revolution. It was very important to him. Aristotle claims that the city is not naturally one. Where all property is held in common, it is more likely to suffer from common neglect than it is from common ownership. He clearly understands, in many ways, the virtues of private property and of commerce. It is evident, Aristotle writes, that as it becomes a city, it becomes more and more like a large town or village. It's evident that a certain diversity is necessary to make up a city. That is to say, a city needs to be diverse. increasingly one, as it becomes increasingly unified--the city--it will no longer be a city. A city is, in its nature, a multitude. As it becomes more of a unity, it will be like a household instead of a polis and a human being instead of the household. There we see the difference between a city and a household, and how it will change as the city becomes more unified. It will become more like a house, rather than a city, and a city will become a household. The aim of the city is not wealth, is not the production of wealth, says Aristotle. Despite his awareness of the importance of commerce and property, he tells us, the aim of a city is to unite the people. The aim of cities is to unify the people, not to produce wealth, he says, and this is the goal of a great city. In Book II, Aristotle offers his criticism of the claims for the sort of excessive unification of centralization, concentration of property. Aristotle would have been critical of the American tendency to regard government as for the sake of business. Wealth, property, he tells us, exists for the. sake of virtue, not virtue for the purposes of wealth. If wealth were the purpose of politics, Aristotle writes, the Phoenicians, you might say, in the ancient world, would be the best regime. But he denies that. Aristotle could never endorse the view stated by a famous American president that the business of America is business. to organize into clubs, what we call political parties which exacerbate rather than control political conflict. These political clubs or parties use their influence to incense the populous, using their power to whip up dangerous passions that tend to make U.S. politicians closer to demagogues than to statesmen. He would say that he would rather see the U.K. go to war with Russia than with the EU, and he would prefer to see the world go to War with Russia rather than to the EU. also regard the peculiar American practice of elections, rather than the Greek practice of appointing political offices by lot. He would regard elections as merely exacerbating the tendency to demagoguery, where each person seeking office plays shamelessly to the mob, promising all manner of things that they know they will do to the public. The U.S. has a more democratic system of elections than Greece, which has a system of electing political leaders by lot, he says. The American system of election is more democratic than that of the Greek system. not and cannot deliver. Think of almost anybody you like. Furthermore, while the U.S. regime in many ways is, in principle, open to all and prides itself on a belief in equality, no doubt Aristotle would remark that its offices are, in fact, open only to the rich and to the wealthy. Think of almost anybody you like. think of almost anybody who you like. think of almost anyone you want. leaders who can acquire the support of the rich, making it rather an oligarchy in the guise of a republic. So Aristotle was not without his own critique of the American constitution and American political culture. There is, obviously, much in the American regime that Aristotle would have found admirable, he says. But he adds that there is also much in it that he would have called into question, including the role of the military and the media in the political life of the U.S. even though it does not conform to his idea of the best regime, which is the subject of the last two books of the Politics, Book VII and VIII. Aristotle is very sketchy here about the structure, the institutional structure and the make-up of thebest regime. But he acknowledges the bestregime is one where the best men rule. That is to say, it is a kind of aristocracy or an aristocratic republic. I want to talk about this regime a little bit now, what Aristotle understands to be the requirements or the fulfillments, the necessities, of this aristocrats republic. parts of the Politics, Aristotle offers a serious challenge to existing Greek traditions and patterns of political education. Every bit, in many ways, is far reaching as Plato's Republic. In the first place, he tells us the purpose of the best regime. The purpose of Aristotle's Republic is directed not at the people, but at the cause of the problem, the problem of the nation, the nation-state, and the world. It is a challenge to the way we think about government, politics, and society. to war, but in fact to peace. The citizen of the best regime, he says, must be able to sustain war if duty requires, but only for the sake of peace and leisure. Again, a critique not only of Sparta, but also of Athens and its imperialistic ambitions. Second, Aristotle says that a person can only be a good citizen if he is able to make a difference in the lives of his fellow citizens, not just for his own benefit. He says that if he can do this, he can be a better citizen than a bad one. understands the purpose of leisure when he says the end of the regime is peace. He doesn't understand by leisure simply relaxation, enjoying your private moments. Leisure does not simply mean rest or inactivity, but leisure is necessary for rest and inactivity. The purpose of peace is leisure, he says, and leisure is the way to achieve it. He adds: "Leisure is the key to peace and it is the only way to get it. It's not just about relaxing, it's about enjoying your vacation time" education or what he sometimes calls by the term philosophy. By philosophy, he seems to suggest not so much the capacity for abstract or speculative thought, but rather a kind of liberal education that he regards to be the preserve of what he calls the megalopsychos, literally, "the megalomaniacal" He regards liberal education as a form of education that can be applied to all areas of life, not just the arts and sciences. He calls this education "the liberal education" or the "megalomniacal education" the great-souled person or the great-Souled man. Mega, megalo, being our terms for great and psychos, related to our word psyche, soul. The gentleman is, in many ways, for Aristotle, the ideal recipient of this form of education, of liberal education and also, in Aristotle's time, of classical education. The great- souledperson is a person who has a great deal of self-control and self-reliance. some respect, the ideal or perfect audience or readership of the book itself. We can begin to see it is clear how Aristotle's best regime differs from Plato's intransigent demand for the rule of philosopher-kings. The megalopsychos, the gentleman, whatever else he is, is not a philosopher in the strict strict sense of the word. He is a man, not a person, and he is not entitled to the same treatment as a philosopher. He should be treated as a man. Aristotle makes clear that the megalopsychos, unlike the philosopher, is a person of some inherited wealth, chiefly landed property. He will be a member of what we might call the urban patriciate. In the Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle provides us with a sense of the city's place in the world, says Andrew Keen. He says: "The city's role in society is to make sure that people live in a way that is urban, not rural" a vivid list of the psychological and even physical characteristics that such a person must possess, this megalopsychos. Such a person, he says, exhibits a sort of lofty detachment to the more or less petty things that weigh most of us down. Aristotle tells us he is slow to act, and he has a high sense of right and wrong. He also has a great sense of humor, and a sense of humour that is not to be trifled with. He has a long memory, and his memory is very good. unless something of great importance is at stake. He repays favor with interest so as not to be under any obligations to others. The gentleman, he says, speaks his mind without fear or favor, somewhat like the New York Times, because to dissemble would be beneath him. He may occasionally occasionally speak his mind, but not in a way that would be seen as disloyal to his country or his countrymen. He is a man of his word, not of his country, and he is not afraid to say what he thinks. hurt others, but this is not done out of deliberate cruelty. Such a person will possess beautiful but useless things, suggesting the possession not only of wealth, but of a kind of cultivated aesthetic sense. As if that weren't enough, Aristotle tells us that the person will also have a good sense of humor, and a sense of humour about the world. The author is the author of "Aristotle: A Biography," published by Thames & Hudson, priced £16.99. For more, go to www.theatlantic.com. megalopsychos walks slowly, because to hurry is undignified, is tall and speaks with a deep voice. Very clear about who, again, the ideal statesman or reader, potential statesman the reader of this book would be. Most importantly, you might say, what distinguishes the gentleman as a class from the philosophers from the philosopher. The gentleman is tall, he walks slowly and he is tall. He is a gentleman, not a philosopher. He walks slowly. He does not hurry. He speaks slowly, he does not rush. is a certain kind of knowledge or practical intelligence. The gentleman may lack the speculative intelligence of a Socrates, but he will possess that quality of practical rationality, of practical judgment necessary for the administration of affairs. Aristotle calls this type of knowledge, this kind of practical judgement, he calls practical rationality. It is a quality of knowledge that can only be acquired through experience. It can only only be gained through experience and experience alone. It cannot be acquired by means of speculation. It only can be gained by experience and practice. it by the term phronimos, that I have on the blackboard. The person who possesses it is the phronicos, a person of practical judgment. It is the person who is able to grasp the fitting or the appropriate, the appropriate thing to do out of the complex arrangements that make up any situation. Above all, such a person embodies that special quality of insight and insight and understanding. It's a term that captures something of our meaning of common sense, practical wisdom, the capacity for judging. discrimination that distinguishes him or her from people, again, of more theoretical or speculative cast of mind. How is this quality of phronimos, of judgment, of practical wisdom, of horse sense, how is it acquired? Aristotle tells us that this kind of knowledge is a kind ofknowledge most appropriate to a person of the horse sense. He says it is a quality of knowledge that is most appropriate for a man of the Horse sense. It is not a quality that can only be acquired through experience. to politics. It is neither the theoretic knowledge aimed simply at abstract truths, nor is it the productive knowledge used in the manufacture of useful artifacts. What is it, then? It is the knowledge used to make useful artifacts, he says. It's the knowledge of politics, he adds, and it's the politics of politics. He says, "It is the political knowledge of the political mind, not the political theory of the politics." It's not just theory, it's also the theory of political theory, he argues. knowledge of how to act where the purpose of action is acting well. You might say it is less a body of true propositions than a shrewd sense of know-how or political savvy. This kind of knowledge entails judgment and deliberation, the deliberative skill or the deliberations art. We only know what to do if we know how to do it, and we can only do it if we have the skill and knowledge to do so. We can only act when we know the right way to act. deliberate, Aristotle says, over things where there is some choice. We deliberate with an eye to preservation or change, to making something better or to preserve it from becoming worse. This kind of knowledge will be the art or craft of the statesman concerned above all with what to do, says the philosopher. He adds: 'This is the art and craft of a statesman. It is not the art of a politician, but of a man who knows how to do it' in a specific situation. It is the skill possessed by the greatest statesmen, you might say, the fathers of the constitutions, as it were, who create the permanent framework in which allows later and lesser figures to handle change. This is the kind of political skill and wisdom, again, possessed by great statesmen. It's a skill that can only be possessed by those who have been there for a long time and know how to deal with the situation they find themselves in. of the founders of cities, the legislative founders of regimes. Aristotle's Politics is a book about the kind of knowledge requisite for that kind of skill. This quality of practical judgment phronimos, practical wisdom, was developed, I think, in a beautiful essay, without any explicit reference to Aristotle, by the writer. It was developed by the author, who was not a member of the Aristotelian family. It is a quality of wisdom that is very rare in our time. English political philosopher Isaiah Berlin. Famous, famous English philosopher, died a number of years ago in the late ‘90s. This, I hope, will be an inspiration to--you should read Isaiah Berlin, I think. In any case, he wrote a wonderful essay, and I hope this will inspire you to read it. I think it will be a great inspiration to you, too. I hope it will help you understand the world a little better. I'm looking forward to hearing from you. called Political Judgment. In it he asks, "What is the intellectual quality that successful statesmen possess that distinguishes their knowledge from all other forms of rationality and knowledge?" I'm going to quote him. "The quality that I am attempting to describe is that special understanding of Political Judgment," he says. He goes on to say that the quality is that it is possible to be both rational and moral at the same time. The quality is called "political judgment" and can be found in the Bible, the Koran, and other texts. public life, which successful statesmen have, whether they are wicked or virtuous. That which Bismark had or Talleyrand or Franklin Roosevelt or, for that matter, men such as Cavour or Disraeli, Gladstone or Ataturk in common with the great psychological novelists. This is something which is conspicuously lacking in men of. public life, and something which has to do with the nature of the human mind. It is a quality which can only be found in those who have had it for a long time. more purely theoretical genius, such as Newton or Einstein or Bertrand Russell or even Freud. So there, too, like Aristotle, he distinguishes a kind of practical skill possessed by the greatest minds, political minds at least, and says it's quite different from what he calls the great psychological novelists, he says. He distinguishes between political genius and political genius. He says it is a different skill from that possessed by great political minds and great political novelists at least. He calls it a practical skill, not a purely theoretical skill. from that possessed of the greatest philosophers and scientists. "What are we to call this capacity?" Berlin continues. "Practical reason, perhaps is a sense of what will work and what will not. It is a capacity for synthesis rather than analysis, for knowledge in the sense of synthesis" "What is practical reason?" you ask? "It is a Capacity for synthesis," he says. "It's a capacity to know what will happen and what won't happen." "What do we call it?" he asks. "I don't know." sense in which trainers know their animals or parents their children or conductors their orchestras, as opposed to that in which chemists know the contents of their test tubes or mathematicians know the rules their symbols obey. Those who lack this quality of practical wisdom, whatever other qualities they may have, are not wise enough to live in the 21st century. They are doomed to repeat the mistakes of the past and fail to learn from the lessons of the present and the future. They will not be able to cope with the challenges of the modern world. possess, no matter how clever, learned, imaginative, kind, noble, attractive, gifted in other ways they may be, are correctly regarded as politically inept. There, Berlin tells us something about the character of this political knowledge that Aristotle describes as phronimos. Again, how is this knowledge acquired? Are we just born? Or do we have to be born with political knowledge? Or are there other ways of acquiring political knowledge, such as through experience, or through education? with it? Do some people just have it or is it a product of experience? Aristotle doesn't say, but I think the answer is clearly some of both. It is a quality, as I agree with Berlin, possessed by some of the great psychological novelists. I mention the names of some of them in the book. It's a quality that can be found in some of our greatest novelists, such as J.K. Rowling and Philip Pullman, for example. Tolstoy, Henry James, and perhaps the greatest of all, Jane Austen, if you want to know a novelist who employs this great skill of judgment, discrimination and practical reason. It is also a virtue of great statesmen. Principally, Berlin mentions Bismark, Disraeli, Franklin Roosevelt. I would also add the names of Tolstoy and James, as well as many other greats. It's a virtue that should not be lost in the modern age. of Pericles, Lincoln, and Churchill. Read their works. Study their histories. They provide a virtual education in statecraft, in how to negotiate affairs in precisely the way Aristotle would have us do. That leads me to the larger question, you might say, which is posed throughout Aristotle's work as a leader. What is the role of a leader in the 21st century? What role does a leader play in today's world? What does it mean to be a leader today? What does Aristotle mean by the political? What is the goal or purpose of the study of politics? And what is distinctive about Aristotle's approach to theStudy of political things? Today, the term "political science" stands for one among a number of different disciplines that we call collectively the social sciences. This not only includes political science, but economics, sociology, anthropology, psychology, among others. Each of these disciplines has its own unique way of looking at the world of politics and politics. these disciplines seeks to give us a handle on a distinctive set of human actions and interactions. Economics deals with the transactions involving the production and distribution of wealth, sociology with the transaction governing status and class, anthropology with the domain of culture, and so on. What is it that makes up a person? What makes a person different from another? What does it mean to be different from someone else? What is the difference between a person and a person of a different race, gender, or sexual orientation? political science studies and what is its relation to the other disciplines. The core of political science, at least according to Aristotle and to this degree I'm very much an Aristotelian, what distinguishes it from all other studies is the concept of the regime, of the politea. The regime, for example, is the regime of the state, the state of the nation, the nation of the people, and the regime is called the politico-rhetoric, or the regime. him, is not one branch of human activity among others, it is the fundamental principle or ordering principle that makes all the others even possible. This is why Aristotle does not regard the study of politics as one social science among others. It is rather what he calls the master science that determines the rank and place of all the other within the polity. His study of the regime, that is to say the underlying constitutional principles that govern each order is what distinguishes Aristotle from the other social scientists. the regime that I think is what distinguishes his kind of political science from that of today. Today, you might say political scientists and social scientists, they're more modest in ascribing priority to any particular branch of knowledge. With, I should say, the possible exception of the economists, who often often ascribe priority to one particular area of knowledge, that's what I'm talking about. I'm not saying that all political scientists are like that, but that's the way they are. Aristotle would deny that economic motives and transactions provide the key to all possible human behaviors. For Aristotle, however, politics has a priority to all the others, because as he has argued, man is the political animal. To be a political animal is to be a politician, he says, and politics is the only way to get there. For more on this story, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter @cnnlifestyle. animal means first to possess speech or reason that allows us to participate in a community or a way of life governed by shared standards of justice and injustice. Aristotle's political science presupposes, in other words, a certain conception of human beings as linguistic animals who are capable not only of speech and reason, but also of reason and action. "Aristotle's Political Science presupposes a certain notion of human being as linguistic animal," says the philosopher's biographer, David Frum. "We are capable of speech, but not of reason," adds Frum, "and not of action." of living together--so do a range of other species--but rather sharing in the arrangements of rule. It is our logos, our reason that makes a community possible and also expresses or creates, you could say, a certain latitude or indeterminacy in how our behavior distinguishes us from other species. It's our logos that makes our community possible, and it's our reason for living in a community. It. is our reason, and our reason is what makes us human, and that's why we live in communities. is precisely, he believes, this latitude that makes political communities not only sites of agreement over shared standards, but also sites of moral contestation over justice and injustice. Politics is about conflict and conflicts over justice. To be a political animal, for him, is to engage or engage or to engage with or to fight for the cause of justice and equality. He says: 'To be a politician is to be a human being who fights for what is right and just' He adds: 'Politics is not just about agreement, it is about contestation and conflict' to be engaged in this ongoing conversation and debate over the very nature of justice, to refuse to participate in that conversation, is either to be below humanity or above it. To be human is to be part of that conversation. To refuse that conversation is to declare oneself an outsider to it, he says, and to do so is not to be a human being at all, but to be above humanity or below it. He says this is not a choice, it is a duty to engage in the conversation. The centrality Aristotle ascribes to politics forces us to consider another question, namely what is the purpose of this study? Why do we engage in it? At first glance, this seems to be overwhelmingly obvious--to gain more knowledge. But knowledge of what and for what? Most people today are attracted to politics because they think they can gain more information. We need to ask ourselves if we are interested in gaining more knowledge, or are we interested in learning more about the world around us. to the study of politics because they are interested in things they've read about in newspapers or seen on TV. Things like elections, political leaders and parties, different causes to which they may feel some attraction, interested in wars and revolutions that they see or have heard about. It is a way of getting involved in the world of politics. It's not a way to get involved in politics, it's a tool to help you understand it. It doesn't mean you have to agree with everything that's being said. to learn more about these things that we come to the study of politics. It's as true now as it was in the time of Aristotle. Aristotle certainly recognized that the accumulation of political knowledge, you might say the gathering of data, the organization of facts is very important. Books III, IV, V of the Politics shows the empirical side of Aristotle's politics. What is this knowledge for? What does Aristotle intend to do with it? Politics, political science, he tells us in the Ethics again, is not a theoretical subject in the matter of physics or metaphysics or mathematics. That is to say, its purpose is not knowledge for its own sake. However important the study of politics may be, it exists not for the sake of knowledge, but for action. As he tells us, as he says, 'I am not a man of words, I am a person of action' He adds: 'I do not want to be known for my knowledge. I want to know what I am doing.' for praxis, is his word for action. Political science exists for the sake of the human good and the opening sentence of the Politics confirms this. All action, all human behavior is aimed at achieving some apparent good, he says. He says, we see, everyone does everything for the purposes of some apparentGood. The Politics is published by Simon & Schuster, a division of Simon &Schuster, on behalf of the British Academy of Political Science. For more information, visit www.theguardian.co.uk. type of good, is all aimed at action. When we act, we seek to preserve or to change. All political action, you might say, is guided by the idea of better or worse. It implies a standard of better and worse and all political action aims at preservation or change. It is not a question of 'better or worse' but of 'what is best for the country?' It is a matter of 'best or worst' and 'how best to get the best out of the country' this implies some idea of the good by which we judge. So it follows, at least Aristotle believes so, that the study of politics is not, again, for the sake of knowledge for its own sake, but knowledge that serves the regime. It helps to make it better or prevent, as it did in Aristotle's time. It is not knowledge for itself, but for the benefit of the regime, which is why it is called politics. This is the way it was used by the ancient Greeks. it from becoming worse. Its goal is not just to know more, but to know how and this requires not only theoretic acumen, but political judgment and the kind of practical knowledge that Aristotle discusses at length. This quality of practical judgment and reflection is, again, somehow unique to the modern age. It is a quality that is not found in any other culture. It's a quality of reflection that is unique to modern culture. This is not something that can be found in other cultures. It can't be found anywhere else. political art or the political skill Aristotle tells us. It is the ability not only to keep the ship of state afloat, but allows the greatest statesmen to guide the ship, to steer it safely to port. That is to say, the kind of knowledge needed by the statesmen. Aristotle's Aristotle's political art is to be found in the works of Plato, Aristotle, Aristotle and others, and can be found at: http://www.theguardian.co.uk/magazines/2013/01/29/the-politics-art-and-the-political-skill-of Aristotle. political science, then, is ultimately the supreme science of statecraft. Statecraft or statesmanship is regarded perhaps by today's political science as too value laden, too subjective to speak of. This, too again, is a word that carries distinctive and statecraft is a term that again we don't hear much about--statecraft or statemanship. It's a word with distinctive and unique meaning. It is a statecraft word. It means statecraft, statemanship, statecraft and statesmanship. The word statecraft has its own meaning and history. strong connotations. What are the attributes of the statesman? I've spoken a little about the attributes that Aristotle believes are essential to the megalopsychos. This will be quite different, for example, from the qualities we will see beginning on Friday and Saturday. This is the first of a two-part series on the state of the nation. The second part of the series will be broadcast on Sunday at 8.30pm on BBC One and 11.30am on BBC Two. next week that Machiavelli and later Hobbes or Locke, believe are necessary for the great founders or statesmen. Plato and Aristotle give their own vision--the philosopher-king, the great-souled man or megalopsychos. But the statesman, again, to the highest degree is the founder of regimes, laws, and institutions. They provide the inspiration and inspiration for the founders, and the inspiration for their regimes, law, and Institutions. The statesman provides the inspiration, inspiration, and motivation for the founder, and for his regimes. constitutional framework within which we, later figures, operate. So if Aristotle's political science is an education for statesmanship, you might say what are its methods? What are its distinctive methods? How do we educate a statesman? HowDo we educate potential statesmen? What is its methods?" This is a question Aristotle would like to answer. He would like us to know his methods for educating statesmen. We would like him to answer this question for us. We want to know what his methods are for teaching statesmanship. asked, you might say, of every mature science. It is possession of a method that distinguishes a mature science from simply a jumble of facts, hearsay, inspired guesses, or a random collection of insights and observations. Without a distinctive method for obtaining and organizing knowledge, we are all just groping, says Dr. Paul Waldman of the University of California, Los Angeles. He says that without a distinctive way to obtain and organize knowledge, "we are alljust groping" in the dark. So what is the distinctive method of Aristotle's Politics? To some degree, Aristotle refuses to play the methodologist's game. In a well-known passage from the Ethics, he says that our discussion will be adequate if it achieves clarity within the limits of its subject. If it achieves this, it is said, it will be sufficient to talk about the subject at hand. But if it does not, then it is not sufficient to discuss the subject. And so on and so on. clarity within the limits of its subject. In other words, he seems to be saying it is wrong to demand methodological purity in a subject like politics where there is always great variety and unpredictability. It is the mark, he says, of an educated person, presumably a liberally educated person. He says it is also the mark of a person who has been educated in a certain way. It's a sign that you have been educated, he adds, in a way that is not always the case. not to demand more precision than the subject matter allows. But that formulation seems, in many ways, to be question begging. How much precision does the subject allow? How do we know? There will always, he suggests, appear to be something ad hoc about the methods used in the study. He suggests that there will always be an ad hoc way of looking at a study that makes it look like it was done in a certain way. But he says that is not always the case. of politics. We will have to let the method fit the subject, rather than demanding the subject matter fit a kind of apriori method. To insist on that kind of methodological purity, he implies, would be to impose a false sense of unity, afalse sense of certainty or absoluteness. He implies that to insist on this kind of purity would be a falsesense of unity and absolutism, and that it would lead to false certainty and certainty. It would also lead to a false notion of unity. on the study of politics, which is variable and contingent and always subject to flux and change. He lays out a set of common questions that political scientists have to address. Even while Aristotle may deny that there is a single method appropriate to the study, he proposes a common set of questions that all political scientists must address. The questions are: What is the nature of politics? What is its nature? How do we understand it? What are the consequences of our actions? What do we do about it? these questions at the very beginning of the fourth book of the Politics. He lists four such questions. The political scientist, he says, must have a grasp of the best regime, given the most favorable circumstances. Second, he tells us, the political scientist must consider what kind of regime will be best under less than optimal circumstances. Third, he must have some knowledge of how to render any regime, no matter how imperfect it may be, more stable and coherent. Finally, thepolitical scientist must know something about the techniques of reform and persuasion. the area of political rhetoric by which existing regimes can be brought closer to the best. Taken together, these four questions are intended to guide inquiry, to shape and direct inquiry. They are not intended to yield sure or certain results, but to guide and inform statesmen and citizens in the world. The questions are not meant to yield certain answers, but rather to inform and inform citizens and statesmen in their own countries about the best ways to approach the world's problems. The answers to the questions are meant to guide, shape, direct and inform inquiry. the business of decision-making. Bearing in mind that political science is a practical science, a science of judgment, it is a science aimed at directing action under specific circumstances and situations. It is important, Aristotle finally suggests, that the language of political science express the common sense or ordinary language of the political world. The language ofpolitical science should be that of common sense, common judgment, common sense and common sense itself, he says. The use of the word 'common sense' in political science should not be taken out of context, he adds. There is virtually no jargon in Aristotle's Politics. Aristotle's political science stays entirely within the orbit of ordinary speech. Such language does not claim to be scientifically purged of ambiguity, but rather adopts standards of proof appropriate to people in debates and assemblies, in courts of law, in council. Actors.actors.com: Do you know the author of this article? If so, please email stephanie.smith@mailonline.co.uk or call 0203 615 4157. The language of Aristotelian political science is the language of man, the political animal. You will never hear him speaking in terms of dependent or independent variables. He will never use technical jargon, artificially imported into the science of politics or the study of politics.rooms and the like. The language of politics is that of man. It is not about politics, it is about politics. It's about the human condition. It doesn't matter if you're a politician or not, it's the same thing. You're a human being. politics from the outside. What most distinguishes Aristotle is that his language is addressed emphatically to citizens and statesmen, not to other political scientists or philosophers. It has a public orientation. It is publicly directed. And it is public spirited. Contrast that with today's today's politics, which is concerned with the common good. It's a very, very different world. It doesn't have the same public orientation and it's not public spirited, it's public-spirited. And that's a big difference. political science. Today, it seems, political scientists are more concerned with advancing the abstract truths of science. Modern political science, in many ways, claims to stand above or apart from the regime, as if it were viewing human affairs from a distant planet. Aristotle takes his stand from within politics and the regime of which he is a part. Of course, we all know contemporary political Scientists are not neutral. They frequently insert their own views into the debate. They often claim to be objective, to be disinterested. views, values we call them, value judgments we call it. They insert them into their discussions. These values are regarded by them as purely subjective, again, their own value judgment so to speak, and not strictly speaking a part of the science of politics. But we all know, do we, that they do? We all know that we all do, don't we? We're all guilty of it, aren't we, of course? We are all guilty. We all are. not, that most contemporary political scientists tend to be liberals. Their values are liberal values. This raises a question. Whether the relation between contemporary political science and liberalism is merely accidental or whether there is some intrinsic, some necessary connection between them. One might do well to ponder which political party is more liberal, and which is more right-wing, than the one that came to power in the US in the 1960s and 1970s. The choice is clear: the liberal party is likely to be more liberal than the conservative one. science is really more scientific--Aristotle's, which is explicitly and necessarily evaluative and that offers advice and exhortation to the statesmen and citizens about how to care for their regime. contemporary political science that claims to be neutral and nonpartisan, but which smuggles its values and preferences in always through always through the lens of its own ideology. This is the difference between Aristotle's and political science, which says it is neutral but smuggles in its own values. the back door. On Friday, let me just remind you, Il Principe. We'll study Machiavelli. On this very partisan note I conclude. On Thursday, we'll study the life of the Italian statesman and play a game of chess with him. We're going to see how well he can play the game of poker. I'm looking forward to it. I hope you'll join us for the game on Friday night at 8 p.m. ET on CNN.