MARKUS KLUTE: All right, hi. So we continue the discussion in 8.701 on units. Why this is an important discussion is because it is very convenient and it simplifies life quite a bit if one does not use SI units in the discussion of, says Markus Klute. So this unit is on units, and we'll talk about it again in 9.01. We'll be back with the next installment of the discussion. Back to the page you came from. in particle physics, decays in particle Physics, or cross-sections. And it's also important to avoid carrying around large exponents. And given, you have a conversation, you want to talk about things which are order of 1 of things instead of 10 to the minus 28 things. And one example is in the case of a particle that decays, or a cross-section in particle physics. It's important to talk to people about things of the order of one of things, not 10 of things. the introduction of a new unit for the cross-sections of-- units for cross-section which describes an area, and that unit is barn. One bar is defined as 10 to the minus 28 square meters. Physics processes, the one at the center of the new unit, are called picobarns, or femtobarns, after the shape of the barn's cross section. The new unit is called barn, or picobar, and it is used to measure the size of a barn. high energies-- for example, the ones we discuss at the Large Hadron Collider-- are typically of the order of picobarn, 10 to the minus 12 barns. So there's an interesting story to barns and why this was introduced. The unit came out in the 1980s, and it's been used at the LHC ever since. It's been a huge success, and we're seeing more and more of it at LHC, the scientists say. It has a big impact on our understanding of the universe, they say. of the Manhattan Project. The idea of the scientist was to confuse potential spies towards what cross-sections for nuclear processes are. And so they introduced this unit of a barn, and they're trying to characterize nuclear collisions, maybe an accelerator shooting something at a target. And one barn is a nuclear collider, and the other one is a bomb-making unit. And they're both in the middle of a building, and one of them is in a barn. And it's a bomb making unit, and it's in the center of the building. cross-section where it's really, really hard to miss-- so a big cross-section. In this context, also, the shed was introduced. This is not very popular today anymore. And it turns out that this idea of confusing readers of papers or of discussions turned into a new standard. So we have to change the way we look at the world. We have to be more open-minded. We need to be open-eyed. We must be more accepting of people's views. In particle physics and in nuclear physics, we use a system called natural units. This system is not really changing the units, but just avoiding carrying around exponents. We also use picobarns and femtobarn's, specifically, quite frequently. But we also use natural units in other fields, such as medicine, medicine and medicine for cancer, for example, or medicine for heart disease. We use natural Units in these fields, as well as in other areas, like medicine and other fields. based on fundamental concepts of quantum mechanics and special relativity. So the idea here is that we replace kilogram, meters, and seconds by h-bar, which is a unit of action in quantum mechanics, c, the speed of light, and GeV. A typical GeV, a typical approximate mass, is a GeV of around 1,000 kg/m2 (1,000 times the mass of a human body) - or 1,200,000,000 tonnes. of a proton. So then, you do this transformation, and then you simplify the option of setting h-bar and c to 1, you find that energies are expressed in GeV. That means when you talk about relativistic equations, E is the energy of the proton, and GeV is the mass of the Proton. That's what we're talking about here. We're using GeV to express the energies of proton-like particles, and we're using E to express mass. equals m c squared and all those things, m, E, and also the momentum have the same unit. That simplifies quite a bit. Time has a unit of 1 over GeV, length has aUnit of 1OverGeV, and area has the unit of1 overGeV squared. So all of these things have a single unit, which is a unit called time. Time is 1overGeV. length is 1 over length. Area is 1-1 over area. So time is 1/2 of length. that's the simplification. You might think that you lose information by setting fundamental constants to 1, but you actually do not, because you carry with you, in your equations, the dimension of the problem. If you want to do a quick exercise here, I invite you to calculate the charge of the charge. That's the simple way to do it. It's a lot of work, but it's worth it in the long run. I'll be back in a few days to show you how it works. radius of the proton, which is 4.1 over GeV, or per GeV. convert this back to SI units. And the hint here is that h-bar c is 4-1 overGeV. The answer can be found from the dimensional analysis of h- bar c and the radius of a proton in the Earth's magnetic field, or in the magnetic field of a single proton at a distance of a few hundred billion miles (kilometers) from the Earth. equal to 0.197 GeV femtometers. So you should already know the answer from previous discussions in the lecture, but the calculation is rather straightforward. On top of this, it's useful to use Heaviside-Lorentz units and combine them with some measurable units we discussed. So what we do in addition here is what we did in addition to the units we already discussed. The result is that we get the same answer as before, but in a different way. is set, say, permittivity in free space to 1. And so alpha, the strength, is a dimensionless fine structure. When you do that, you basically combine or tie the electric charge to the strength of QCD. The result is a new type of quantum computer. It's called a QCD quantum computer, or QCD-based computer. For more information on QCD, visit www.qc-online.com. In the U.S., visit the National Institute of Standards and Technology. constant, 1 over 137, becomes e squared, the electric charge squared, over 4 pi. So this is also very convenient, to have this kind of convention. So we'll use those natural units as we go through class. In some examples, we will use SI, in others, use natural units. This will help us understand the nature of the solar system, and how it relates to the Earth's surface. We'll use SI in some cases, and natural units in others. always be clear from the problem we're looking at. Always be clear about what you're trying to do. Always show us how you're going to solve a problem. Always. Show us how to get to the solution you're looking for. always. show us the way to get there.always. be clear of the problem you're aiming to solve. always be clear. of the goal you're seeking to achieve.always be. clear of your goal. of getting to the answer you're after.