The prize isn't cash or a luxury cruise, it's a position in your country's national legislature. All of your fellow lawmakers were chosen in the same way. This might strike you as a strange way, but it's the only way to get a seat in the national legislature in the country you live in. It's also the best way to find out who you are and what you can do to help your country in the future. It could also be the most interesting way to learn more about your country. The ancient Athenians who coined the word had another view of democracy. In fact, elections only played a small role in Athenian democracy, with most offices filled by random lottery from a pool of citizen volunteers. To run a government, let alone a democracy, you need to have a majority of the vote. The majority of votes in a democracy must be cast by at least 50 per cent of the population, according to the U.S. Bureau of Democracy and Human Rights. For more information, go to www.democracyandhuman rights.org. The 5th Century BC Athens was a direct democracy that encouraged wide participation through the principle of ho boulomenos, or anyone who wishes. This meant that any of its approximately 30,000 eligible citizens could vote for a leader. This is in contrast to the representative democracies common today, where voters elect leaders to make laws and decisions on their behalf. In the 5th century BC Athens there were around 30,00 eligible citizens. This was a fraction of the current population of the UK. could attend the ecclesia, a general assembly meeting several times a month. In principle, any of the 6,000 or so who showed up at each session had the right to address their fellow citizens, propose a law, or bring a public lawsuit. Of course, a crowd of 6,00 people trying to make a law is a tough task for any group of people to handle, but it's even harder for a group of six,000 people trying for a law. to speak at the same time would not have made for effective government. So the Athenian system also relied on a 500 member governing council called the Boule, to set the agenda and evaluate proposals. The Boule was made up of hundreds of jurors and magistrates to handle legal matters. Rather than being elected by the people, they had to be chosen by a jury of up to 500 people, with the majority of them being from the same town or city as the leader. The jury was then able to make a decision on whether or not to approve a proposal. elected or appointed, the people in these positions were chosen by lot. This process of randomized selection is know as sortition. The only positions filled by elections were those recognized as requiring expertise, such as generals. But these were considered aristocratic, meaning rule by the best, as opposed to democracies, and were filled by the most senior people in the country. The result was a system known as aristocratic rule, which was seen as a form of tyranny. The system was eventually replaced by democracy, but not until the 1970s.  democracy arose in Athens after long periods of social and political tension marked by conflict among nobles. Powers once restricted to elites were expanded to ordinary citizens. Rather than a privilege, civic participation was the duty of all citizens, with sortition and strict term limits preventing governing classes or political parties from forming. By 21st century, democracy will be the norm, not the exception, in every country, including the UK and the U.S., according to a new report by the Centre for European Policy Studies. standards, Athenian rule by the many excluded an awful lot of people. Women, slaves and foreigners were denied full citizenship, and when we filter out those too young to serve, the pool of eligible Athenians drops to only 10-20% of the overall population. Some ancient philosophers, including Plato, disparaged this, saying it was unfair to those who were too old to be eligible to serve. The Athenians were known as the "enemies of the many" because of this. form of democracy as being anarchic and run by fools. But today the word has such positive associations, that vastly different regimes claim to embody it. At the same time, some share Plato's skepticism about the wisdom of crowds. Many modern democracies reconcile this conflict by having citizens elect those who they think are best for the country. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @soulmata and @jennifer_cnn. they consider qualified to legislate on their behalf. But this poses its own problems, including the influence of wealth, and the emergence of professional politicians with different interests than their constituents. Could reviving election by lottery lead to more effective government through a more diverse and representative group of legislatures? It could also lead to a more effective and representative government. It would be a step in the right direction, but it would also be a long way from where we are now. It's a long, long way off, but I think it's worth a try. You probably shouldn't hold your breath to win a spot in your country's government. But depending on where you live, you may still be selected to participate in a jury, a citizens' assembly, or a deliberative. Or does modern political office, like Athenian military command, require specialized knowledge and skills? You may still get selected to participation in a Jury, a Citizens' Assembly or a Deliberative Assembly. Or you could be selected for a position in the National Council of State. poll, all examples of how the democratic principle behind sortition still survives today. Polls show that the principle of sortition is still very much alive and well in the United States today. The majority of Americans support sortition, with the majority of people in the U.S. voting in favor of it by a wide margin in the last presidential election in 2008. The most popular type of vote in the 2008 election was for the Democratic Party, followed by the Republican Party and the Libertarian Party. The Democratic Party won the popular vote.