Markus Klute: This set of slides is on the organization of this course. It's part of the syllabus. I'll explain how the course is structured, how you participate and how you'll be graded. To get started, I'll give you some details and where to find proper pointers. To start, click through to the next slide and the next one will be the first slide in the course. To see the rest of the course, click on the second slide and then the third. this class will be taught in an inverted classroom or flipped classroom setting. It will be online-only so we will not have in-person opportunities to discuss. There's a second video where I'll just briefly talk about the strategy of the inverted classroom and the benefits. What you are What you do What you say What you did What you said What you wrote What you write What you have written What you want to write. You can write your own essay. Submit your essay at CNN iReport. typically used for as lectures is organized solely in short videos where I discuss concepts or methods. The videos also include a few short questions for your own self-evaluation, and we'll pick up those questions and later in recitation session. So when you meet Tuesdays and Thursdays we'll have time to have time for recitation. We'll also pick up on the questions later in the week when we have more time. We're looking for people who want to learn more about self-examination and self-criticism. to answer your questions. We'll have time to go through those [INAUDIBLE] and hopefully have a good discussion. The recitations are also used for another concept, which I'll explain on a later slide, which is your presentation of a specific paper. This is part of your homework set is to be able to read and understand the content of a paper. It's also part of the homework set to understand how to write a paper, and how to present it to a group. find a paper to discuss with me whether or not it fits into this class schedule, and together with a partner, have a short discussion of it. So we'll use these Tuesday and Thursday sessions for this purpose. And in addition, there's going to be an office hour on Friday. We'll also use the office hour to talk about how we can use our time together in the classroom to improve our understanding of each other's work. We're going to use this office hour as a way to get to know each other better. It's one hour where I'm just going to be connected to a Zoom meeting. You can log in at any time and we'll discuss whatever you want to talk about. For that let's contribute to the Doodle poll, which I posed during the first [INAUDIBLE] time of the first class. It's a question I posed to the class at the start of the class, and it's a good one. It asks: What do you think of the new Doodle? I'm going to answer it in this article. and then we'll find the best possible time for everybody involved. The course evaluation or your evaluation in this course will be made up 50% out of homework. So it'll be six PSets are going to be posted. One will be forgiven so I'll basically count five PSets, he says. He says he'll post them at a time that is best for the students and for the course. He adds: "We're going to post them when it's the best time for everyone involved" and each will allow you to accumulate 8 points. The paper presentation I was talking about will have 20 points. We're talking about a 20-minute presentation of a paper. It's really a summary of the paper of your choice together with 10 minutes of Q&A. Again, this is being done by a team of experts. We don't know who is doing it yet, but it's going to be a lot of work. We'll find out in a few days. It will be a very interesting process. in two groups so you have to split up the aspect of presenting-- preparing and presenting, and then also when it comes to the response and the questions. And then there's going to be two short oral exams. This is 20 minutes, so the actual exam is only going to only be 20 minutes. The exam will take place in the morning and the afternoon, and the exam will be in the evening, so it will only take 20 minutes each time. It will be a two-hour exam, and it will be two questions and two answers. 15 minutes with the teaching staff. Justin and myself ask you a couple of questions and just make sure that you are on top of the content we discussed in the weeks prior. So there is two. The first one deals with the particle, and the second one is with the teacher. The teaching staff asks you two questions and then we go through the answers. We'll be back in 15 minutes with another 15 minutes of teaching staff questions. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. physics content, and the second one with the nuclear physics and experimental method as well. The grading scheme will not be worse than what I've given you here. The great divide-- the great divide or the grade divide-- is at 85% between A and B, 70% between B and C, 60% for A to B. For B to C, the divide is between 85% and 70%. For C to D, it's 85% to 70% and for D to F, it is 60% to F. between C and D, and below 50% earns you an F. "I don't think anybody can get into this environment as long as they participate," he says. "You have to be in it to win it," he adds. "If you're not in it, you're in it for the wrong reasons." "I think we're all in this together," he concludes. "We have to work together to get the best out of each other. That's what it's all about."