The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open CourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. To see more videos from MIT Open courseware, visit the video hub at the bottom of the page. For more information about MIT OpencourseWare, visit opencourseware.org or call the support line at 1-800-273-8255 or visit the website at http://www.mitopencourseWare.org. before Ken, and thank goodness Ken insisted he went before me, because in some ways that was the most amazing introduction to my research program that you could possibly have ever had. And it articulated deeply why social intelligence should pervade our thinking about the mind and brain and the social world. It was an incredible introduction to social intelligence, and it was a very important part of what I learned about social intelligence in the first few years of my career. It's been a very exciting time for social intelligence research in the U.S. range of phenomena that people mean in social intelligence. From extremely complex phenomena that govern the interactions of large groups of people, like war, to incredibly minute phenomena, like whether you can get your hand to a target in 100 milliseconds or less. I think that when people talk about social intelligence, they mean a range of phenomena, from war to war to very minute things like hand-to-target speed. That's what social intelligence is about, I think, and that's why it's so important. social cognition they do actually mean all of those things. And that is both thrilling-- when you work in social cognition-- and also terrifying, especially when people are hoping for a coherent theory of all of that. I think that trying to get a coherent account of everything from your social cognition is a very difficult task, but it's worth it in the long run, I think. I'm glad you asked me to talk about it. I'd love to hear your thoughts on social cognition. hand motions and your perception of other people's hand motions all the way to politics and sociology is daunting and, frankly, deeply unlikely. And so, by contrast to Ken-- who starts with, let's look at social interactions and see what's there, which I think is a very awesome approach-- I'm going to take a very different approach. I'm. going to try to look at the social interaction in a different way and try to see what I can learn from it. I think it's going to be very interesting. going to take almost the opposite approach, which is say, there's one thing that's probably there a lot. Let's try to study that one thing in many different ways and contexts. And the one thing, as Lou said that I'm going to talk about-- although, contrary to many people's impressions, I'm not going to say that it's the same thing every time. I'm just going to take a look at it in a different way and in different contexts. That's what I'll be doing. is not the only thing I work on-- is this ability that we have. OK, so a little demo of the problem that I work with-- and because it's early in the morning and everybody needs to wake up, I'm going to get you guys to do this as a joke. It's not a joke, it's just a demonstration of what I'm trying to do. I'm working on the ability to do it. I don't know if I can do it yet, but I'm getting close. task, so as an experiment. So in this experiment, I'm going to ask you guys to make a moral judgment of a character. Her name is Grace. And the way you're going to make that moral judgment is, I's going to tell you something she did, and you'regoing to go to the bottom of the page and make a judgment about it. That's what I'm doing, and that's the way I'm asking you to do it. I want you to think about it, and then act on it. say how much blame she deserves-- moral blame, how wrong that was. You're going to do so by raising your hand. The more wrong it was, the higher your hand goes. And everybody has to vote. OK? Yes? OK, so this is a story about Grace. She's on a tour and she's on an apology tour. And she's going to be in New York City for the rest of the week. She'll be in a hotel. She won't be there long. of a chemical factory. Next to the coffee machine is a jar of white powder labeled sugar, so Grace thinks the powder is sugar. She puts some of that powder in the other girl's coffee. But it turns out that powder is contaminated by a dangerous toxic poison, and when the girl drinks the coffee, she dies. How much blame does Grace deserve for putting the powder in coffee? OK, now what if I slightly changed that story? So grace thinks that the white powder is toxic poison. And she put some of the poison in the coffee. And when the girls drinks it, they die. So what's characteristic about these stories is that they're always tragic. that, in the story I told you, everything was the same from the beginning, the scenario where Grace was, to the action and the outcome-- that the girl died. But your moral judgments differed by about the entire scale that I gave you, from saying that she deserved almost no to saying she deserved a lot. That's how different the two moral judgments were from each other. And that's the way I want it to be, I think, for all of us to be. blame to saying that she deserved pretty much as much blame as you could reach. And that's the same kind of moral judgment we get from typical human subjects and also from MIT undergraduates, which say that in scenarios like the one I gave you, what matters most for the most is the person at the center of the situation. That's the kind of judgment you get from a typical human subject, and it's also the judgment that you'll get from an MIT undergrad, which says that in a situation like this, the most important thing is the victim. moral blame that we assign is not what happened-- did somebody die or not-- or how bad that outcome was. But it's what Grace thought she was doing, whether she thought the powder was sugar or she thought that it was poison. I should just say right away that I don't blame Grace for what happened. I blame herself for what she did. I'm not proud of it. But I'm proud of the person that she is and the person she is becoming. That's what I want for her. set up that scenario. I gave you the best case scenario for the role of beliefs. It's easy to make these things way more complicated. But that scenario isolates one important feature of our moral judgment and also an important feature. of a lot of the rest of our social life. We need to work out how to use our beliefs to make better decisions about what we do and don't do, and how we act on them. We can't rely solely on our own moral judgements to make good decisions. cognition. It's not how we avoid bumping into people in subways, but a lot of the other kind of social cognition we do about the people that are around us, which is our ability to assign thoughts or internal mental states to other people. So in psychology, this ability has a lot to do with how we interact with other people, and how we react to them. It can be a very powerful tool, but it can also be a really bad one, too. been studied from kind of relatively simple perceptual phenomena like assigning intentions and goals to simple moving characters in an animation. This ability has been studied all the way to understanding some of the most complex, abstract ideas. This is the very famous Heider and Simmel example from the '40s. This can also be used to understand more complex ideas, such as the concept of a "universal goal" or a " universal goal" for a nation or a nation's future. It can also help us understand the nature of the world and our place in it. that we ever encounter, like the famous apocryphal statement attributed to Alan Greenspan. "I know you think you understand what you thought I said, but I don't think you realize that what you heard was not what I meant," Greenspan once said. So to the degree that our minds let us, we often don't understand what we think we are hearing, or what we thought we were hearing, for that matter. That's the way it is in politics, and it's how it will always be in politics. us make any sense of that at all, we're using our ability to make sense of other people's minds. How many people here have seen the standard test of this ability of thinking about other people’s thoughts, which the false belief task? OK, so then I'm just going to show you one. So as I said, the scope of tests of our able to think about other person's thoughts or internal states is very wide. HowMany people have seen somebody do afalse belief task or give a false belieftask? How manyPeople would like to see a false believed task? is very large. I'm saying that two ways on purpose because actually, although these are often conflated, I think there's a really important difference between thinking about epistemic states and what you want and how you want to think. There's a difference between things like what you know, what you see, andWhat you think-- versus states likewhat you want, how you think, and the way you see it. I think that's a very important difference. It's a big one. you feel. I think it turns out empirically that those are really different problems. And I'm almost exclusively going to talk about the first one, so how we think about what other people see, think, and know-- but not want or feel. At the end I'll come back to wanting, but I'm going to focus on the first part of the question. I want to know what you want, and how you want to feel, and I'll talk to you about that. and feeling. This problem was set up as kind of a litmus test for our ability to think about other people's minds, starting in the late '70s and coming out of the '80s. The problem is how do we know what other people have seen, what they think and what they know? The answer is that we don't know, but we can try to figure out how to get a sense of what others are thinking, seeing and feeling. We can ask people to tell us what they've seen, heard or felt. Everybody knows humans could do this. What about animals? And actually, the debate about whether this capacity for thinking about other people's thoughts is or is not shared with which other animals has gone on continuously since the late 1800s. So the origin of this problem for psychology is, everybody knows humans can do this, but what about other animals? That's where the debate has been going on for a very, very long time, I think, and it's still going to go on. '70s and has not been resolved. That's the origin of this debate, and it's not resolved yet. But it led to the construction of this particular task as a litmus test for what one person knows about somebody else's thoughts, called the false belief task. And so here's what a 'false belief task' is, and what it means to be a falsebelief. It's a test for people who think they know something that they don't, but they're not sure they do. false belief task looks like. This is being given to a five-year-old human child. Do you know what pirates really like? CHILD: What? REBECCA SAXE: Pirates really like cheese sandwiches. The child: Cheese? I love cheese! The child's name is Ivan and he is the first pirate. Ivan has his own false belief task to do. The task is called 'false belief' and takes place over a period of time. It can be carried out by children as young as five. cheese sandwich, and he says, yum,. yum, yums. I really love cheese sandwiches. Ivan puts his sandwich over here on top of the pirate chest. Ivan says, you know what, I need a drink with my lunch. So Ivan goes to get a drink. And while Ivan is away, the wind comes, and it blows the sandwich down onto the grass. And now, here comes the other pirate. This pirate is called Joshua. And Joshua also really loves cheese sandwiches, so Joshua has a cheese sandwich. cheese sandwiches. And he puts his cheese sandwich over here on top of the pirate chest. CHILD: So that one is his. REBECCA SAXE: That one's Joshua's. And then his is on the ground. That's exactly right. ChILD: so he won't know which one is yours. That one is Joshua's and that one's my cheese sandwich. that's Joshua and that's mine. It's his and my cheese sandwiches. I don't know what to say. Joshua and Ivan are playing a game where they have to choose which of their sandwiches they want to eat. Joshua chooses the cheese sandwich, while Ivan chooses the meat. The game goes on until the end of the episode, when Ivan decides to take the meat over the cheese. The episode is on ABC at 8 p.m. ET on Sunday. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow CNN Living on Twitter @cnnlabs and @jennifer_lopez. one. All right, let's see. I told you. He took that one. OK, so that's called passing the false belief task. And the thing that's reported in scientific papers is that he correctly predicted that Ivan would take Joshua's sandwich. Although if if you were Joshua, you would have taken Ivan's sandwich, too. You would have been the one who took the sandwich, not Joshua. You were the one that took the sandwiches, not the other one. That's what science is about. you watch the video, you see that the knowledge the kid is bringing to bear is a way richer than just his correct prediction and includes him, in fact, trying to stop me in the story to warn me of what's coming. So it's a rich interpretation of what other people are thinking and what they're trying to say to each other. It's a richer interpretation of the world than just one person's prediction. It was a rich experience for me to be a part of. people know and don't know and will know and haven't seen and so forth. The reason why this task became so famous is that not all participants perform the same way. And so one class of participants who've become the focus of intense scrutiny is slightly younger kids, namely three-year-olds. The task has become so famous because of the way it is done. It's a very different way of doing it, and it's very different to the way other people do it. So I'll give you a sense of what that looks like. This is a three-year-old. He's paid equally rapt attention throughout the entire story. And we come to the crucial moment, and he's asked again the same question. And Ivan says, I want my cheese sandwich. Do you think he's going to take that one? Let's see what he does. And he takes this one. Uh oh-- why did he take this one? OK, and so the traditional read Ivan left his cheese sandwich on top of the pirate chest and he doesn't know that it's been moved. He doesn't understand that because Ivan left his Cheese Sandwich on top. of the Pirate Chest that he'll believe that it was moved. Ivan wants his Cheese sandwich, but doesn't get believing that he left it there. Ivan doesn't believe that because he didn't know it was there that he will believe that he's left it. Ivan is a kid who gets wanting, right. He gets believing. He wants to believe. that that sandwich is his, and that his actions depend on his own beliefs. And that's the source of both this wrong prediction-- why does he say that he'll be a better person if he gets his cheese sandwich? -- and his wrong prediction of the true state of the world, which is that he won't be a good person unless he gets the cheese sandwich he thinks he wants. That's what he's wrong about, and it's the reason he's making a wrong prediction in the first place. take his cheese sandwich-- and the wrong explanation. So when he goes to take the other cheese sandwich, the one that's actually Joshua's, then we say, why did he do that? And again, this is typical performance that the little kids confabulate. So in this case, it's that his fell on the ground. He doesn't want his anymore. That's why he's taking Joshua's sandwich. And that pattern of performance was interpreted as evidence of conceptual thinking. change and development-- kids going from having a partial understanding of other people's minds that included wanting to a richer interpretation. So what I want to get from this actually is not whether or not it's true that there's conceptual change between people and ideas. It's about how kids go from wanting to believe to wanting to understand others' minds, and how that changes their own understanding of what it means to believe in the world, and what that means to be a person. That's what I'm interested in. three and five, although I do think it is true, but just an idea of what capacity are we talking about. We're talking about the capacity actually that the five-year-old showed, however they got it. It's this capacity to, when watching other people act in a film, to be able to take on that role and be a part of it. That's what we're looking for in a young actor. We want to see that in our young actors. And we're not talking about how old they are, but when they are. the world, bring to bear-- both spontaneously and when asked-- a conception of the other person having beliefs, perceptual history, knowledge, an internal representation of the world that guides actions. And so that is what I'm going to call thinking about thought. And the idea that this is a domain where we can bring our own beliefs to bear on the world is a very important one. It's a domain that we should all try to think about, and try to understand, as much as we can. that you could study on its own-- well, there's two questions here. One is can you study this at all. And the second one isCan you study it separate from the whole rest of cognition. Both of those are related to Liz, and indeed Nancy, and many people's worries. That's one of the reasons I'm so interested in the study of the brain. I want to find out what it's like to be a person with a brain that's not working properly. that you could never make progress on a problem like this, which I share. And so what I want to tell you guys is two phases of my attempt to make progress in understanding how we do that. I share the worry that you could ever make progress, and I share that worry, too. So what I'm trying to say is that you can make progress if you start by understanding how you do it. And that's the first phase. The second phase is to figure out how to do it, and the third is to find a way to get there. How do we think about other people as containing internal mental lives, mental representations? I'm going to talk about just fMRI, although I do use other methods to study this problem. But I think fMRI has been both an incredible gift to our ability to understand the human mind and to help us understand others. I think it has been a huge help to us in our understanding of the mind. I'm looking forward to using it in the future to help people understand other people's mental lives. fMRI imposes a huge number of limitations on what we can discover. What I'm going to tell you about is just a tiny bit of my phase one investigations using the early strategies that fMRI allowed us. And then a more in-depth look at how I'm using more modern techniques in fMRI to try to get further. This is partly because I think it's interesting what we've learned. But it's mainly because you guys might not actually want to know about theory of mind. FMRI was developed 15 years ago to study the brain's ability to think complex thoughts. FMRI is more useful when studying something that is compartmentalized from the rest of the mind, says Dr. David Frum. To learn more about fMRI, visit www.fMRI.org or go to the fMRI site on the University of California, Los Angeles website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. one question is-- is theory of mind, the ability to think about other people's thoughts, in any sense its own problem? Or are we just studying the whole problem of human intelligence and capacity? So that was sort of the first question that we set out to answer. We and we and we are trying to answer that question, and we hope to answer it in a way that will help people understand the nature of the human mind. We hope to do that in the next few years. a number of people did this. And the way we did it is that we had people in an fMRI machine doing basically an adult version of the pirates task that I just showed you. So they read short verbal stories that describe somebody who comes to have a false identity. And they read them in a way that makes it seem like they are telling a story about a person who is lying to them. And then they try to guess what the person is saying. And if they get it right, they think it is the person who has a false ID. belief. This is an example. So Ann puts lasagna in the blue dish. Ian takes the lasagna out and puts spaghetti in the red dish. And then we ask, what does Ann think is in theblue dish. OK, so this is a very simple encapsulation of our ability to believe. We believe that we are different from other people, and that we can be different from others. We are different, and we can have different levels of belief. We can have a different level of self-belief, and this is one of the keys to our success. represent what somebody else thinks and separate it from the state of the world. So while you were doing that, you were clearly using your theory of mind. But you were also using many, many,Many other capacities of your mind and brain, like the capacity to see those. It was a very, very important moment in your life, and you will remember it for the rest of your life. You will always remember it as one of the most important moments in my life. I will never forget it. words, to know they are words in English, to put them together in sentences, and then to make a response by pushing a button. So we're using everything from your eyes to your fingers and most of the brain in between. And then the question is, the part that required is, what is it that you want to do with your life? You can find out more at CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @cnnslate and @jennifer_lopez. you thinking about thoughts-- is there any sense in which that. that's special or different from the whole rest of the logical and cognitive capacity of your brain? So to ask that question we designed a control condition in which you similarly read stories that involve something that was true and that you believed to be true. We asked you to think about your thoughts in a way that was similar to the way you would think about a story you had just heard. We then asked you if you thought about the story in a similar way to how you would imagine a story would feel. becomes false. You need to think about those two and respond using a button press. But in this case, what it is is a state of the world. So this is an island and a photograph taken of it. Then the photograph, of course, stays the same. But the world, the world becomes false. The world becomes a photograph of the island, the island becomes a world. The island becomes an island, and the photograph is a world, but the world is false. changes. So there's a volcano that erupts. And now we can ask you either about the photograph, what's in the photograph. Or what's the world actually like now. And the idea is that in this comparison you need the ability to see the stimuli, read English, put together your logical changes. And so on and so on, until we get to the end of the story. And then we'll ask you what you think the world is like now, and what it looks like. thoughts, and choose a button press in both cases. But only in the first case do you also need to think about other people's thoughts. And so that comparison would let us look for brain regions where blood oxygenation or metabolism is higher if you're thinking about others' thoughts. It would also let us see if you have a higher metabolism or oxygenation in your brain if you are thinking about someone else's thoughts, such as a friend or family member, for example. So that is old news now. The simple answer is that we and many, many other groups that tried this in many different ways found a whole group of brain regions where metabolism or blood oxygenation is higher if you need to think about other people's thoughts in the stories. We and many others have found that this is true in a number of different ways. We have also found that in some cases, the brain regions that are affected by this are the ones that are most affected by the idea that people are thinking about others' thoughts. Part of what's interesting though about this brain region is not just the claims about selectivity. The other thing that's interesting-- and extremely fortunate for research purposes-- is that the signal is ridiculously strong and reliable. The difference between thinking about somebody else's thoughts and other logical problems-- in terms of thinking about logical problems -- is a big one. It's a very, very important one for us to try and figure out how to make the world a better place for people to live in. of how significant, how reliable, how similar across individual subjects-- is comparable to the difference between looking at gradings and not looking at gratings in V1, which is nuts. That's crazy that something this complicated and abstract would have an unbelievably large, robust, reliable signal in individual subjects. I'll give it to you: It's crazy. It's nuts. It is crazy that it would have such a large and robust signal inindividual subjects. It would be crazy if it didn't. you a little hint of it. But everyone who has ever come through my lab says that they never believe me until they see it in their own data. And you can do this in any individual subject. So here's just three individual participants after five minutes to 10 minutes after 5-10 minutes. You can see the results of this experiment in the video below. The results can be seen in the full video below, as well as the results in the second video. The video below shows the results after 10 minutes and the third video after 5 minutes. of scanning. You need to read only between 10 and 20 total stories in literally five to 10 minutes. And every individual subject basically shows the same pattern of brain activation for thinking about thoughts compared to the other stories. It's just this unbelievably strong signal, literally unbelievable. It should be a wake-up call for people to think about what they are doing and what they want to do in their lives, says Dr. David Perry. The study was published in the journal Frontiers in Psychology. not possibly be true on any a priori story, except for maybe the story Ken just told you about how social cognition is the fundamental basis of everything. When you look inside this brain region, this is in one of them. I'm showing you pictures of the right TPJ. It's in the right part of the brain, and it's in a region called the right prefrontal cortex. This is the part that's involved in social cognition. It is in the area that's associated with social interaction. one of five cortical regions. Two of the five regions are located in the right part of the brain. The data from the right TPJ are particularly clean. In the rightTPJ, that's average percent singal change in some of our early experiments to stories about beliefs compared to control stories about photographs. That's the average percent increase in belief about a story compared to a control story about a photograph. The right TP J is a good place to start, because the data are clean and the results are consistent. things are striking. One is that it's a really big difference-- a big positive signal when you're reading stories about beliefs, and not much when you are reading about photographs. So you start reading a story and it starts at the time you start read the story. The other thing is that the story begins at the beginning of the story, when you first start reading it. It's a very positive signal, and it's also a very negative signal, when it starts with the story itself. story, and the signal starts to go up. This is just showing that difference in how much you think about thoughts contributes a lot of variance across many different individual stories. And if you look within the story, it's the time when you're thinking about a thought that you get the most out of the story. And that's when the signal goes up the most, and that's where you get most of the information from your brain. That's when you get more out of a story. activity in this brain region. We also spend a bunch of time saying fMRI, as everybody knows, is a correlational signal. Does this brain area actually play a causal role in letting you think about thoughts? And so we did a version of the same experiment that I gave you in the experiment with the people in New York. The results were similar to the ones we saw in the New York experiment with people in San Francisco and Los Angeles. The study was published in the journal Frontiers in Psychology. guys on moral reasoning with TMS. We asked whether using TMS on the right TPJ compared to a control brain region would disproportionately affect how you use people's mental states in making moral judgments. We showed that after TMS to the rightTPJ, people made more moral judgments than after using a control region. The results were published in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. use the beliefs of the character less in making their moral judgments. This was after about eight years that I was saying here's what we've learned. We've learned that the right TPJ is selectively involved in theory in theory. And so where we get to after all of this is a hypothesis. It's a hypothesis that we can use to try to figure out how people make moral judgments in the first place. We don't know if it's true or not, but we can try it out. of mind, and so selectively depends on all the experiments I didn't show you. That's a claim about specificity. But "involved in"-- that's a euphemism. And it's auphemism that a lot of cognitive neuroscientists use and are satisfied with. But after a while, I found it deeply unsatisfying, and I'm not sure if it ever will be used in the real world. It's just a way of saying that you're not really involved in what you're doing. embarrassing, like-- what on earth is "involved in"? And so what I want to talk to you about is how to get beyond the euphemism of " involved in" in using fMRI to understand the mind. This is what fMRI in my hands typically looks like. You read a bunch of fMRI papers and you think, "Oh, my God, what is this?" But the truth is that fMRI is a tool that can be used to help us understand the human mind. stories in the scanner, and we record activity in the brain region while you're reading those stories. And so our traditional measures are the measures that let us estimate specificity and selectivity and answer all the questions you guys asked me. Is it more or less accurate to say that a person's reading comprehension is better than their vocabulary? That's what we're trying to find out. We'll have to wait and see, but I think we'll find out in the next few weeks. It's going to be a very interesting experiment. for this, less for that? What makes it go up or down? Those measures, called univariate measures, measure the amount of activity in that region, on average, as you read a different story. So you get something that looks like this. And what you show is that what you're seeing is that you're reading more for this, and less for this? That's what we're seeing in the U.S., and that's what's happening in the rest of the world, too. this brain region responds a certain amount. Or there's a certainamount of activity metabolism in this brain region while you're reading that story. And so what we do with that is we make arguments about selectivity and these kinds of things that we've been talking about this entire time. We use that to explain why we think certain things are more or less likely to happen in certain situations. We also use it to explain the different types of brain activity that we see in different parts of the brain. And if you did that in the reverse direction, you'd say, OK, what can we learn about these stimuli or the representation of these stimlui-- these two stimuli-- from activity like this? Well OK, both of them are within the set that this brain region cares about. They both elicit the same responses. And that's what we're trying to find out about the brain's response to these stimuli. We want to know more about what's going on in this region of the brain. high activity. So both stories involve thinking about thoughts. And one of the things we showed early on is that activity generalizes in the sense that many different stories about many different kinds of thoughts all illicit activity in this brain region. This brain region is involved when a story describes thoughts. OK, what's wrong with that for making theoretical progress on theory of high activity? Well, I think that that is related to this idea of involvement. And so from the amount of activity in the brain region, you know something like that story is about Thoughts. mind is that, with respect to the representation of other people's thoughts, that doesn't tell us anything about how our brain does it. So for example, what it doesn't tells us-- it doesn's tell us how we know who thinks what, why, and with what consequences-- we can't see. So the things that would make something a theory of mind-- a representation of who thinkswhat, why and with how consequences -- we can not see. It doesn'tTell us how our brains track or represent any of these properties. in the univariate signal. So what I would like to make progress on, what I think we're starting to makeprogress on using MVPA, is getting beyond that this brain region is involved in theory of mind and trying to ask something about what is represented in this brain area, he says. He adds: 'I think we are making progress on that. It's a long way to go, but we are starting to get closer to the goal of what we want to achieve' "We're doing this using a key assumption which comes from systems neuroscience, which is that we can think of representations in terms of population codes of features or dimensions," he says. "And I want to say that right now because that is an old, discredited theory of concepts, but nevertheless a key part of our work," he adds. "We're going to use that as a starting point in the next phase of our research," he continues. "It's going to be a very exciting time for us." powerful strategy in neuroscience, including in this context. It's another thing I could talk at greater length about. So the idea that we're going to look at is that populations of neurons will respond differentially to features or dimensions of our stimuli. And by figuring out what the main features are, we'll be able to predict how neurons will react to different stimuli in the real world. That's a very powerful strategy, and it can be used in a number of different ways in the future. or dimensions are of our stimuli, we can infer something about the representation underlying. The representation that this brain region participates in-- and that is the representation of theory of mind. OK, So what is MVPA? I'll briefly say my idea of how to think about MVPA. So a traditional MVPA is a brain region that is involved in a series of activities that are related to theory of mind, such as thinking about how to respond to a stimulus. That's what MVPA does. analysis-- the things that we were doing mostly for the first 15 years of fMRI-- are called now univariate analyses. You would take a patch of cortex, as represented by a bunch of pixels in the brain-- they're called voxels. They're called volume elements of the brain you're studying. That's what we're doing now with fMRI. We're looking at the whole brain, not just a small area of it, and we're trying to figure out what's going on in there. and look at the average amount of response. These experiments typically proceed in what's called now the forward or encoding direction. What was most effectively revealed by these analyzes are differences in the cortex at the scale of regions, what one region as opposed to another region does, so what the brain is trying to do. The unit of analysis in these experiments was the amount ofresponse. And you look at how varying that dimension in your stimuli causes differences. in the magnitude of the thing that you're measuring. kind of large-scale structure of the cortex is on the scale maybe of a centimeter. And that turns out in many contexts-- especially in the back half of the brain, the representation regions-- to correspond in some sense to the stimulus type. What kind of thing were you dealing with? What is it that you're looking at or processing? And then this is, I think, in some ways the shortest possible version of Nancy's amazing 30-year research program of figuring out how to parcellate cortex. that we're presenting to you. And divide up in this forward direction. Think of a type of stimulus. Find the brain region where the magnitude of response is selective to that stimulus type. MVPA analyses-- so multivoxel pattern analysis-- are contrasted to this in the sense that they tend to tend to be more focused on one area of the brain and not the whole brain. And that's what we're going to do in this article. We'll show you how to do it in your own brain. be multivariant. So that is, you're looking at not how much on average a group of voxels respond, but the relative response between one voxel and another from trial to trial. So you'reLooking at which of two voxEL is higher or lower than the other, rather than what their average response is. It's a way of looking at how a person reacts to a situation rather than how much they respond to it. It can be a way to see how people respond to different situations. The answer at the end is-- given that I got this pattern, what can I figure out about the stimulus? So that's the way many of these analyzes proceed. These analyzes are most interesting when they're looking for things smaller than a region. This is again another interesting long answer to the question: How much of the overall amount of activity is in the brain? It has mostly, though not always, been used in the reverse or decoding direction. The answer is that it's a lot. conversation that I would have got to at the end. All the mathematical techniques of MVPA could be used to rediscover all of the things Nancy already discovered using the traditional analyses. And in fact, if you use them uncarefully that's what you're most likely to do, because those are the most common ways of finding out what's going on in the world. That's the way to get to the bottom of the mystery of the human brain. It's a mystery that no one has ever solved. huge signals in the brain. And so if you're not careful, what you will do is just re-go over old territory with new math. I am more interested in these techniques when they let us see things we could never see before. So when, instead of telling us about region, they instead tell us about brain region. That's what I'm interested in. I want to know what's going on in that part of the brain that we don't know about yet. I'd like to know how it works. level differences or centimeter scale differences, they're telling us about much smaller and more interleaved populations on the spatial and representational skills. What they're revealing are not the type classifications of stimuli-- so the things that decide whether this region or that region will be more activated-- but but things that make the difference between activation and non-activation in a population. The study was published in the journal Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, published by the University of California, Los Angeles. For more, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/science/science-and-behavior/features/features. for a given type of stimuli, what are the key dimensions of representation. So the reason why I think MVPA is giving a new life to fMRI is because many of the most interesting questions about cognition and cognitive science that we wanted to answer and that fMRI never let us answer are now being answered. For more information on MVPA, go to: www.mvpa.org.uk. for more information about the MVPA brain imaging platform, or go to www.vmpa.org for more details. MVP.us answer were about within-stimulus type features or dimensions. So within-type dimensions of importance-- and MVP.us is letting us do that in its most interesting applications. What makes this face look like person A versus person B? What make this thought predict moral blame versus not blame? The answer was to ask what makes this thought look like a person A and a person B, and what makes it look like two people A and one person B. The answer were to ask about what makes the face look different. Intuition here is that-- think about a region, like the right TPJ, or the face area if you think about faces. Or V1 is often where I start, because we know enough about V1 that I can use it to imagine what we're talking about. So you can think about that whole area. And you think, what can we learn about what it does. Does everybody here have some sense of V1? Everyone's had kind of a first introductory neuroscience class, OK. LGN of your thalamus to V1.LGN is the first cortical stop of visual information. It's very involved in vision. If you were doing visions, if you're seeing visual stimuli, you get a big response in V1 LGN. If they're not visual, you don't get a response in LGN at all. LGN is a very important part of the brain's ability to process visual information, and it's very important for vision. It is the most important area in the brain for visual processing. stimuli, like you're hearing auditory stimuli or feeling tactile stimuli, you don't get a big response in V1. So that's a selectivity type measure. It's a univariate measure for the amount of activity in VI that tells you V1 is in some way involved in vision, relative to audition or somatic sensation. But that misses pretty much all the interesting contributions that visual cortex makes to vision. We want to know what transformations V1 has made to our vision. over the information coming from LGN is V1 implementing-- what computational transformations, what representations. And that's why theories like Marr's theory-- which say that it's edge detection, or that there are receptive fields, that it depends on the contrast, the position, and the orientation of the information in the field. That's why it's important to have a theory of edge detection that can be applied to the LGN. It can be used to understand how LGN works. that counts as an account of the representation that V1 forms of the image in the first bottom-up sweep. In a way, that's saying "it's involved in vision" doesn't even begin to count. OK, so the question is, if we were going to look at V1, could we discover from it? The answer is yes, and it could be a lot more interesting than we first thought. It could be the key to understanding how the human mind works. fMRI that V1, for example, has an orientation map, that neurons in V1 have an orientation preference. That's a key feature of the computation V1 does. Different from the LGN and the retina, the orientation map is a preference for the orientation. It's a different feature of V1 than it is of the retina or LGN. It is a key part of the computations that take place in the V1 region of the brain. And it's a very important part of that computation. of a contrast and edge. And the answer in standard analyses is-- no, you can't, because V1 as a whole will activate to big images regardless of the orientation of the content of the image. So you need to be able to get to something more fine-grained than V1. You need to go beyond V1 to get the best image quality. You can do this by using a combination of V1, V2, V3 and V4, and other tools. For more information on how to use these tools, visit iReport.com. need to be able to say there are different subpopulations of neurons inside V1. And that's the decoding perspective that says, if we wanted to look at V1 and know is the line like this or like that, the way we would tell is not how much activity there is in V1, but is there relatively more activity in the population of neurons that responds like this, or in the subpopulation of neuronsthat responds like that. It's a way of looking at the brain. like that? And it's the relative activity in those two populations that would let you say, is the line like this, or is it like that. That's population coding or population decoding. And then you take that to the fMRI level. So now you want to say, can we tell what's going on in that area? And that's population decoding, or population coding. It's a very complex process, and it takes a long time to get to the bottom of it. which of those two subpopulations is more active in fMRI? Now, if you could measure the individual neurons, then decoding from the population is simple. What makes it really hard is that we don't know how many neurons are active in each subpopulation. We just know that they're all active in different parts of the brain, and we can try to figure out which parts are more active. That's what makes fMRI really hard. It's like trying to tell the difference between two different types of people. in fMRI is that the unit of measurement is the blood oxygenation in 100,000 neurons. And so it seems potentially really unlikely that you would be able to tell from the fMRI signal whether the neurons that prefer bars like this or bars like these are the ones that prefer to drink at the bar that is at the top of the list. It would be really unlikely to be able. to tell. from fMRI signals whether they prefer bars that are at the bottom of the chart or the top. are more active, because they're all intermixed inside a single measurement in fMRI. The reason we used to focus on how much activity with fMRI is that it was quite plausible that that's all that was going on. And so it's not stupid that we usedto focus on things likeHow much activity. With fMRI, it's quite plausible to find out how active a person is by looking at their brain waves. It's quite possible to find that a person's brain waves are more active if they're mixed together. fMRI could tell us. The neural populations, like orientation preferring neurons in V1, were too spatially mixed to tell the difference between them in fMRI. And so what we were going to get was just how much activity in the population as a whole. So the traditional way of thinking was that fMRI could only tell us what the population was doing. But that's not what fMRI was able to do. It could only show us how many neurons were active in a particular area. There's so many things that could cause fine spatial patterns that we don't care about. Noise, for a start. Where the blood vessels happen to be is another thing. We don't want to know what's going on in the brain that we can't see. We just want to be able to see what the brain is doing at the time. That's what fMRI is supposed to help us with. It's not supposed to tell us what's happening in the body. We want to see how the brain works. FMRI is such a core spatial measure, that the only thing it could tell you was the average over the millions of neurons that make up a region. And there's a key intuition underlying MVPA. So there's the big signal, says Dr. David Perry. And so people assumed, I think very reasonably, that because fMRI is a core measure, it would tell you what the average is. But that's not the case, he says. He says fMRI can tell you a lot more than people think. which is the regional signal-- V1 and vision-- and there's lots of noise. But there might also be inside there a tiny bit of spatial pattern. And so from the relative activity in those two voxels, we could still tell you the orientation. That was the intuition behind the study. It's a tiny, subtle little signal superimposed on top of this massive signal, which is the average of V1. That's what we're trying to do with this study. multivoxel pattern analysis when it was first proposed. And it's now sweeping the fMRI world, many different versions of these analyses. And so actually what I'm going to do again-- to give you a more concrete sense of what this is and how it works-- is I'm just going to go through the different types of analyses and show you what they look like. And I'll end with the one that I think is the most useful for us right now, which is the one we're using right now. show you two different ways MVPA is done concretely in my lab to try to get you more of a sense of what's going on. And we can come back to these more general issues of what it's measuring and what that means. OK, so here's what it looks like. Here's how MVPA looks like in a lab. Here is what it looked like in the lab. And here is how it looks in a real-life lab. It looks like this. when we do MVPA. Again, if it helps, think about the analogy from vision. We've gone from saying, is this vision or audition, to trying to say which orientation is it. So we're moving from saying,. is this theory of mind or not, to try to say anything interesting about. MVPA, which airs on BBC One, BBC Two and BBC Three, is due to be released in the UK on September 14. For more information, visit www.mvpa.com. the space within theory of mind-- some dimension that might matter within theory. And the first dimension or potential feature that we wanted to look for we chose because it really matters to human judgments. And it's the one that you guys did in the very beginning of the project. It's the first thing that we looked for in the first few minutes of the show. It was the first place that we started looking for the first part of the movie. It is the first time that we've ever looked at the first half of the film. my talk-- telling the difference between somebody who knowingly or unknowingly commits murder. That, as you saw, makes a huge, huge difference in behavior. And also, we know it's represented in the right TPJ because of the TMS experiment. If we mess up the signaling in the TPJ, we change. We change behavior. We don't want to change behavior, but we want to make sure we're doing the right thing. We want to be able to tell the difference. that judgment. And so that was our best guess, that if any feature of other people's mental states is represented in the right TPJ, it would be that feature. If MVPA was ever going to be able to decode a feature of others' mental states, we should start there, we thought. We were wrong, but it was a good guess, and we're still trying to figure out how to get to the bottom of it. We're still working on it. That was the idea. In every every trial you read a long, complicated story that sets up a murder. So here's an example. Your family's over for dinner. You want to show off your culinary skills for one of the dishes. Adding peanuts is one way to do it. That's how it works in the real world. It's not that way in the movies. But it's a good way to get people to try it out for a few minutes. And it's fun to watch. will bring out the flavor. So you grind up peanuts and put them in the dish and feed everyone. Your cousin, one of the dinner guests, is severely allergic to peanuts. You had absolutely no idea about his allergy when you added the peanuts. And then at the end of the meal, you add the peanuts again to make it even more delicious. You add them to the dish again and again until everyone is full. You then add the peanut butter to the top of the dish to make the final touch. ask how much blame you should get. This is in the second person and doesn't matter. What's nice about this experiment is that we can do a relatively minimal pair. Somebody asked me if you could do it in the first person, and you can. You can do it if you want to. It's a very simple experiment. You don't have to be a genius to do it. It just has to be done in a relatively small way. It doesn't need to be the whole story. So in all of our old experiments we wrote one set of stories about people's mental states and a completely different set of story about other things. In this experiment, we make one tiny change. So we make, for example, a change in the way we talk to people about their mental states. And those stories are different in many, many,Many ways. And that's what we're going to try to do in this experiment. And we'll see how it works out in the future. a change from you had no idea to you knew. We change on average two to four words in this whole long scenario. So we can make these tiny interventions. It's a complicated stimulus, but the change we make is very small and totally changed the meaning of the whole. We can make a very small change in a very long scenario and it can have a huge impact on the way the story is written and the way it's told. It can change the way people see the world. story by just changing your mental state. Whether you knew or you didn't know about your cousin's peanut allergy is really important to the moral judgment of what happened. We know that. And it's represented in the story by just Changing your Mental State. OK, what univariate analyses would say is, this is a really important fact. Whether or not you know about it, it's still important to your moral judgment. And you can do something about it if you want to. right TPJ, because if we TMS the rightTPJ, you make your moral judgments of this distinction specifically change. But if you ask how much does the right TPJ respond to these stories, the answer is the righttpJ responds exactly equally to these two conditions. And the intuition is, if we have a righttpj, we can make the right moral judgments about what is right and what is not right. And we can do this by TMSing our TPJ to the right level. because in both cases it matters what you think. It matters that you knew, and it matters thatyou didn't know. And the right TPJ is tracking the important information about what you Think. And so it's activated for both of these kinds of stories. So that's a univariate analysis. And that's what we're trying to do with this story. We want to make sure that we're getting the most out of this story, and that's why we're using the TPJ. The key intuition behind a multivariate analysis. The idea is to think in a very abstract similarity space. If we take the two stories-- and so we take. the story you had no idea about your cousin's allergy when you added the peanuts. That is a multivariable analysis. That's a new way of looking at the world. It's a very different way of thinking about the world than the way we normally think about it. It can be very different from what we think we know. story is complicated. It has many important dimensions. Now we take a new story. This is a story about, for example, a faulty parachute. Within that story there's many, many different dimensions. It's about parachutes. There's all kinds of complicated things going. But there's this one feature-- whether you knew it or not, it's a parachute. Whether you know it or whether you think you do, it is a parachutes story. It is a parachute story. or didn't know that the parachute was faulty. There's another story about publicly shaming your classmate by saying something embarrassing about their essay. So again, that's a whole new scenario with all kinds of dimensions in it. But there's this one feature. Did you know or not know that there was a feature in the parachute that made it easier for people to fall out of it? If so, it's a good thing you didn't see it. If you did, it could have been a lot worse. person who wrote the essay was in the room when you said that publicly shaming thing? A different story is about demonstrating your karate skills and knocking out your classmate-- again, totally new moral scenario. But again, this one feature-- did you know or not know that your classmate was a drug addict? Did you know that you were in the same class as your drug addict classmate? Do you know you were involved in a drug deal? Did your classmate tell you about the drug deal or did you not know? there when you did the kick? Now here's the idea. Even though each of those new scenarios is completely different, if there are different subpopulations within your right TPJ responding when you knew you were going to cause harm-- compared to when you didn't know you'd cause harm, that could be a sign of a good TPJ. If you have a TPJ that responds differently to different situations, you may have a better TPJ than you think. You may also have a more active TPJ when you know you're about to do something bad. harm-- then even though the pattern of activity in your right TPJ will be different on every trial-- because you're representing a different person having a different mental state in a different context-- a little part of that response will be the same. Or it will beDifferent in the same context. Or It will be Different in the Same Context. That's what happens when you're trying to represent a person who is in a mental state that's different from what you're used to seeing. same way, right, because the same cell population will be more active for all the stories that have knowing harm. And so the logic is that if we could look in the right way, we could find the right stories. And the other population would be relatively active in all the story that have the unknowing harm. That's the way it works, I think, and I think it's a good way to look at the world. I don't think there's any reason why we shouldn't try to find out what the right story is. TPJ and measure the pattern of activity-- and hope that reflects something like the relative activation of different cell populations inside the right TPJ. We hope that the pattern would be more similar for pairs or subsets of stories that share this one feature, and are different in every other. We also hope that this would be the case for all stories, and not just one or two stories in a set of stories. We're also hoping that this will be true for stories in general, not just stories in one story. way, compared to pairs that are different in every other way and don't share that feature. OK, so this is the central logic. Take any two stories within the set. They're all unique. So those two stories that are. different, you're representing a new mental state of a new person. That's how you represent a person's mental state. And that's the way you create a new character. So that's what we're trying to do with this set. You have a new pattern in your right TPJ. But if they share the feature that you knew you were going to cause harm, that would be something a little bit similar in yourright TPJ activation compared to if they don't show that feature. Does that logic make sense? Do you think it makes sense? Share your thoughts in the comments below or post a video on our Facebook page, Twitter or YouTube channel. We'll feature the best in our weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you've read. And so what you get is a spatial pattern of activation. So we're now not looking at how much the right TPJ responded. But within the space of the rightTPJ, where was there a little bit more or alittle bit less activity? And these signals are tiny compared to the rest of the population. And so we're not looking for the amount of activity, we're looking at where there was a little more or little more activity within the same area of the TPJ. to the thing I showed you before. So the amount of activity in the right TPJ is a big signal. The relative activity between one voxel and another is a tiny signal. And it's superimposed on a lot of noise. But if there's anything there at all, then you'll still be able to see it if you look hard enough. If you want to find out more, go to www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/science/science-and-tech/science.html. be able to pick up a little more similarity for pairs that are matched on the feature of interest compared to pairs that aren't. That's the logic behind a Haxby style analysis. And so literally what you do is, you take the vector and you compare it to a pair that is similar to you. And that's what the Hax by style analysis is about. It's a way of looking for patterns in the data that are similar to each other, rather than just one another. of responses across all the voxels inside a region, and you correlate them across subsets of your data. And you ask whether the correlation in space-- so what it looks like, the spatial pattern of activity over those voxel-- is more similar for pairs that share the feature you're interested. You can see the results of this experiment in the video below. The full video is available on CNN.com and the company's YouTube channel. Click here to watch the full video. in compared to pairs that don't share the feature that you're interested in. And what you get at is two numbers-- the correlation for pairs that do share the. feature and the correlation of pairs that didn't share it for each individual subject. And the question you ask in.in is: What is the feature you are interested in? And the answer is: It's the same for both you and the person you're talking to. In this case, it's the ability to share a feature with another person. a Haxby style correlation is what's called the within-condition correlation. So the spatial correlation of the response to two independent sets of stories that share this one feature-- is the spatial pattern more similar in that pair compared to a pair that don't share that feature. When everything else is the same, the correlation is not as strong as it would be if everything else was the same. For more on this story, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories and CNN iReport. CNN.com's John Sutter and his colleagues conducted an analysis of the correlation between within-condition and between-condition stimuli. They found that the within- condition correlation was higher than the between- Condition correlation. Sutter: "What you get out of an analysis like this-- for example, in our first attempt to do this in these stimuli-- there's these two correlations. And you ask if they're different. OK, and what we got in their first attempt was different?" experiment is that the within-condition correlation is significantly but a tiny bit stronger than the between- condition correlation. So there's a lot of things to ask about this. But the first question is-- is that real, or is that a coincidence? That is the first thing you want to know when you're doing a study like this, says Dr. David Frum, a professor of psychology at the University of California, San Diego. The study was published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. you see data like this. Afterwards, we can ask what does it mean. But let's start with is that real. And so the way that you ask is it real is, you just make sure that it would replicate, that in independent data you'd get the same answer. And that's how you make sure it's real, is that it's a real data set that you can replicate and get the answer you want? And so that's the way you start with. just before we set out to actually replicate this experiment, we remember that we had actually already run this experiment two times before-- because we were studying this process of representing accidental and intentional harms for a long time before we thought of using MVPA. So we had these two experiments that we used to do this experiment. We were studying the process ofrepresentation of intentional and accidental harms. We used MVPA to represent these two different ways of representing intentional and unintentional harm. We found that MVPA was the most effective way to represent this. old data sets in the lab, two whole independent experiments in which people had read stories about knowing and unknowing harm. And the other thing is that we had manipulated this distinction in different ways across the stimuli. So in the example I just told you, the way that we did it was to make people think that they were doing something that they weren't doing. And we did this in a number of different ways, so that we were able to get this effect across the whole range of stimuli. did it is, we said you knew about the allergy or you didn't know about the allergies. But in the older experiments, like this example I gave you at the beginning of the talk, we had described two different beliefs-- so either believing that it's sugar or believing that It's Not Sugar. It's not sugar or it's not not sugar, it's just a different type of sugar. That's what we're trying to find out. We want to know what the difference is between the two. poison, so no negation. This is just important because that's a different way to create the same distinction. And what you want to know is, are you decoding the abstract thing-- that she knew she was causing harm or not-- or something less abstract, like whether the story has negation, like "I'm sorry" or "I didn't mean to hurt you"? That's what you're trying to figure out, and that's what we want to find out. in it. That's an alternative possibility. And so in experiments B and C, we had done it this way. It's also in the third person, not the second person. So if we find the same result, then it generalizes across all these incidental features of the way the experiment was carried out, he says. He adds: "It's a very exciting time to be a scientist" in the U.S. and around the world, and he's looking forward to the future. "There's some weird magical property of being a scientist," he says. "If you don't know the hypothesis when you're running the experiment and you have all the data and then you go back and check, there's something more real about it" "There's just this experience like, if I had the hypothesis in my head, maybe it somehow got from my head to the data. But when the data is there, that makes no sense whatsoever," he adds. "That's experiment two, and that's experiment three" were already there and then you went back and analyzed them and the effect was hiding in the data that you'd had on your server, there's something way more real and magical about that. So anyway, because it was there in all of our old data, I just believed it. I just thought that it was a good idea, and I was right. I was wrong. I'm so glad I did it. It was a really good idea and I'm very happy to have done it. was true. The other thing to notice about this is, to get an MVPA signal, we didn't change anything about the fMRI. We didn't changed the resolution-- the temporal resolution, the spatial resolution. You can know that for sure, because these are our old data that we had before we had MVPA. You could know that because these were our oldData that we Had before we Had MVPA Signals. That's how we knew it was true. We could know it because we had the old data. started doing MVPA. MVPA is not a technique for collecting better data, it's a technique to get more information out of the same data. It's an analysis technique, not a way of getting data. OK, so what this says is that however similar the data is, the results are not the same. That's not what MVPA says. It says that the data should be analysed in a different way to get the same results. That doesn't mean the results should be the same, that means the analysis should be different. two unrelated stories are about a case in which somebody kills somebody, they are more similar if they are both cases of knowing murder. So just making that future match makes the pattern of neural response in the brain change. If you cross that feature, you are more likely to have a case of unknowing murder than if you don't cross it at all. So that's what we're trying to do in this case. We're looking for a pattern in the neural response that will lead us to solve the case. right TPJ more similar, suggesting that which part of the right TPJ is more or less active contains information about whether or not the person who committed the murder knew what they were doing at the time. So these are a bunch of similar TPJs. This is specific to the rightTPJ. So, for example, in the case of a murder, the TPJ that is most likely to be active is the one that is more likely to have been involved in the murder. This could be because the murder took place in the middle of the night. the other brain regions involved in theory of mind and social cognition. And none of them contain any information about this dimension at all. So this dimension is represented in the right TPJ and not represented anywhere else. There's another thing that makes these data interesting. People are reading these people are reading them because they want to know what's going on in their brains. They want to understand what's happening in the brain. So they're looking for information about the right brain regions to understand it. stories, and they're making moral judgments. And moral judgments of these stories vary across people. It's not extreme individual variability. Everybody agrees that it's worse to be a bad person than to not be a good person at all. But some people tend to go more with what the person thought, whereas other people tend. to go with what they caused, he says. He says that's the way it should be, and that's how people should feel about other people's bad behavior. knowingly murder than to unknowingly murder. But there is variability in how much worse. Some people think that basically what you thought you were doing is all that matters in these stories, whereas other people think both of those things matter. So it matters to some degree that you caused the death of the person you were trying to kill. But it matters a lot more that you didn't intend to kill the person that you were attempting to kill, and that you did not intend to do it. the murder and to some degree that you didn't know. So there's individual variability. And one thing that we can look at is, how does the individual variability in the behavior relate to the Individual Variability in the representation? So what this looks like is, on the x-axis I measure -- on the X-axis, I measure the individual variability in the representation. And on the Y-axis we measure the individual variance in the representation. for you, how much worse are intentional than accidental harms. How much worse is it when you knew you were going to cause harm than when you didn't know? So that's always going to be a positive number. Everybody thinks it's worse. But for some people, it's a lot worse. For example, if you know you're going to harm someone, you're more likely to harm them intentionally than accidentally. That's a good thing. But it can also be a bad thing. than it is for other people. And then relate that to, while you were reading that story, how different were the patterns in your brain when you wereReading about knowing harm compared to unknowing harm. Does that make sense? They're pretty correlated. So the more that you represented knowing knowing, the more likely it was that you were to think of harm in a negative way. And so on and so on, until you get to the point where you think of it in a positive way, that's how you think about it. harm as different from unknowing harm in your right TPJ. The more that you judged them as different when we asked you for moral judgment, the more likely you were to judge them differently. The pattern difference in your left TPJ accounts for 35% of the variance in your moral judgment. That's pretty amazing, because that's a lot of people's judgment. And it's a big difference, too, because it accounts for so much of our moral judgment in the first place. pretty noisy measurement. Actually it's both. It's a pretty noisy measurement of your brain. So it's quite amazing that those are that correlated. So that's what's cool about the data. But we'll get to the method. So Haxby style correlations-- these are Hax by style correlations -- these are quite amazing. They are very noisy, but it's a very good way to get the results you want. So we're going to talk about how we got them. called Haxby style because they were the first form of MVPA introduced, and they were introduced by Jim Hax by in 2001. It took a long time for other people to recognize what a cool technique this was. But he had this idea a very, very, long time ago, and it was a very good idea. It was a great idea, and I'm very proud of it. I think it's a really, really, great technique. It's a great way to get the most out of your camera. long time ago. And the idea is, take a region you care about and ask this basic question. For some future that I wonder if it's represented, is the correlation across neural responses more similar when the stimuli share that feature than when they don't share it? So that that could be represented in some way in the future, I don't know if that's possible yet, but I think it's a good question to try and figure out how to do it. I think that would be a good first step. gives you a pretty robust measurement, because you're using all the voxels in the region to get one number out-- the correlation. And you're doing it over partitions of the data, often halves of thedata, so many trials are going into both the train and test. So in this case, the correlation is pretty robust, and that's what we're trying to get out of this study. It's a pretty good measurement, too, because we're looking at the correlation of the whole data set, not just one region. case we're using halves of the data, even halves and odd halves. And so each of the things we're correlating is a relatively less noisy neural measure because it has many trials averaged into it. So it's robust and simple. In this case, it can be sensitive to pretty minimal changes in the data. It can be very sensitive to very small changes in a lot of things, such as a change in the level of noise in a data set. It's a very robust measure and it's very simple to use. stimulus variations. As I showed you, this is a two- to four-word variation on an 80-word story. So it's sensitive to small distinctions in the stimuli. Here we showed that it generalizes. So we used totally independent stories in the train and test set. And so we're always generalizing from the stimuli that we're looking at in the story. We're always looking for ways to generalize from the story that we are looking at, and that's what we did here. one set of examples to a totally different set of example. It gave us a measure that was stable within a participant in the sense that the measure in each individual related to that individual's behavior. So it's characterizing individuals in a relatively stable way. And we could show that we could do that with a group of people. It was a very stable way of characterizing people, and it was a stable measure of people's behavior, too, in a way that was relatively stable. it differs across regions. So we could show that this was present in the right TPJ but not present in other regions. And that's a bunch of stuff you would want to know. That's a whole bunch of extra information than we ever were able to get before. And I'll be back in a few days to talk more about how we got to this stage in the game. I'm looking forward to hearing from you all again in the next few days and weeks. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. give you one more example of the way that Haxby correlations can be used. So in this case I showed you, we hypothesized one dimension. And we tried to decode that dimension. Obviously, you don't only have to do one. And so another way to do this is to build a model of the world from scratch, which is what we did in the case of this example. We built a model from scratch from scratch with the data that we had. And then we used that model to solve the problem of how to build the model. stimulus sets that, for example, have two orthogonal dimensions and ask about both of them. So again, you're reading stories about people who are having experiences. And some sets of these sets of stimuli have two different dimensions. So here's an experiment in which we asked about decoding two Orthogonal differences within the same set of stimuli. And we ask about decoding the difference between the two dimensions in the same stimuli set. And that's what we did in this experiment. stories vary. Leslie has just been in a big, important interview. He sees himself in a mirror, and he sees that his shirt has a big coffee stain down the front. Another one is-- Eric gets to a restaurant to meet his friends and finds that he's got a stain on his shirt. And another one is -- Eric sees that he has a stain in his shirt, and it's a big one. He's got to get it out of his system before he goes out with friends. fiance's parents, and he sees them and they're looking happy So that's two completely different stories. And then, Abigail is painting her dorm room, and she hears somebody's footsteps down the hallway. And the footsteps sound like her beloved boyfriend's. So these stories are all different. Again, again, these stories were written for a different audience, but they were all inspired by real-life events and people's reactions to them. The book is published by Simon & Schuster at $20. they're all different. But the first two stories I read you share a feature, which is that somebody in the story is seeing something. And they don't share that feature with the third story, in which somebody in that story is hearing something. Does that makes sense? Compared to, for example-- Compared to,. for example, when you're in a car and you're driving and you think you're going to see something. But you're not. You're driving. You don't see anything. Quentin hears a phone message, and the message says she has bad news to tell him. That's another story that shares this feature that somebody in the story is hearing something. And so we can use this set of stories to ask, is the neural response to stories in which people hear something different than they think they are hearing it? That's what we're trying to find out in this series of stories, and we'll show you how to do it in the next few weeks. somebody is seeing something more similar within that set? So one set of stories about seeing something is compared to another set of story about seeing. Are those stories more similar to one another than when you cross that feature? And so in the right TPJ, what we found is that stories about see are more similar than stories about hearing. And stories about hear are moreSimilar to each other than they are to other stories when they are cross-referenced. And so that's what we did. But, as you may have noticed, the stimulus set had another distinction in it, which is whether the thing is good or bad that's happening to you. So finding out after an interview that you have coffee down your shirt or hearing a message that says there's bad news, those are the stimulus sets. Those are the "good" and "bad" stimulus sets, respectively. The stimulus set is the one that tells you if you're having a good day or a bad day, or if you need to go to the bathroom. are both bad things. Whereas seeing your fiance looking happy or hearing that your beloved boyfriend is coming down the hallway, those are both good things. And so we could ask in the same dataset, what about stories that share this feature of valence. The pairs of stories that are both bad and good are called the "bad-fiance" and "good-boy" pairs. The "good" pair is the "fiancée" and the "boyfriend" pair. matched on valence, do they have a more similar neural signature. And in the right TPJ they're not. We've actually found this a whole bunch of times. The rightTPJ doesn't care about valence. Other regions do-- don't worry, we'll find out what they do. We'll let you know when we find out how they do and what they don't do. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from."What's the difference?" you ask. "The difference is the neural signature of the two stories" Do represent valence. But the right TPJ doesn't. So that's another way that you can use this method-- hypothesize two or three orthogonal dimensions within the same stimulus set. And then we can get, for example, interactions between these to say, OK, the rightTPJ does represent some valence, but not all of it. It's a very powerful way to think about the way that the brain works. It can be very powerful. It really is. dimensions, doesn't represent other dimensions-- in principle. So you can test potentially multiple orthogonal distinctions. There's a whole bunch of limitations of Haxby style correlations. One of them is that all the tests are binary. The answer you get for anything you test is that there is or is not a dimension. It's a binary test. It doesn't mean there's a dimension, it just means there's an answer to a question about whether there is a dimension or not. information about that distinction. There's no continuous measure here. It's just that two things are different from one another or they are not different. And so once people started thinking about this method, it became clear that this is actually just a special case of a much more general idea of what it means to be different from the same thing. That's what we're trying to get at here. We're not trying to say that everything is the same, we're just saying that it's different from what it once was. more general way of thinking about fMRI data. This particular method, using spatial correlations, is very stable and robust. But it's a special case of a much more general set. It's a very stable, robust method, but it's not a very general way to look at fMRI. It doesn't work for all fMRI patients, but for some, it could be a very useful tool. It could be used in the future to help people understand their brain's responses to stress.