CNN's Jeff Grossman takes a look at the big picture of energy storage. He talks about why electrical storage is important and why it could be used in the future. Grossman: "I want to start with this sort of big picture, all right. So we're going to kind of introduce energy storage, and then we'll talk about sort of why Electrical storage is kind of a thing and important" "Then we'll kind of go," Grossman says, "to the next phase of the story" into batteries and then talk about the chemistry of batteries and throw in a couple of, why this matters. So if you think about this on a planetary scale, actually, the planet is kind of a storage device. It's an energy storage device for that thing over there, right, and it's also a power source for the rest of us. So that's what we're trying to do with the solar system, to make it more efficient and more energy efficient. And we're going to do it with the help of a lot of other people, too. so like if you think about all the energy flows that go on on planet Earth, well, then you've got-- there's a picture I like. It kind of shows you the different energy flows, right. You've got the sun, so you'veGot like solar radiation. You're got tides, there's the tides. There's the moon. There is the sun. There are the planets. And then there are the stars. And there are all these other things that make up our planet. moon, you've got wind. You've got all these kinds of energy happening on the planet, all the way down to life happening, rock formation, right. And then sometimes those things, you know, rocks can form alloys over millions and millions of years. And the thing is, if you think about it, right, that's what's going on on the moon. That's what is going on in the solar system. And that's why we're looking at it. this, where you draw the line is somewhat arbitrary in a sense, right. It depends on our use. I mean, if you think about it, fossil fuels are actually a renewable source of energy on geological scales. The problem is that it's like 10, 20, 30 million year old sunlight, right? So where do you draw that line? I don't know. I think it's a very difficult question. It's very, very difficult to answer. I'm not sure where to draw it. right, and it'll happen again, but the question is how do we store energy on timescales that matter to us. And so you can draw this line and then think about what that means, and typically, most sort of energy storage needs are going to be around a year or a year and a half. That's the kind of time frame we're looking at. We're going to need to be able to store that energy on a long-term basis, and that's where we need to start. less, right. OK, so now why electricity? Why electricity, right? So the thing is, electricity is more and more important in our lives, and if you look at just sort of like the major sectors, so you have the power generation, you have transportation. You have industry, you've got buildings, buildings, and so on. So you have to make sure that you have enough electricity to power all of these things. And so that you don't have to rely on fossil fuels to power them. So that's what we do. and this is a plot of these sectors and the CO2 emissions. You can plot all sorts of things about these sectors. This is CO2 versus time. These are kind of the major contributors, but the thing is electricity, because of things that are happening as well, the opportunity-- either in electricity, or in other ways, to reduce CO2 in the environment. It's a very complex issue. It is a very, very complex problem. It has to be solved. It can't just be solved with carbon dioxide. Electricity has sort of about a 70% role, about a70% opportunity of all of this. In an electric car it's not going to be useful if you have to have it plugged in all the time, right. And so most of this 70% is not currently-- it's the potential for the electricity to be used in a variety of ways, including transportation, for example. That's how much electricity matters here, but the thing is that electricity, as you know, in an electric cars it'snot going to being useful if it's plugged in every time. electrification of our world that is happening. That's how much electricity will play a role, but most of it is useless unless you can store it. So storage of electricity is clearly really, really important. And so we get to sort of how do you think about storage technologies, and how do we get the most out of our energy resources? It's a very exciting time for us, and I'm looking forward to seeing what the future has in store for us in the years to come. again, I just want to kind of gently introduce us to energy storage and we'll go into batteries. Now so the kind of plot that I'm showing you here, talking about Ashby plots, right, but this is actually a different kind. It's a special kind because it has to do with energy storage. And we'll be talking about batteries, too. We'll be looking at different kinds of batteries and different types of energy storage, as well as energy-efficient batteries. with energy storage, and there's a guy who in the 1960s, David Ragone, he first-- And it's actually fascinating. He wrote a paper in 1968, a review of batteries for electric vehicles in 1968. And he's saying, how do I put-- there's all these possibilities. We want to electrify, right? And he says, "There's all those possibilities. There's all this energy storage that can be used to do that," he says. our transportation fleet, but which batteries make the most sense? And so he decided to plot them on these two axes, energy stored versus the power and that's a very common way. These are called Ragone plots now, so it's the energy versus power. And this is how you'll see how the fleet will look in the future, he says. He says it will be interesting to see how it will change over the next few years, and how the technology will change as a result. a lot of discussions. If you look online and you're interested in energy storage as a field, you'll see a lot of plots like this where you got, OK, so energy is like watt hours, right. And so that's energy per time times time, so we can have lots of fun with that. But so what that means if you think about it a little bit, if you plot energy storage technologies on plots such as this, then these are all the different technologies on one plot. diagonal lines are one number of time. It's like if you had a given density and you're using it at a given rate, a giving power, then that's how long it would last. So these plots are really convenient. They're really convenient ways to compare energy technologies. OK, so those are those. Now, let's go to the other side of the room and see what's going on with the power station. What's going to happen next? What's the result? would be like, I've got energy storage technology and it's got this much density, this much power-- well, then it's going to last if I use it at that power for 41 days and so forth. Now the interesting, though, there's lots of stuff on here. Why don't I just use it? I don't know. Why not? I'm going to use it. I'm not going to stop using it, I'm just going to keep using it. want high and high? That sounds like a good thing, right, so shouldn't we be pumping water up hills all over the place? Well, obviously, if you think about it, you don't do that in your phone. You don't even do that. in your backyard. You aren't even doing that in the first place. You're not supposed to be doing that. You should be doing it in the middle of the night, when it's dark. You shouldn't be doing this in the morning, when the sun is up. in a town. Why? Because pumped hydro is extraordinarily limited. You have to do it at very large scales. It's very low energy density, right. It is one of the oldest ways we have of storing energy. I'm just thinking of the waterwheel, but it's just as important as a waterwheel. It can be used to store energy in a very large way, for example, in a power plant or a power station in a rural area, or even in a city. very constrained, so we can't use this in most applications, pumped hydro. But OK, oh, so this is compressed air, CAES. That's got a whole lot of limitations as well. We've got, just to give you the abbreviations, Superconducting Magnetic Coils. Superconducters, right, just keep keep keep Superconducter. That sounds good. That was the name of the device. It's called a superconducting superconductor, or SSC. it going. And then you draw the [MUMBLES] and it just keeps going forever. It's a great battery, right, except for all the problems that it has and how much it costs, but it's a really cool concept and it's here. All of these things exist. All the things that we're talking about here are real and they're going to be on the market in the next few months or so. We just don't know when they'll go on sale. exist. They all exist and they're all very interesting and important energy storage devices. So that's the main point. So like here, you know supercaps, you build up a lot of charge in a solid. Here you've got flywheels. Well, I'm just saying that they all exist. They're interesting, important, electrical energystorage devices, right. So, that's what I'm trying to get at. I'm not trying to say that they're not important. rotating something heavy really, really fast. I get worried about that. I don't want to be in that building, but they do build flywheel energy storage device where you slow it down and then you generate electricity from that. So these kinds of plots are really,really, really helpful for us. We're going to use them a lot in the future, I'm sure, and I'm excited about the possibilities for the future of the country. I'm looking forward to it. comparing one energy technology with another. Now, the thing is as I said, there's a whole list of these and it goes on and on. Oh, that's really hard to see. They've all got a lot of limitations, all right, and so capacitors have a low density. You can convert you can convert them all into different types of energy. That's what we're trying to do here. We're not trying to create a new type of energy, we're just trying to find a new way of using it. energy into some fuel and store it and then combust it. That's got low round-trip efficiency. This is what we're going to talk about today, electrochemical. There are challenges there too. Kinetic, pumped hydro, there's so many different ways of storing energy. The thing is there is an advantage that there is a lot of energy that can be stored in the form of a liquid or a gas or a mixture of the two. It's called electrochemical storage. There is an advantage about using electrochemistry, and what is electro-- I just said the word Electrochemistry. I should tell you what that is, right, and it's the relationship between electricity and chemical reactions. I love saving time, rxns. That's equal to electrochem chemistry. I'm a big fan of saving time. It's a great way to go about your day. I like to save time. I don't like to waste time. That means I'm going to save a lot of time. This isn't it. Now electrochemistry, OK. And so what you'll see is like things like electrochemical energy storage, and this isn't just one type of thing. It's not just one kind of battery, and it's not even just batteries. It is this broader definition, but we're going to talk about batteries today. We'll talk about electrochemicalenergy storage, or electrochemical battery storage, for a few minutes. And then we'll move on to something else. We're getting to the point where we're electrifying everything. We need electricity almost everywhere, even in your combustion car. You need electricity a lot more than you used to, than 20 years ago. And so as we electrify our cars, we're going to need more and more electricity. And that's a good thing, because it means we don't have to rely on fossil fuels as much as we used to. It means we can get more electricity from renewable sources. It's a very exciting time for us. world, and then I said I've got to store that energy, you start to think about what Carnot did. Now I'm paraphrasing here, but this is basically what he said if you think about how it applies to this conversion, which is that the second law of thermodynamics makes you store energy. That's what I'm trying to do with the solar panels. I'm going to store the energy in a way that makes it available to the next generation of solar cells. pay a penalty of energy if you convert it into heat and then back into electricity. Well, even if you just have heat in the first place and now you want to generate electricity from that, you're limited. We talked about this before, right, like that the energy density of a house is much lower than that of a power plant. It's a very, very complex process. It takes a long time to get to the point where you can make electricity from heat. But you can do it. gasoline, it's so high and it's such an amazing energy storage material because you can transport it safely, right. Yeah, but the thing is, I just gave you the example the car. You put it in your car. Does anybody know how efficient, how much of that energy your car can store? I don't know, but it could be a lot. I mean, it would be huge. It could be the future of the energy storage industry. It would be amazing. actually uses to move percentage wise? Take a guess? Yeah, it's 10% to 20%. It depends on the car-- my car probably 5%. It's an old car. So most of that gasoline's energy is going into waste. Why? Carnot. Now this is not a thermodynamics class, Carnot says. Carnot: "It's not about how much energy you use. It's about what you use it for. What you do with the energy that you use is what matters" but this comes into this so I wanted to mention Carnot and the fact that there is another way to do it. So you could do chemical reaction to heat. That's how we power most of our world today. A power plant gets up to a higher temperature so the heat is released into the atmosphere. But Carnot says you can do it in a different way as well. He says you could use a mixture of chemicals and heat to create a new type of power plant. But he says it would take a long time to get to that point. penalty is less, but still most power plants, you lose about 50%. Most power plants at best are around 50% efficient in terms of converting the thermal energy into electrical energy. Yeah, but I can use a different way, and that's electrochemistry. And it's one of the reasons why electrochemical is more popular than traditional methods of power generation. It's a way of converting thermal energy to electrical energy in a way that's more efficient. And that's why it's called electrochemical. energy storage is so appealing, because you don't really pay a penalty. I can go back and forth without the second law hurting me. So I want to mention something about Carnot, about the second Law. This is not a class on energy storage, this is a class about the law. It's a very, very serious issue. It is a very serious matter. It has to be dealt with very carefully. And I think that we can do it. I think we can get it done. thermo, but the second law involves entropy so I had to say something, especially because it's in Averill, right, and that's your textbook that you're diligently reading every day, and there it is. And by the way, Averills has a beautiful chapter on batteries, chapter 19. I'm sure you know, as you're sure to have read it. It's called "Batteries and the Second Law of Entanglement" The second law of entanglement involves entropy, and so does the law of thermodynamics. It's really well written. This is what he says about entropy, though, and for now we can state that entropy is a thermodynamic property of all substances that is proportional to their degree of disorder. Averill, such a good book, but let me ask you guys a question. So people people people, what do you think about the idea of 'entropy' in the first place? I mean, it's a very interesting concept, but I don't know if it's very practical. Entropy is not about smoothness and it's not about disorder. So how many of you think the one on the left has a higher entropy? How many ofYou think it's the ones on the right? So the thing is it's on theleft. Why? Because entropy is notabout smoothness. That is wrong. Entropy is about disorder and disorder is not the same thing. It's about order and disorder. That's what entropy is about. So that's what I'm going to focus on. is about accessibility to states. It's about how many states you have to be in. Now, that can appear to be like disorder, right, but a messier room does not have higher entropy, and in this case, it's just simply the rules of the algorithm. I have rules here about accessibility, and that's what I'm trying to achieve here. I'm not trying to make you feel like you're in a mess, I'm just trying to get you to feel more comfortable. the dots are randomly selected but with the constraint that they cannot touch each other. That means that those dots had fewer possibilities. They had fewer states that they could be in. This system has much higher entropy. It's about the number of the dots being able to touch each each other, not about how many of them there are in the whole system. That's what makes it so much more interesting to play with than a computer game or a game of Monopoly, for example, which has a much lower level of entropy. states. I just want to make that-- again, this is not the topic of this class, but I've got to make my case about entropy when I can. And I brought up Carnot, so there you go. Entropy is not just disorder. Now OK, so we're back to batteries. Now we're going to take a break and go back to the classroom. We'll be back in a few minutes with the next lesson. We're going back to school. so electrochemistry, there's a lot of reasons why electrochemical storage is-- here's the chart again, right. It's this one here. You see that, electrochemical batteries, all right, that we're going to talk about. No penalty on the second law is no penalty on a second law, right? So that's one of the reasons why this is so appealing. There's a lots of other reasons why it's so appealing, too, including the cost. one of them. You can have transport easily, right. We drive electric cars. We see that. No pollution at the point of use-- pollution can be focused at the points of production. Also, the batteries can be charged by renewable technologies like solar wind, and they're very highly efficient. Electric cars can be used to transport people around the world, and there is no need to use fossil fuels for transport at the time of use, he says. He adds that electric cars can also be used as a way of transporting people. cars, for example, have a very high efficiency depending on the car, but upwards of 90% in terms of converting that electrical energy back and forth. The metrics that matter, I wrote a couple of them here, all right, watts, hours. These are the things that matter in batteries, but they're not the same thing in a car. It's the efficiency that matters, it's the hours that matter and the watts that matter. That's where the difference is, and that's where it's going to stay. so many other things matter, and this is why this is a complicated problem. And it's also why batteries are not in any way a one-size-fits-all. I mean, you know that from like AAs and AAAs and 9-volt, but it's so much more than that, because it's about the application. It's also about the fact that it's not just a battery, it's a device, and it can be used in a variety of ways. change not going from your computer to your phone but going from a car to a phone to a house to a grid. And so the needs are all going to be different, and then which ones of these things you care about is going to depend on what chemistry you have in your body. "It's not just going to go from your phone to your car, it's going to come from your car to your house to your home," he says. "You're going to have to change your chemistry to get it to work" you think about. It all comes down to the chemistry as we're going to see. It's all about the chemistry. And just to put a few numbers down, the cell phone has a few watts of power. Light bulb is 10 to 100. A AAA battery has 1.5 watt hours. A cell phone is a cell phone and a light bulb is a bulb. A battery is a battery and a cellphone is a phone. The chemistry is the same, but the power is different. of storage, all right, so that's how much energy is inside of a AAA battery. Needed to drive a car 200 miles, 100 kilowatt hours. Powering your house, 40 kilowatts max, depending on how many AC units you're running. It's just fun to think about these things, right. The world is a big enough place to have a battery that can store that much energy. It could be used to power a car for 200 miles or a house for 40. is this many watts as of a few years ago. So if you had, I think it's something like 20,000 billion AAA batteries, you could run the world for an hour-ish, something like that. These numbers are just fun to play with, so I wanted to put a few examples on the site to show you what I'm talking about. If you want to see more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and click through the gallery to see other examples. "It all began with this beautiful argument that I have to tell you because it's really a cool piece of history. And it took place in Italy," he says. "It was Galvani who was a physiologist, and he really was a great guy" "It's a really great story," he adds. "I'm so proud to have been a part of it. It's been a really, really great journey for me. I'm looking forward to the rest of it." loved the topic of why animals move, right. How is it that animals are moving? You know, how am I moving my muscles? How is anything moving? Well, there had been theories about this going all the way back. You remember Socrates and Plato, the elements, and the elements are the elements of motion. So what is motion and why do animals move in the way they do? We'll find out in the next episode of This Is Life with David Walliams, tonight at 10pm on BBC1. right, and aether? There were similar theories for motion of the human body. In fact, the word pneuma was used to describe the essence that goes through all living things that allows them to move. Well, Galvani didn't like that and he wanted something more concrete, and so he was the one who came up with the term 'pneuma' and the word 'aether' which is now used to refer to the etheric state of the universe. really trying to make a connection, especially between things that move and electricity. Now, it was difficult. There wasn't like a constant source. So you had electric generators in your lab at the time, but Galvani wanted to go big, so he hooked up his lightning rod to a frog. He wanted to make it look like a lightning rod, but it was actually a frog with a lightning bolt attached to the end of its tail. He also wanted to show that lightning could be used to create electricity. The frog was not alive, seriously, because then you'll see why-- at least I don't think so. I really hope not. Now I'm thinking about it, I'm getting a little bummed honestly, but I don's think they were alive. That doesn't look alive. So I'm not sure what's going on, but it doesn't seem like they're alive, so that's a bad sign, I think. I hope they're not alive. I'm so bummed. he hooked them up to lightning rods and he watched and he waited as the storm's coming, and he's like, the lightning rod hits and he hooked him up to some metals, and the frog went crazy. It was like, ah-ha, motion, electricity. He'd been jolting them in his lab. He had been joling them with lightning rods in his laboratory. It's like he was trying to make a lightning rod into a frog. He was doing it in a lab, and it was working. He's been doing it for years. with his own electric generator, but he wanted to go big, and also, they didn't know. at the time what electricity was, right, so they didn’t know if the electricity that he generated in his own thing was the same as the Electricity that came from the rest of the country. "They didn'tknow if the Electricity That He Generated in His Own thing was The Electricity That Came From The Rest Of The Country," he said. "And so they couldn't tell if it was the other way around" Galvani deduced that the motion itself is something that generates electricity. He saw that you get the same result. The frog still moved. So Galvani said the motion of a frog, and all motion of all living creatures, generate electricity. That's what he said. This is a really cool result. It's a really good example of the power of motion in the world of living things, he says. He says, "The motion of every living creature, including the frog, generates electricity" little article about this debate, because in Galvani's case, if you have two metal wires hooked up to a frog, like we say, if we close the loop, then what he said is that the charge that was already in there moves around the loop and back and makes the device work. If you have a frog and you connect it to a wire, then the wire will move around the frog and make the frog move. That's what happens in a frog-to-wire device. leg move. Volta got really interested in this and he said, you know, let me study this. He was a physicist at the time. He said, why do you keep using two different metals? So I think that's what he was trying to figure out, and that's why he was so interested in it. He thought it was fascinating, and he wanted to study it. And he was right, and it's a really interesting thing to look at, because it's so different from what we see today. this is about the metals, not the frog, and they had a big huge argument, right. So this is Volta's picture, is that it's when you connect two different metals that you get a charge flowing through the frog. Volta, I think, as many of you know, went on to go on to become a famous scientist. He was a great scientist, and he had a huge impact on our understanding of the history of the universe, and of science. win that argument, and we have the volt named after him, and he also created the first stable battery, the voltaic pile. Galvani on the other hand really opened the doors to the idea that we have electricity in our bodies, which is pretty cool. He also is the reason we have to have electricity at all in the first place, because of his work on the volt and the battery. He is also the reason that the volt is named for him, because he created the volt. why the story of Frankenstein was written. It's actually true because they went around and took all sorts of things and electrocuted them and showed that they moved, and often they weren't alive, and so Mary Shelley, I think, saw that. You went around like the countryside shocking people, and you went around shocking people. It was a very exciting time for Mary Shelley. She was very, very proud of what she had done and she was very happy to have done it. I actually meant that as like not literally, but just shocking them by what he's doing. And I don't think they ever used humans, but still, people's imaginations and so forth, and it was quite a thing. OK, very interesting story. Now, why does this matter? I've got two whys. I'm going to tell you what they did, and why they did it. And then I'll tell you why I think it's a good idea. This is called a little sun. There's over a billion people who can't read at night because there's no access to electricity. Today my first one is on a personal scale, smaller scale, and then my next one will be on a grid scale. This matters. This is a small sun, but it can make a big difference to a lot of people's lives. It's called alittle sun, and it's on a small scale. It can help you read. It could help you sleep. lot of the studying that you could do would be at night, right. So this is a really cool program. Why does this work? This is a solar cell but this wouldn't work unless you could store the electricity, right, so I wanted to make you guys aware of it. Little. Little is the name of the program that lets you study at night. It's called Little, Little Little. It is a program that allows you to study in the dark. Little Little is a project that allows people to study during the day. Sun. You just press this and you can read at night, right. That doesn't happen unless you've got electrochemical energy storage, right, and there's some stats up here. $25 billion liters of kerosene are used to meet the needs of the U.S. population. This is already making a big difference in millions of people's lives, and we're just getting started. We hope to see you on the next episode of The Sun at 10 p.m. ET. basic lighting needs in a lot of these places. That releases tremendous amounts of toxic fumes, and you can make a huge difference. But you know, it's sort of the same as cooking, right. So the challenge is, but you don't cook. So wood fire cooking is a huge problem, and we need to find a way to solve it. We need to get rid of the toxic fumes from the wood fire, but we also need to make sure we have basic lighting. If you have a solar cooker, that's great except that most people don't cook during the day. They cook at night or in the morning, right. And so you've got to store energy to make these things actually useful, right, and I really like this program so I wanted to use it for this. I want to show you how you can use it to make your own solar cooker. And I want you to share your photos and videos with the rest of the world so that we can all benefit from it. The best way to understand this is with a classic example. It's Volta's two different metals. Volta did that one of my, why this matters. And we'll go big on the next one, but let's get to the chemistry. So what happens in a battery? It's the same as a car battery. It has two different parts. It can be charged and discharged in different ways. And it can be used to make different types of batteries. It is the same like a car batteries. lots of metals. That's what he did. And he showed that the frog moved with most of them, so it's the metals. So let's take these two classic metals and show what happens. You've got copper and you've got zinc. Now, in this case, I'm just going to have a frog move with them, and I'm going to show you what it looks like. It's a frog moving with copper and it's going to move with zinc. zinc. This is the zinc piece of metal, and this is a piece of zinc, and I put it in a solution of copper ions. And so in this case, what do we have? Let's write this down. In this case,. I've got zinc solid. Well, before I write this, before he writes this, he put the zinc solid in a. solution of. copper ions, and he found that the copper ions were the key to the zinc. solid. down, let's write down what's in the solution. The solution is copper sulfate and this goes to everything that we've been talking about. So I've got a solution, a beaker, that has copper ions in it. How much? I don't know. Look up the K sp, right? Now we know how to do that. So 2 minus in solution. It turns blue and it gives you these ions that are dissolved in solution, and then you put a piece of zinc in there. So what happens is there. is a transfer of electrons, right. Now we talked a lot about electrons. We're talking about transfers of electrons. I mean, just think about it. We went from H, right, like this, and then we did this, OK. Here we go. It's aTransfer of electrons is a transferof electrons,right. We are talking about transferring electrons. It is a Transfer of electrons and it is a transferring of electrons in the same way that we talk about transferring atoms and molecules. little bit less sharing but still. All right, and then we did this, where it's like, OK, there's almost nothing there. It all went there. These are where my electrons are, all right. Well, then we put this in water and we got this, OK. And we got them sort of sort of in the same place. And then we went back and did it again, and it was the same thing. And it was like, okay, this is where the electrons are. of separated and this one just broke off with its electron, leaving a positive charge behind. So we've done all this. We know this, all right. So what's happening here is special because what's happened here is a trading of electrons. You see, in all the bonding that we have done, we have created a new kind of bond. We've created a bond between two electrons. We have a new type of bond, and we're going to use it to create new bonds. we're talking about how electrons share in bonds and then these things break apart, but now I'm going to do reactions that trade them. That's electrochemistry, and what happens when I put that zinc strip into that solution is this. The zinc that goes into solution is 2 plus and 2 electrons. And the copper in the solution plates onto the zinc, plus those 2 electrons goes to copper like that. The full reaction would be then zinc solid plus copper 2 plus in solution goes to zinc 2 plus. in solution plus copper solid. That's the trading. Now I like writing it like this because you really see explicitly the gaining and losing of electrons. Oh, those have words associated with them, gaining and lost electrons. But this is the reaction that we're kind of used to, right, so it's a little bit different. But it's the same reaction. It's just a different way of looking at it. And it's very, very similar to what we see in the real world. When something loses electrons like that we call it oxidation, and when something gains electrons we call this reduction. And so when two different materials-- in this case, these two metals-- trade electrons and one of them is oxidized, that's also got a name. It's called a redox couple, redox, Redox, right. So these are a redot couple, is what they're called when you trade electrons. This is just the same thing, right? It's what happens. like this. OK, so what's happening? What's happening is at the surface of the zinc, I see these copper ions in solution. And it's like, well, if I gave you two electrons, then you'd be able to become a copper solid, right. If I lose two electrons as a zinc atom, I'm a zinc 2 plus. That's this. Why does that happen? Well, we'll get to that, right, but that's what is happening. and the zinc is coming off of the strip. They're doing this. All right, why is that happening? Because if you put that strip in there and the thing just heats up, this is exothermic. That means that this reaction will go. This is spontaneous. Where can you go to get some of this zinc? I don't know. I've never heard of it. I'm not sure how to get it. But if you can get it, I'll show you how. I write that? Nowhere. Spontaneous. It didn't have to be, as we'll see, but this one is. But all that's happening is you're going down in energy. You're giving energy away and you're heating up the environment. Now the question is, how can I not let that happen? How can I stop it? I don't know, but I'm going to try to do my best to do it. I'm not going to give up. I stop the heating from happen and instead take advantage of this electron trading to do work? That's what a battery is. It's taking advantage ofThis. And really what it comes down to is just a different construction of the device. The battery is this. And it's this. The electron trading is what makes it possible to do what it does. And that's what the battery is doing. That's the power of the battery. And I think it's a very, very good thing. Fundamentals of a battery is this kind of thing, but now instead of allowing this plating to happen, I'm going to separate that. So for example, I'll separate that and I'll construct it in such a way that those electrons get traded through some wire that I can do work with, OK? So for instance, I'd separate the plating so that I could do some work with it. I'd do that for a battery. I'm doing that for this battery. example-- where is it? OK, maybe not for example. Maybe for example, maybe I need to turn this on and off. Here we go. This is the picture that Averill gives for the battery. So what you saw wasn't a battery because I wasn't stopping the electron flow and doing something with it. It was just a picture of what a battery would look like if it was working. It's not a battery, it's just a photo of what it looks like when it's working. anything, but if you construct it like this, is called a galvanic cell. That's the difference. All right, now I can do work with that electron trade. So let's go through this. So on the left, on the right, I can work with the electron trade, and on the bottom I can't work with it at all. I can only do that when I'm in the middle of the process of making an electron. So that's what I'm doing here. so what did I do? Well, I got my zinc strip but now I've got a copper strip. Just trying to see. OK, I'm putting the zinc not into the copper directly where I just put the copper. But I'm Putting the zinc Not into the Copper directly Where I just Put the zinc. I've Got a zinc strip over here. I'm put the zinc over here, but I'm not putting the copper over there. I have a copper Strip over here and a zinc Strip. short it and the whole thing just heats up. Instead, I'm putting the zinc into a solution of zinc ions. Look at that. Zinc has zinc ions in solution, right. Now, copper, copper is in a solutions of copper ions. So these are now the two beakers. On the left on the left, on the right, the zinc ions, and the copper ions, right and left. The zinc is in the solution, while the copper is the solution of Copper ions. I've got zinc nitrate. In this case it's a nitrate, not a sulfate. It doesn't matter. The whole point of the solution is that I get these ions in a beaker. Got to get these ion in aBeaker, so you've got the copper ions in the beaker on the side. It's a copper-based solution. It has copper in it, but it's also a zinc-based one, so it's not the same thing. right with the copper solid and you've got the zinc ions. So let's look at what's happening and blow up those different sides, right. So at the anode, it's called the anodes because it's where the charge comes from. It's calledThe anode. What's happening? Well, what's happened is what is happening is what we call a charge exchange. It happens when the charge exchange occurs between two different parts of the same material. The charge exchange happens between the copper and the zinc solid. The copper and zinc solid are the same. A zinc atom leaves its metal strip and goes into that beaker of zinc ions, right. But now you've got two charges, two electrons on the strip because it left a zinc 2 plus. Nothing more will happen unless those 2 electrons go. The zinc is leaving the solid. But the thing is that now, you'veGot to be careful here. So the zinc is becoming 2plus. What about those two electrons? Where do they go? A zinc atom leaving its metal Strip and going into thatBeaker of Zinc ions. I just showed you. away. What's so cool about batteries is that it's all about neutrality. That's the whole point. If you think about batteries as current flowing, batteries is all aboutneutrality. It's allabout keeping these things neutral because if I just build this charge up here, I can't have another zinc charge. That is the whole idea of batteries. They're all about neutrality. They don't need to be current flowing. They just need to have a charge. They need to stay neutral. This wire allows the charge to go over to the other place, the cathode, where the copper is sitting there saying, you know what, if I go in. That's what this wire is for, right. The charge has to go somewhere, but that's what thatWire is for. It's a good way to get the charge into the right place at the right time. The cathode is the place where the charge is supposed to go, and that's where this wire goes. had two electrons-- if I had two electrons on the copper strip then I could use those as a way to lure in a copper 2 plus ion, right. And if I did that, then I'm doing what this did, right? So I'm using the two electrons as a lure to get the ion to come into contact with me. And that's what I did. That's how I got the ion. I used that to lure the ion into coming to me. I'm trying to do the same thing here. right here. It's the same thing that we just did with the plating except now those electrons are going through this wire up here. The zinc is trading electrons with the copper. That's keeping this neutral, so now the electrons go away and now another zinc can go into solution. Now the electrons are gone and the zinc can be used to create a new solution. The solution is then placed in the solution and the copper is added to the solution to create the final product. Then the copper grabs them, plates a piece of copper, and then more electrons can come, right. It's the same thing. This is what it looks like. If you take those electrodes out of the solutions after running this for five, 10 minutes, look at what is happening. It’s the same things. It doesn’t matter how you do it, it just matters what you do, and it’ll always be the same.’’ happened. The copper plated. You got copper ions from solution plating that and zinc ions from Solution leaving that. And so those are the reactions that are happening. One's happening on the zinc side and one's happened on the other side, but there's something else. There's something another because there's copper in the solution. And that's what's going on in the lab. It's a reaction that's happening in a very different way to the way the copper is being processed. just one other piece of it that you've got to understand to understand how a battery works, and it's this thing here. So up here, this is my conduit for electrons to go. Each time it goes, I can plate. I can lose the more it go, right. But notice, notice, that the more I lose, the more the battery goes. That's how it works, that's the way it's supposed to work. And that's what I'm trying to do. if I lose 2 plus-- so I've got these 2 plus. It's not charged. Copper sulfate in that case is copper nitrate. Copper nitrate goes in a solution, it's not a charged solution. These things are balanced, right, 2 plus, 2 minus. So now I'm taking only 2 minus, and I'm not taking 2 plus or 2 minus at all. I'm just taking 2 minus and 1 minus. That's the way it works. It doesn't have to be that way. a 2 plus out of solution. No way. It's the same thing. You've got make it neutral again, all right. It won't work otherwise. You can't start building up charge in the solution. So that's what this thing is about. This is called a salt bridge. That is what this is. That's what it's all about. And that's why it's called the salt bridge, because it's a salt. bridge. And it's the only way to get around it. and that completes the circuit. See, this lets the electrons flow. This gives ions. It doesn't matter what it is, right. That's the electrolyte. It's just a source of ions. Here is an ACL, so now for every copper 2 plus that plates onto the copper electrode, that plates on to the metal electrode. And that's an ACL. That is an electrolyte, and that is the source of the ions. And this is an electrode. This is a metal electrode, and this is a copper electrode. two NA plus atoms go into this beaker from the bridge, because here I've got dissolved salt. Dissolved salt, sodium chloride is in water, so I got all these sodium ions. And when a charge imbalance happens because something plates here, I can draw it. It's a very complex system. It takes a long time to get it to work. But it's very, very simple. It just takes a few atoms to make it go from one to the other. It doesn't take a lot of time. sodium atoms out of the salt bridge and I can draw chlorine atoms from that side, right. That completes your circuit. That's an iron neutralizer, the salt Bridge, and this is allowing the electrons to keep everything neutral, and that's how you get the current. It's pretty cool, right? I mean, it's pretty amazing, right, and it's a pretty cool thing to be able to do. I think that's pretty neat, too. I don't think I've ever seen anything like it. It's pretty cool stuff. Now the thing is, you can do this yourself. That's why I bought these for, is that you can-- somebody sees the the potato battery. I like the human battery. So these are just volt meters and these are set to the right thing, yep. And they're pretty good, too. I mean, they're like volt meters, but they're not. They're just volts meters. And these are pretty good. And so are the potato batteries. what you'll find, you can see what happens, right. Like when you touch the two electrodes, yeah, and sometimes you've got to squeeze. Oh, look at that current. You have electric-- you are providing electricity. You are the salt bridge, so what that means is you are actually plating and taking metals off of these two electrodes right now. Your hands are doing that and you're trading electrons. You're a conduit for that to happen. It's pretty cool, and you can play with these. have lots of items on the table tomorrow maybe at a dinner, and I'm just suggesting that you play around with this idea, because look. This is what Volta did, this is literally what the name of that device, the guy that that's named after, is what he did. And I'm like, 'You know what? Let's do this.' And we're going to do this, and we're not going to stop, because we're gonna do it, and it's going to be great. He hooked up two different metals. I just put some paper clips in there, it works. It can be almost-- not almost, but lots of different metals will work. Why? We'll get to that in a sec. Here I've got another paperclip and a copper wire, right, two different metal. It's almost like a microscope, but it's not, it's just a little bit more complicated than that. He hooked up some paperclips in there and it worked. It was almost a microscope. The power isn't coming from you as Galvani thought. No, the power is coming from the difference in potentials of those metals wanting or not wanting electrons. Everybody wants electrons, let's be honest, but who wants its more? It all comes back to the same stuff we talked about. It's all about the potentials, not about the electrons. And that's what we're going to focus on in the next few weeks. We'll be back with more of the answers. just that now we're talking about the metals and whether they're more interested than the other metal in having those two electrons. That's what a potential is. Oh, now so OK. Here we go. There's the volt. So what determines it, right? What determines the potential? Well, it's what I just said. You know, intuitively. It's the difference in these things wanting and saying, well, OK, I got copper and zinc. How do I know? well, if you look at zinc-- let me see. Where do I have it? Zinc is argon and 3d10 and 4s2. Copper is the same thing in terms of its argon core, 3D10 4s1. All right, OK, copper, oh, we got numbers 30 and 29. Which one of those wants to give? Go to CNN.com/soulmatestories to find out. Back to Mail Online home. Go to www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/2013/01/30/zinc-is-argon-and-3d10-4s2-4-1.html. up 2 electrons or take 2 electrons more than the other? That's what determines the potential. And you know, when you look at this, you might say-- this is from Averill so he actually is missing the f's because this is just taken right from the textbook, but anyway, so anyway. So this is taken from a textbook, and it's from a book called "Averill's Theoretical Physics of Electricity" and it says, "What happens when two electrons are in contact?" that's the potential. Look at this. This is like an energy diagram but these aren't electronics. These are just potentials, but the potential is related to which one wants the 2 electrons more. It's 2 plus. The oxidation state is 2 plus, so you look at this, you say, well,Well, that's a potential. That's the oxidation state. The potential is the state where you want the electrons to be together more. And that's what happens. I don't know which one might give up electrons more. It turns out it's the zinc. And you might say, well, but wait a second. If I just take an electron out of here, won't it be harder than one out ofhere, because this only has 4s1? The answer is yes. It's the same as taking an electron in and out of a bottle of water. It doesn't matter which one you take out, just how big it is. is yes, but I'm taking 2. I'm not taking 1, I'm talking about the oxidation state of 2 plus. That's going to be harder here. It's harder to take a 4s1 in a 3d from that beautifully filled 3d shell than it is to take these 2s electrons. That’s why I’m taking 2, not 1, and that's why I'm going to take 2, 2, and not 1. It’ll be harder than I thought. that's higher. That's why that's hire, right. The delta v is all about the chemistry. It's all about all of the things that we've learned. So it's more than that because of these solutions, so it's hire. It is more than just one person. It can be a whole team. It has to be a team of people who work together to get the best out of each other. And that's what we're trying to do here. We're all in this together. more complicated than that, but at the core of all of this is all the topics that we've learned, how strongly are electrons bound to an atom, to a metal, right. And so well, if I took cobalt, what would happen? If I take cobalt instead of copper, the voltage would go up. If I took copper instead of Cobalt, the volts would go down, right? And so on and so on, right, until we get to the heart of the matter. here would be 1/2. And you can sort of look at the table and think about why that is. Cobalt has a 4s2 but it's got less d electrons, and so is it going to be easier or harder to pull them out? Well, it's going to being easier than 1-2. That's what we're going to try to do here. We're not going to get there right away, but we'll try to get to the bottom of it as best we can. copper but harder than zinc so it goes in the middle, right. The potential difference is less for cobalt and zinc but you still get a potential. And so that's what Volta did, and he did all sorts of different metals. And you can understand why zinc and copper does this but copper and zinc doesn't. The reason is the potential. It's just literally the potential difference that we just drew. This is going to be easier to take. So I'm. not going the other way, right. I'm not going to go the other side, so nothing happens when you do that. And then finally, the last kind of piece of this is that we need a reference because you can only get the changes in potentials. It's like you can't get the change in potential if you don't have a reference. You have to have a set of potentials that you can go to. You can't go to them if you have no reference. You can only get the changes, not the absolute, so you've got to have a standardization. And the standardization in the world of batteries is hydrogen. So what you do when you think about battery potentials is you write down all of these reduction-- reduction is gaining electrons, right--enthalpy.com: How do you make a hydrogen battery? Share your photos, videos, and stories at iReport.com/Heroes of the Solar Power Fields and Twitter @SolarPowerPlanet. you write down all. It doesn't matter. You could write reduction, you could write oxidation. They're just a flip of the sign, right. It's just a flipped sign of the potential, but what you write these down with respect to a common electrode, and it's the standard. That's called the standard, and that's what we're trying to get to. We're getting there, but we've got a long way to go, and we're going to get there. standard hydrogen electrode. So sometimes you'll see it as the SHE in the battery world. And what it is it's just a very nice platinum electrode that doesn't change. So it doesn't plate or lose atoms. And it's a reaction that on that electrode happens with hydrogen, hydrogen gas. And that's why it's called the SHE electrode. It's a good way to store energy in a battery. It doesn't need to be used for long periods of time. It can be used to store electricity for a long time. so what you do is you hook this up on one side, and then you put all the metals against that. And you measure their potential. What's so powerful about the SHE is that now I've got all of these with respect to their potential, and I can see what they can do. That's the power of the SHE. I think that's what's so exciting about it. It's like, 'I can see the potential of all these different metals. And I can measure that potential.' the same reference, right? So now when I look at my zinc-copper battery, well, it's just the difference between those that's the potential of the battery. So hydrogen electrodes gives you that ability to standardize it and create huge tables. And if you look up potentials of reduction, they're all the same, right?" he says. "It's just a difference between these two electrodes that makes the difference. So that's what we're trying to do here." related to hydrogen. You get thousands of them. How much does somebody want to lose, how many electrons? That's going to be in these tables. And it's by a setup that is very similar to the one I showed you that is related to Hydrogen. OK. Or you could go to the other side of the room and do the same thing. You could go back and forth between the two sides. You can do that for a long time. It's a very complex process. the other way. If I had zinc-- I just showed you zinc. Copper in zinc doesn't happen because it's the wrong sign. But then what if I put copper-- instead of in zinc, I put. copper in silver. It works. Because now now there's copper in zinc and copper inSilver. It's a new way of looking at the world, and it's a good way to look at it, too. It just takes a little bit of time, but it's worth it. silver is down here. How did I know that? Because I hooked it up to hydrogen and I compared it to copper. And so that's how you do battery chemistry is you look things up. You look up these potentials in tables, and you think about which voltage you need. That's how battery chemistry works, and that's the way I do it. I don't know why I'm doing it, but I'm going to keep doing it until I figure out how to do it better. Lithium is a storage technology. It was the highest one on the list, too. The Nobel Prize was for the development of lithium ions as a storageTechnology. The reason is this. You saw-- it was the high one. And the reason is that it was a breakthrough in the field of storage technology, and it was developed by a team of scientists. The prize was awarded to the team of researchers at the University of California, San Diego, who worked on the project for 20 years. Look at that. So now, I don't know what the potential of a lithium something battery is going to be, but I'm starting out with a pretty negative voltage with respect to hydrogen. That makes you think you might get high voltages, and you do. Yeah, but you have another. You have another high voltage battery, but it's not as powerful as the first one. It's not a battery that's going to last as long as a lithium-ion battery. Lithium is a light battery technology. It's a beautiful battery technology, which is why the Nobel Prize was given. The Nobel Prize is awarded to the inventor of the lithium battery. It is the world's first ever Nobel Prize in Physics. It was awarded for the development of lithium-ion batteries in the 1950s and 1960s. The first lithium battery was developed in the United States in the 1960s and the first commercial production began in the 1970s. It has been used in batteries since the 1980s. energy density versus volume. And a lithium battery works much the same way in the sense that you have the separator here. That's the electrolyte. But now it's rechargeable. And I don't have time to go into rechargeable batteries versus what are called primary batteries, which is the one I'm talking about. I'm not going to get into that right now. I've got a lot of other things to talk about, I'm sure, but I'll get to that later. showed you. But all the chemistry is the same. You're shuttling ions back and forth. You've got that external circuit. And what I wanted to-- and there's a whole bunch of chemistry. So what has exploded in the last-- well, that's a bad word for batteries because that is a big problem. But that's not what I was trying to say. I just wanted to show you the chemistry. And it's the same as it always has been. danger with lithium batteries. But what has really made the field take off is you know the word. We're in the class. It's chemistry. Because the flexibility of where you can put that other electrode and what properties it has gives you enormous room. That's why lithium-ion batteries can can be so exciting to work with. It can be the next big thing in the field of energy storage. It has a huge potential to change the way we look at the world. It could be a game-changer. go in everything now, all the way up to the grid. This is the grid now. So we went from small to very big. The growth in solar and wind has been incredible over the past few years. And that was my last Why This Matters in the last 2 and 1/2 minutes. I'll be back next week with the next installment of "Why This Matters with Jarrett Bellini" on CNN Tech at 10:30 p.m. ET. Back to the page you came from. last 10, 20 years. The problem, as I think I've shown you, is the variability. And so this is like-- if you zoom in here, that's the load, the black line. And this is what these two resources give you. And you can see that it doesn't match. If you want to know more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and search for "Soulmatters" on the site. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. zoom in on a day, then you really can see it, right? There is the load. And there's what you would get from solar and wind. And so here's the question. I said, well, OK, how do you fix this? You got to store it. There's no way to use it. It's too big. There are too many things that can't be done. It just doesn't make sense. It would be better if we had a lot of solar power. But we don't. renewables at large scales unless you store it. In fact, we're really at essentially the tipping point. If you look at the countries in the world and what their SPV penetration is-- and this is a couple years old, but it's still pretty much the same-- Germany, Greece, Italy. They're all going to have to do more to store their renewable energy. That's the big challenge. It's going to take a lot of work to get them to do it. Germany is at 7.1% as of a few years ago. That's a huge penetration of PV. Well, here's the problem. If you look at-- this is Germany, now. Huge penetration-- these are these six years, seven years. It's a big problem for the U.S. of A. But it's not a huge problem for Germany, either. It just happens to be a bigger problem in Germany than it is in the United States. At the top of the page, please share your thoughts. of adding PV. They're now at 7%. 2016 is 7%. This is how much the price of electricity was in Germany when they added. PV. As they add more and more of this renewable to the grid, its price goes down when it's available. In fact, it's now not economical for them to add more PV unless they can add it with storage. Because actually the price has gone down so much and it's not economical to add any more of it. They can sell it for a lot of money. gone up here when they're not generating any PV electricity. So you can come up with-- and they did in this paper-- this sort of value factor which, when it goes below 1, means there's no economic outcome that's positive here. You can't make money any more. And look at the number of jobs that have been lost in this country because of the decline in solar power. It's a huge loss of jobs, and it's a big loss of economic activity. where that happens. You can't solve renewables at the scale of the grid without storage. And no option exists today. It might be batteries, but there's nothing that actually does it today at the scales that we need. It's right around where they are, at 5%. It's at 5% of the power grid. And you can't do that without storage, and there's no option today. There's no way you can do it without storage at that scale. And it's not going to happen. need. So that's a real challenge for chemistry. I hope you guys have a great Thanksgiving and maybe hook up some different metals. And I'll see you all next week. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @cnnireport. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the CNNOpinions page.Back to thepage you came From. Back from the CNN Opinion page. Back in the page, click here for the latest from CNN.