GILBERT STRANG: Calculus. Differential equations is the big application of calculus. It's kind of interesting to see what part of calculus, what information and what ideas from calculus, actually get used in differential equations. And I'm going to show you what I see, and it's not everything by any means, it's some basic ideas, but not all the details you learned. So I'm not saying forget all those, but just focus on what matters. The derivative of x to the n, the derivative of sine and cosine. The derivative of e to the x, which is eto the x. And so on. My topic.my topic. And the first thing is, you really do need to know basic derivatives. I'll be back in a week or so with a new topic. I'm looking forward to it. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. The original article was published on November 14, 2013. is e to the x. Dy dt equals y. We'll have to do more with that. And then the inverse function related to the exponential is the logarithm. With that special derivative of 1/x. OK. But you know, you know. You know. It's a wonderful equation. That's the wonderful equation that is solved by e tothe x. We will have to have more fun with this one. We have a lot of fun with it. Derivative is a linear operation. The product rule fg prime plus fgprime is the derivative of f plus g. You can create the derivatives of an enormous array of functions using the key rules. Those rules are: f plus f, g plus g, f + g, g + f, f+g, f-g, g-g. The key rules for these rules are as follows: f+f prime, g+gprime, fgPrime, ffPrime, gfPrime. gf prime. The quotient rule. Who can remember that? And above all, the chain rule. The derivative of this-- of that chain of functions, that composite function is the derivative of f with respect to g times the derivatives of g and x. That's really-- that it's chains. It's really -- that's really what it's all about, isn't it? It's a chain of chains, and that's the way to get to the end of the story. of functions that really blow open the functions or we can deal with. The fundamental theorem involves the derivative and the integral. And it says that one is the inverse operation to the other. The derivative of the integral of a function is called the "inverse operation" of the function. It is the same as the inverse of the expression for a function that is positive or negative. It's the same thing as saying that a function has a positive value if and only if it is positive. It means that the function can be positive or Negative. this. [? ET ?] to show the dummy variable. The x is the limit of integration. I don't care what that dummy variable is. I can-- I'll change that dummyvariable to t. Whatever. I won't change it to something else. I just want to know what it is. This. is the answer to the question, "What is the size of an integral?" The answer, of course, is that it's the number of bits that make up an integral. This is the number that makes up the integral. discuss that fundamental theorem, but it certainly is fundamental and I'll use it. So-- but remember what it says. It says that if you take a function, you integrate it, you take the derivative, you get the function back again. Maybe that's better. I'llUse the fundamental theorem right away. So -- but rememberWhat it says: If you take an equation and integrate it and take its derivative, the equation is the same as the original. So that's what the theorem says. OK can I apply that to a really-- I see this as a key example in differential equations. And let me show you the function I have in mind. The function I has in mind, I'll call it y, is the interval from 0 to t. So it's a function that is a function of the interval between 0 and t. That's a really good example of a differential equation. It's a real-world example of how a function can be applied to a very real situation. It's the integral of this, e to the t minus s. Some function. That's a remarkable formula for the solution to a basic differential equation. So with this, that solves the equation dy dt equals y plus q of t. So when I see that equation, I think, 'This is the answer to the problem of time' I think that's a very remarkable formula. It's the answer. to the question, 'What is time?' I thought, 'It's time to find out' and we'll see it again and we'll derive this formula, but now I want to just use the fundamental theorem of calculus to check the formula. What as we created-- as we derive the formula-- well it won't be wrong because our derivation will be good. But also, it would be good because it would show that it's a good formula. And we'll use that to check it again. And then we'll go on to the next part of the story. be nice, I just think if you plug that in, to that differential equation it's solved. OK so I want to take the derivative of that. That's my job. And that's why I do it here because it uses all the rules. OK to take that derivative, I notice the differential equation is solved. I notice that the derivative is the same as the sum of the first and second derivatives. I think that's a good way to look at it. I don't know why I'm doing it, but that's the way it is. t is appearing there in the usual place, and it's also inside the integral. But this is a simple function. I can take e to the t-- I'm going to take eto the t out of the-- outside the integral, too. So I have a function, e to t, and I can use it to solve a problem. That's a simple way to do it, but it's not perfect. It's not a perfect way to solve it, either, but I can do it. t times another function of t. I'm going to use the product rule and show that the derivative of that product is one term will be y and the other term will been q. Can I just apply the productrule to this function that I've pulled out of a book? The answer is yes. The product rule is used to show that a function is a product of a function and a term. The result is that the function is the product of two terms, one of which is y and one of whom is q. hat, but you'll see it again. OK so it's a product of this times this. So the derivative dy dt is-- the product rule says take the derivative of [INAUDIBLE] that is e to the [INAudIBLE]. Plus, the first thing times the derivative. of the second. Now I'm using the first.thing times the derivatives of the first and second. So it's the product of first thing and derivative of second. It's called a product rule. product rule. It just-- you have to notice that e to the t came twice because it is there and its derivative is the same. OK now, what's the derivative of that? Fundamental theorem of calculus. We've integrated something, I want to take its derivative, so I get that something. So I get the product rule. I get it. I got it. OK, now I want the derivative. So, what is it? It's the e-to-the-t rule. I get e to the minus tq of t. That's the fundamental theorem. Are you good with that? So let's just look and see what we have. First term was exactly y. Exactly what is above because when I took the derivative of the first guy, the f it didn't. The fundamental theorem is that e to tq is equal to e to minus tk. That is what we get from the first term to tk, which is exactly y to minus y. change it, so I still have y. What have I I-- what do I have here? E to the t times e to the minus t is one. Just what I want. So I'm left with q of t. So i still have t. I'm still left with t. i'm now left with Q of t and I'm now i. So    I'm still i. I've got t. Now I have q. I want q. Now   I want t. the two terms from the product rule are the two terms in the differential equation. I just think as you saw the fundamental theorem was needed right there to find the derivative of what's in that box, is what'sin those parentheses. I like that the use of the use. of the word 'dichotomy' is used. I think it's a very good way to show the difference between the two parts of the equation, the product and the derivative, and how they are related to each other. fundamental theorem. So it's a straight line and what we need is y of t plus delta t. That's taking any function, maybe you'd like to take any function. And here we go. This tangent to the graph. It involves the tangent line to theGraph. So we need to take a tangent of t and delta t to form a graph. And this is the graph of the graph that we are looking at. We need to use this graph to make the graph look more like a circle. rather I just called the function f. A function at a point a little beyond t, is approximately the function at t plus the correction because it-- plus a delta f, right? A delta f. It's approximately delta t times the derivative at t. And what's the delta f approximately? It's about delta t at t, plus a correction at t to get to the point of the original function, which is the function t. That's what I mean by the term "f" That-- there's a lot of symbols on that line, but it expresses the most basic fact of differential calculus. If I put that f of t on this side with a minus sign, then I have delta f. And if I divide by that delta t, then the same rule is the same. That's the basic rule of calculus, and that's what I'm trying to get at with this article. I hope it helps you understand some of the concepts behind differential calculus, as well. saying that this is approximately df dt. That's a fundamental idea of calculus, that the derivative is quite close. At the point t-- the derivative at the point T is close to delta f divided by delta t. It changes over a short time interval. OK so that's the tangent. It's a very simple equation. It doesn't have to be complex. It just has to be very close to the real value of the derivative. It can be as simple as that. line because it starts with that's the constant term. Just draw a picture. So I'm drawing a picture here. So let me draw a graph of-- oh there's the graph of e to the t. So it starts up with e and t is a function of delta t. That's the slope. So the slope of e is the e-t ratio. And the slope is the ratio of the e to t, which is the rate of change of the t to the e. slope 1. OK the tangent line, and of course it comes down here Not below. That's this approximation to f. And you see as I-- here is t equals 0 let's let's say t is 0. And we say f is 0, and we say that f is 1, so f is the slope of t. And that's the t-slope. And it's 0, so t is t, and f is f, and t is f. So that's f. say. And here's t equal delta t. And you see if I take a big step, my line is far from the curve. And we want to get closer. So the way to get close is we have to take into account the bending. The curve is bending. What derivative do we get? We get a derivative of the curve's bending. And that's how we get closer to it. We get to the point where we can see the curve bending. We can see what derivative we get. tells us about bending? That is delta t squared times the second derivative. One half. It turns out a one half shows in there. So this is the term that changes the tangent line, to a tangent parabola. It notices the bending at that point. The second derivative at that points is what makes the bending happen. It's the second term that makes the line bend. The term that causes the line to bend is called the second derivative at the point of bending. point. So it curves up. It doesn't follow it perfectly, but as well-- much better than the other. So this is the line. Here is the parabola. And here is the function. The real one. OK. I won't review the theory there that it pulls out that one half, but I will say that it doesn't pull out that half as well as the theory says it does. It's not perfect, but it's better than it used to be. you could check it. Now finally, what if we want to do even better? Well we need to take into account the third derivative and then the fourth derivative and so on, and if we get all those derivatives then, all of them that means, we will be at the top of the list. You can check it by going to: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/2013/01/30/how-to-get-a-better-job-and-how-much-does-it-cost-you.html?storylink=cpy. function because that's a nice function, e to the t. We can recreate that function from knowing its height, its slope, its bending and all the rest of the terms. So there's a whole lot more-- Infinitely many terms. That one over two-- the good way to think of one. That's a good way of thinking of one, because it's over two. It's a one-over-two function, which is a nice way to say one-to-one. over two, one half is one over two factorial, two times one. And keep going. That's called the Taylor series named after Taylor. Kind of frightening at first. It's one over n factorial,. times t to the nth, pretty small, times the n.th derivative of the function. AndKeep going. It’s one over 2 factorial. times t, times n, times 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. frightening because it's got infinitely many terms. For most functions, you really don't want to compute the nth derivative. For e to the t, I don't mind computing the n fourth derivative. But usually that's not what you want. And the terms are getting a little more comp-- for e to t, you don't really want to do that. You want to get to the e-to-t part of the equation, where it's still e. this isn't so practical. Tangent parabola, quite practical. Higher order terms, less-- much less practical. But the formula is beautiful because you see the pattern, that's really what mathematics is about patterns, and here you're seeing the pattern in the higher, higher terms. They all fit that. It's very practical. [INAUDIBLE] very practical, but it's not very practical in the high order terms. But it's beautiful because it's a pattern. pattern and when you add up all the terms, if you have a nice function, then the approximation becomes perfect and you would have equality. And those are the best functions of mathematics and exponential is one of them. So to end this lecture, approximate to equal provided we have aNice function. And exponential is another one of the best Functions of Mathematics. And it is a perfect approximation to equal if and only if the function is a nice one. And if it is not, then it is an approximation to equality. of course one of them. OK that's calculus. Well, part of calculus. Thank you. Well it's one of the things that's part of the calculus. OK. Well that's a part of it. thank you. OK, that's another one of it, too. It's a little bit of calculus, but it's a lot of it too. OK it's calculus, it's all part of a calculus. And it's also part of my life. I'm sorry.