The principles of baking. Is it worth using a preferment when cold fermenting? Let's go to the kitchen and find out. How do you prepare a batch of cookies? Let us know in the comments below or tweet us @CNNBakers. Back to the page you came from. Visit CNN.com/Baking for the latest from CNN Baking. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter @CNN Baking and @CNN_Baking, and please share your pictures of your baked goods with us. to do today we'll make three breads one with the brief mint and two without one of the breads without the bereavement will be bulk fermented in the fridge for 24 hours. The third one will be made with a brief mint which will be left for 12 hours to ferment then it'll be mixed into the main dough for an additional 12 hours of fermentation. The main comparison I want to do today is between the two breads and the one we'll be making today will be the one with a bereavement. the two breads which will take the same amount of time to make the one with the bereavement and the one that will be well fermented in the fridge for 24 hours. My opinion is that using a bereavement when cold fermenting makes no sense because we can simply leave it. The breads can be made in the same way but will take different amounts of time for different purposes. The Breadmaker is published by Hodder & Stoughton, priced £12.99. For more information, visit www.hodderandstoughton.com. the dough in the fridge for longer if it's going to take the same amount of time to make why would you add the extra step of making a briefment this is how we're going to test it I mixed the first dough and I placed it into the fridge it will remain there for 24 hours. at the same time I'm making a Brief and it will be left at room temperature for 12 hours and that will be mixed into the dough. That dough will then be left in the refrigerator for another 12 hours like I mentioned. earlier so in the end both breads will take about the same amount of time to make but why are we doing this a while ago I posted a video comparing prefix and called about fermentation in that video I concluded the Callback fermentation beats bereavement in every way it does. The Callback bread is made with a mixture of yeast, sugar, and water. The bread is then fermented for about an hour and a half before it is baked. The final product is a bread that is about the size of a small loaf. develops far more flavor it makes the crust crispier and the crumb most substantial. It simplifies the process because we don't have to make a separate thing. As soon as I publish that video people started asking me about combining the two methods. I always told everyone just combine the two and make the crust more substantial. I think that's the best way to get the most flavor out of the crust. It's a great way to start a new recipe. I hope you'll try it out. leave your DOTA for men for longer why make that preferment I hope we can put that one to rest today. Let's just get back to comparing cold fermentation to prevents which one of them is better was not really the right question to ask. There are some nuances to cold fermentation and preventing cold fermentation. There is a difference between the two and it is important to be aware of it. It is not the same thing as saying that cold fermentation is better than cold fermentation, it is just a different type of fermentation. to the answer one method is not better than the other they're just different and I guess I'm a bit biased just because I like to simplify the process and I prefer the results from cold fermentation. There was a great comment under that video mentioning baguettes using coal bulk. I prefer to use cold fermentation and I use coal bulk to make my baguette. I also like to use hot fermentation and use hot coal bulk for my bread. I use cold fermentations to make bread. fermented dough or a dough made with a Polish would result in Far different breads in the end fermenting the whole dough makes the bread more chewy but at the same time it boosts flavor quite a lot. using a Polish improves the flavor slightly but it gives the bread a chewy texture. Using a Polish improved the flavor of the bread but it also gave it a cheery taste. Using one of these Polish doughs improves the bread's flavor a lot but also makes it chewy. Using two Polish doughs improves the flavor but also gives it a chewiness. a much lighter and airier crumb or at least it is able to and it can make for a thinner crust too all great characteristics of a baguette. When it comes to cold fermentation versus brief mint there is no better method what is better is up to the person making the sandwich. The best way to make baguettes is to use a cold fermentation method and a brief mint method. For more information on cold fermentation and mint please go to coldfermentation.com or go to www.baguette.com. baker or up to the person eating the bread but when it comes to combining Cobalt fermentation and bereavements that's where I say simply fermenting for longer is better than using prevent and then fermenting the dough in fridge. I've said that with confidence even though I had not tried it before but I'm not sure if you've tried it yet. If you have tried it, I'd love to hear what you think. Share your photos and videos of your bread with us at iReport. the side by side obviously you can only find this out by trying it yourself my taste buds are different from yours but let's just get back to our three does here so the one on the left has been in the fridge for 24 hours and the one in the middle has been left in the sun for a few hours. The one in front of the camera is the one that's been left out in the open for a couple of hours. And the one behind the camera has been kept in the oven for a little longer. middle was made with the bereavement which took 12 hours to rise which was then mixed into the dough and left in the fridge for 12 more hours. The one on the right has only been in the refrigerator for 12 hours when making the final dough I did. The final dough was then left to rise for a further 12 hours before it was added to the cake. The cake was then baked for an hour and a half and served with a layer of ice cream and a dollop of butter. use slightly less yeast in the dough that was made with the bravement and that was to compensate for the amount of yeast coming from the bereavement itself as it rises it multiplies. "Technically in the end the double debriefment would have more yeast in it there" "I thought technically in theend the double Debriefmentwould have more Yeast in it" "There was a little bit of a difference in the way the dough was made. It was a bit more dough-youth-based" was 2 grams of yeast in the doughs without bereavement and 1.7 grams yeast in. the one with the bravement. If you want to find the written formula it is in the link below the video title. okay we'll do the final shaping now we'll Place those in love tins. Now we'll place them in the tins and let them cool. Then we'll put them into the oven and bake them for an hour or so until the dough is set. we'll let them rise and that will bake them kind of a short video today I don't really have much else to say here we've done these kinds of comparisons countless times there's nothing new here all I want is the answer to the question is it worth using briefment. We've done this kind of comparison countless times. There'sNothing new here. All I want to know is if it's worth it. We'll let the bread rise and then we'll bake them. when cold fermenting and I'm pretty sure there is is a yes or no question so here we go we got our three loaves. They all look pretty much the same on the outside and obviously they have all split open on the side too. They were a bit underproofed so they were going to be a bit different. When cold fermented they were all going to look a little different on the inside and outside. They are going to feel a little bit different inside and out too. which doesn't make any difference in this test it is the fermentation time up until the final proof which really counts now cutting them open I can tell you that the crust on all breads is exactly the same. Next up I smell them all see if they smell any next up I sniff them all to see if any of them smell any different than the others. The crust is the same on all of the breads so it doesn't matter what kind of bread it is. I can't tell you if the crust is different from the other breads. different I did not feel any difference between a 24 hour fermented one and the one with the bereavement but the one on the right predictably smells a little bit lighter than the other two when it comes to softness of the crumb. The 24-hour fermented loaf was very different from the 24-day- fermented loaf and was very soft. The one with bereavement was very hard to chew and had a very different crumb to the one without bereavement. It was also a little lighter in colour than the others. slightly denser very slightly chewier if I had not compared them side by side I would have never been able to tell the difference. That's how little the difference was but when it came to taste which is arguably the most important part the first two breads tasted exactly the same. If you want to try the breads for yourself, I would recommend buying two loaves of bread and a slice of cheese. They are slightly denser and chewier than the other breads but the cheese is more meltable. same I could feel zero difference between the 24 hour fermented one and the one with the bravement but they were far more flavorful than the one that was fermented only for 12 hours. Is it worth using bereavement when cold fermenting that's definitely no from me the only way to go? I don't think it's worth it at all. I'm not sure if I would do it again but I would try it again if I were to do it over and over again. I've never had such a good experience with a cold fermented beer. significant difference is that it takes more work when you make impravement. perhaps there would be differences in different recipes perhaps my taste is not very sensitive or perhaps I'm just biased again. If you are one of those people that use a bereavement when cold fermenting then try this. It's not for everyone but if you're one of the people who like to try new things then this could be a good one for you. I hope this has helped you out in some way. comparison for yourself then tell us of your results you might be surprised. What do you think of my test and my results have you ever tried something like this before do you use preference when cold fermenting let me know down in comments you want to see more.comparisons for yourself than tell us what you thought of the test and your results. I hope to see you back at the site in the next week or so to share your results and photos of the fermenting process. CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery. Visit CNN.com/Travel each week for a new gallery of snapshots from around the world. Please submit your best shots of the world for next week's gallery. Click here for the next gallery of iReport photos. Please share your best photos of the globe with CNN iReport by posting a picture in the comments below or sharing it with your friends on Facebook, Twitter and Google+. iReport: Share your best pictures of the week.