Crash Course U.S. History looks at the history of the United States as seen through the lens of Marvel comic superheroes. Today we talk about wonder women. Mr. Green: Oh, Me from the Past, you sniveling little sniveler. We’ll be back next week with a look at the Civil War and the birth of the nation’s first president, George H.W. Bush. For more, go to www.crashcourseu.org. idiot. Also this is the study of history, which means a constant reexamination and redefinition of what it means to be a hero. In the case of this episode, it’s about taking the first steps towards acknowledging that not all heroes are worthy. Wonder Woman is from the DC Universe, and is based on the popular comic book series of the same name by Dan Jurgens and Steve Ditko. The episode is available on Blu-ray and DVD now, with a US release date to be announced. Women transformed pre-Civil War America as they fought to improve prisons, schools, decrease public drunkenness, and end slavery. While fighting for change and justice for others, American women discovered that the prisoners, children, and slaves they were fighting for were men. So we’re going to talk about how women transformed America before the Civil War. We’ll also talk about women’s role in the birth of the modern U.S. state of California. We'll end the show with a look back at some of the women who helped start the state. fighting for weren't the only people being oppressed and marginalized in the American democracy. So in the colonial era, most American women of European descent lived lives much like those of their European counterparts. They were legally and socially subservient to men and trapped within a patriarchal structure. The women of the U.S. fought for equal rights to equal pay for equal work. They fought for women's rights to vote and equal rights for women to the vote. The fight for women’s rights for equal wages for women was fought for by the women of America. Lower and working class women were actually more equal to men of their own classes, but only because they were, like, equally poor. As usual, it all comes back to economics. In general, throughout world history, the higher the social class, the greater the restrictions on women— although high class women have always had more rights than low class women. The more you have, the more you can do to help a woman, the less you have to do to a man, and the more likely it is that you will have a better life. women have traditionally had the lowest mortality rates, which is one of the benefits of you know doors and extra lifeboats and whatnot. So at least you get to enjoy that oppression for many years. As previously noted, American women did participate in the American Revolution, but they were still in the military at the time of the Revolution. They were still fighting and dying for their country. They still had to fight for their rights. They had to die. They fought and died for her country. expected to marry and have kids rather than, like, pursue a career. Under the legal principle of “coverture’ actually husbands held authority over the person, property and choices of their wives. Also since women weren’t permitted to own property and property ownership was a precondition for voting, they were totally out of touch with their husbands and their children’s lives. And since women were not allowed to own a home, they couldn't vote, which was a requirement for women to be allowed to vote. shut out of the political process. Citizens of the new Republic were therefore definitionally male, but women did still improve their status via the ideology of “Republican Motherhood.” Women were important to the new. Republic because they were raising children—ESPECIALLY MALE. CHILDREN—who would become the future voters, legislators, and honorary. honorary citizens. Women did not have the same status as men, but they did have more power and influence. doctors of America. So women couldn’t themselves participate in the political process, but they needed to be educated some because they were going to potty train those who would later participate. What’s that? There were no potties? Really? Apparently instead of pottie they had typhoid. Actually instead of typhoid they had Typhoid. Instead of Typhoid, there were no typhoid, they had pottied. Actually, there was no Typhoid; they had no typhoids, they just had to learn to use them. it was a result of not having potties. So even living without rights in a pottyless nation, the Republican Mother idea allowed women access to education, so that they could teach their children. Also women—provided they weren’t slaves--were counted in determining the population of a state for representation purposes, so women could be counted in the population count. So women were able to vote, and they could vote for the president, and for the vice-president, and so on. that was at least an acknowledgement that they were at, like, five fifths human. And then the market revolution had profound effects on American women, too, because as production shifted from homes to factories, it shifted away from women doing the producing. This led to the so-called ‘cult of domesticity,’ and it was the beginning of the end of women’s roles as breadwinners and housewives. It was the birth of the modern American family. which like most cults, I am opposed to. That’s right, Stan, I’m opposed to the Blue Oyster Cult,. The Cult, The Cult of Personality by In Living Color, and the three remaining Shakers. Sorry, Shakers, but who are we kidding? You’re not watching. You're too busy dancing. The cult of. Which like mostcults,  I am opposed. to. The Blue Oysters Cult. domesticity decreed that a woman’s place was in the home, so rather than making stuff, the job of women was to enable their husbands to make stuff. Women provided food and a clean living space, but also by providing what our favorite historian Eric Foner called “non-market values like love,” she says. “Non-marketvalues like love” is a term used to refer to non- market values such as love and compassion. friendship, and mutual obligation,” which is the way we talk about puppies these days. And indeed that’s in line with actual story titles from early 19th century American women's magazines, like “Woman, a Being to Come Home To” and ‘Woman: Man's Best Friend.’ Oh, it’t time for the Mystery Document? It’ll be called “The Mystery Document.” It will be published in the spring of 2015. The rules here are simple. I either get the author of the Mystery Document right...oh, hey there, eagle...or I get shocked. Let’s see what we’ve got. “Woman is to win everything by peace and love; by making herself so much respected, esteemed,” the document says. ‘Woman: Man's Best Friend’ is the title of a book about the relationship between a man and a woman. The book is called “Man and Woman” and is published by Penguin Books. and loved, that to yield to her opinions and to gratify her wishes, will be the free-will offering of the heart. But the moment woman begins to feel the promptings of ambition, or the thirst for power, her aegis of defense is gone. All the sacred protection of religion, all the protected by religion, is gone in a woman's heart. The moment a woman feels ambition, the moment she feels power, the time for religion is over. The time for a woman to be a woman is when she feels she is a woman, not a woman. all the generous promptings of chivalry, all the poetry of romantic gallantry, depend upon woman’s retaining her place as dependent and defenseless, and making no claims, and maintaining no right but what are the gifts of honor, rectitude and love.” Well it was definitely a dude and I have no idea who he was, but he was definitely not a man. “I’m not a woman. I’ve never been a woman,” she said. idea which dude, so I’m just going to guess John C. Calhoun because he’s a bad person. No? Well, what can you do? It wasn’t a dude? It was apparently Harriet Beecher Stowe's sister Catharine. Catharine was an education reformer and yet held all of those opinions, so aaaaAAAAH. So aaaannnndddd, it was Catharine Stowe who held those opinions. I assume Stan brought up Harriet Beecher Stowe’s sister to point out that it wasn’t just men who bought into the Cult of Domesticity. The idea of true equality between men and women was so radical that almost no one embraced it. Like, despite the economic growth associated with the cult of domesticity. It was a radical idea, but it was not embraced by the majority of people in the UK at the time. And it was a huge mistake. market economy, women’s opportunities for work were very limited. Only very low paying work was available to them and in most states they couldn’t control their own wages if they were married. But, still poor women did find work in factories or as domestic servants or seamstresses. Some middle class women found work in that most disreputable of fields, teaching, but the cult of domesticity held that a respectable middle class woman should stay at home. The truth is, most American women had no chance to work for profit outside their houses. in reform movements. Reform movements were open to women partly because if women were supposed to be the moral center of the home, they could also claim to be moral conscience of the nation. Thus it didn’t seem out of the ordinary for women to be in charge of the country’s finances and education. In the 1950s and 1960s, women were in control of the political process in the U.S. and much of the rest of the world. They were also in control over the media and the political system. for women to become active in the movement to build asylums for the mentally ill, for instance, as Dorothea Dix was. Many of the most famous advocates for legally prohibiting the sale of alcohol in the US were women, such as Mary Wollstonecraft and Dorothee Dix. For more information, visit the Alcoholics Anonymous website and the Alcoholic Association of America's website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Frances Willard founded the Women’s Christian Temperance Union in 1874. It would be one of the most powerful lobbying groups in the U.S. by the end of the 20th century. Willard was a member of the House of Representatives from 1874 to 1875. She died in 1875, and her husband was the chairman of the Senate Temperance Committee from 1875 to 1878. She was the first woman to be elected to Congress from the state of New York. 19th century. Women gave many temperance lectures featuring horror stories of men who, rather than seeking refuge from the harsh competition of the market economy, found solace at the bottom of a glass or at the end of a beer hose. And women gave many Temperance Lectures featuring Horror stories of Men who sought refuge at the Bottom of a Glass or at The End of A Beer Hose. And Women gave temperance Lecture featuring Horror Stories of Men Who Seek refuge at The Bottom Of A Glass or At The End Of A Beer hose. by the way, yes, there were bars that allowed you to drink as much beer as you could, from a hose, for a nickel. Today, these establishments are known as frat houses. These temperance lectures would tell of men spending all their hard earned money on drink, leaving wives and wives and leaving their children behind. These men were known as 'drinks men' and 'drinkers' and were called 'drinking men' or 'drunk men' children—there were always children—starving and freezing, because in the world of the temperance lecture, it was always winter. Now don’t get me wrong: Prohibition was a disaster, because 1. Freedom, and 2. It’s the only time we had to amend the constitution to be like, “Just kidding about that other other.’’ “It’ll never happen again,” he says. “I’m not going to let it happen again.” amendment,” but it’s worth remembering that back then people drank WAY more than we do now, and also that alcohol is probably a greater public health issue than some recreational drugs that remain illegal. But regardless, the temperance movement made a huge difference in American life because eventually, male and female drinkers were allowed to drink as much as they wanted. “I’m not a drinker, but I’ll drink if I want to,’’ one woman said. ‘I don’t want to drink because I feel like I have to. female supporters of temperance realized that women would be a more powerful ally against alcohol if they could vote. So, in 1928, critic Gilbert Seldes wrote that if prohibition had existed in 1800, “the suffragists might have remained for another century a scattered group of intellectual cranks.” If you or a family member have contemplated voting for the first time, please contact CNN iReport at tips@dailymail.co.uk. For confidential support on suicide matters, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The most urgent reasons for women to want to vote in the mid-1800s were alcohol related. They wanted the saloons closed down, or at least regulated. The wanted the right to own property, and to shield their families’ financial security from the profligacy of drunken men. They also wanted to be able to vote for the first time in their lifetimes, in the first presidential election in 1864. The first woman to do so was suffragist Mary Pat Farmer, who was elected to Congress in 1856. husbands. They wanted the right to divorce those men, and to have them arrested for wife beating. They also wanted to protect children from being terrorized by them. To do all these things they needed to change the laws that consigned married women to the status of chattel. And to change those they wanted to change, they had to go through the courts. They had to fight for their right to be married. They needed to fight to be able to divorce their husbands. laws, they needed the vote. Many women were also important contributors to the anti-slavery movement, although they tended to have more subordinate roles. Like, abolitionist Maria Stewart was the first African American woman to lecture to mixed male and female audiences. Harriet Beecher Stowe wrote the terrible but very important book “The Underground Railroad’s Story.” It was published in 1838 and became a best-selling book of the same name in 1841. Sarah and Angelina Grimke, daughters of a South Carolina slaveholder, converted to Quakerism and became outspoken critics of slavery. Sarah Grimke even published the Letters on the Equality of the Sexes in 1838, which is pretty much what the title suggests. By the way, Stan, you could have written Uncle Tom’s Cabin. You could have done a lot of things, Stan. You’re a good writer. But you’d have to do a lot more than that. have made Sarah Grimke’s letters the Mystery Document. I would have gotten that. But I want to say one more thing about Harriet Beecher Stowe. There’t a reason we read Uncle Tom's Cabin in history classes and not in literature ones. Uncle Tom’S Cabin introduced millions of Americans to Harriet Stowe, and she was one of the most influential women of the 20th century. She was the inspiration for the novel, which was published in 1877. the idea that African American people were people. At least in 19th century readers, Uncle Tom’s Cabin humanized slaves to such a degree that it was banned throughout most of the south. So many women involved in the abolitionist movement, when studying slavery, noticed that there was something a little a little different about the story of Uncle Tom's Cabin than the real life experience of African American slaves in the U.S. The story was published in 1852 and was adapted into a movie in 1853. Some male abolitionists, notably Frederick Douglass and William Lloyd Garrison became supporters of women’s rights. But ultimately the male leaders of the anti-slavery movement denied women's demands for equality. And they may have had had a reason for doing so, as it was not popular with the public at the time. But they may also have been worried that it would undermine the cause of abolition. It's a story that has been told many times before, but not as often as it should have. a point because slavery only existed in parts of the country whereas women existed in all of it. In fact, one of the arguments used by pro-slavery forces was that equality under the law for male slaves might lead to, like, equality for WOMEN. And one of them was that it would lead to a slippery slope ending with equality for women. And it did, in fact, end with women being equal to men in the eyes of the law. But that's a story for another day. out of this emerging consciousness of their own subordinate position, the movement for women's rights was born. The most visible manifestation of it was the issue of woman’s suffrage, raised most eloquently at the Seneca Falls Convention of 1848. Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucretia Mott, Susan B. Anthony and many others spoke out in favor of women's suffrage at the convention. In 1848, women were allowed to vote for the first time in the U.S. The Declaration of Sentiments was modeled very closely on the Declaration of Independence. In some ways this declaration was much more radical than the declaration of Independence because it took on the entire patriarchal structure. The Declaration was published in 1776. It was the first declaration of independence in the U.S. and was signed by the president of the United States, George H.W. Bush, on July 4, 1776, at the White House in Washington, D.C. The declaration was published by a group of men called the Sons of the American Revolution, who were led by William Henry Harrison. out about the 19th century movement for women’s rights. Often American feminists travelled abroad to find allies, prefiguring the later transatlantic movement of other advocates for social justice like Florence Kelley and W.E.B DuBois. Most of the delegates at Seneca Falls, for instance, were from the middle class. There were no representatives of, like, cotton mills, but this didn’t mean that 19th Century feminists didn't acknowledge the needs of working women. Like, Sojourner Truth, probably the most famous black woman abolitionist, spoke eloquently of the plight of working class women, especially slaves, since she’d been one until 1827. And other women recognized that women needed to be able to participate in the market economy to gain some economic freedom. Now, of course, we’re in the age of the internet, where we can all go to the store and buy a cup of coffee and a glass of wine. course all the women who wrote about the moral evils of 19th century America or spoke out or took hatchets to saloons were doing what we would now recognize as work. But they were not being paid. Amelia Bloomer got paid, though, because she recognized that it was impossible for her to be paid for her work. She was paid for what she did, she said, because it was her job to do it and she was not paid for the work she did. women to easily participate in economic activities because of their crazy clothes. So she popularized a new kind of clothing featuring a loose fitting tunic, trousers, and eponymous undergarments. But then Bloomer and her pants were ridiculed in the press and in the streets, and this brings up the third part of the story. The third part is about how Bloomer's pants became known as the 'crazy pants' and how they were ridiculed by the public and the press. The fourth part is the story of how she came to be known as 'the woman in the pants' important thing to remember about the 19th century women’s movement. It faced strong resistance. Patriarchy, like the force, is strong, which is why Luke and Yoda and Darth Vader and Obi-Wan and whoever Samuel Jackson played...all dudes. By the way, why did they train Luke up and not Princess Leia? I don't know, but it was probably not a good idea. I mean, he's a dude, and Princess Leia is a princess. I’m just saying. Many women’s rights advocates were fighting to overturn not just laws, but also attitudes. Some of those goals, such as claiming greater control over the right to regulate their own sexual activity and whether or not to have sex, are still being fought today. Who was cooler and had more to fight for and was less screwed up? Patriarchy. Or was it the other way around? Or was there a better way to go about it? I’m going to go with the latter. not to have children were twisted by critics to claim that women advocated “free love.” It’s interesting to note that the United States ended slavery more than 50 years before it granted women the right to vote and that although much of the march towards equality between the sexes has been made, there is still a long way to go in terms of equality between men and women. The U.S. ended slavery in 1865, but it wasn’t until 1920 that women were allowed to vote. The Equal Rights Amendment, despite being passed by Congress, was never ratified. But by taking leading roles in the reform movements in the 19th century, women were able to enter the public. Women played a key role in temperance and slavery, but also prisons and asylums. Women also played a leading role in the women's suffrage movement in the U.S. in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Women's rights have been slow to be ratified, but they have been a key part of women's history. sphere for the first time. And these great women changed the world for better and for worse, just as great men do. Along the way, they made “the woman question’ part of the movement for social reform in the U.S. And in doing so, American women chipped away at the status quo for years to come. In the end, it was the women who made the world a better place for all of us to live in, not the men. at the idea that a woman’s place must be in the home. That might not have been a presidential election or a war, but it is still bringing real change to our real lives on a daily basis. Thanks for watching. I’ll see you next week. Crash Course is produced by CNN iReport and CNN.com's iReport team. For the latest from CNN, follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter. For more from CNN Living, follow us on Twitter and Instagram. This episode is written by my high school history teacher Raoul Meyer, and myself. If you want to suggest captions for the libertage, please do so. The show is directed by Stan Muller. Our script supervisor is Meredith Danko. The associate producer is Danica Johnson. And our graphics team is Thought Café. The episode is also available on iTunes and the CNN iReport app. For more information on the iReport App, visit http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/news/features/top-stories/topstories-topstories. in comments where you can also ask questions about today’s video that will be answered by our team of historians. Thanks for watching Crash Course and as we say in my hometown, don’t forget to be awesome. Back to the page you came from with this week's Crash Course video. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter @CrashCourse and @CNNOpinion. For more Crash Course videos, visit CNN.com/Crashcourse and follow us on Twitter @cnncrashcourse.