Best index: 14

Medicare now covers a number of preventive services, including immunizations and cancer screenings. Not all beneficiaries avail themselves of covered preventive services. Some beneficiaries may simply choose not to use these services, but others may be unaware that the services are available or covered by Medicare. For some beneficiaries, certain services may not be warranted or may be of limited value, authors say. They say appropriate preventive care depends on an individual’s age and particular health risks, during those checkups. The authors: Despite how often Medicare beneficiaries visit physicians, relatively few beneficiaries receive the full range of recommended preventive services covered byMedicare. The task force recommends that all people age 65 or older receive an annual influenza vaccination and at least one pneumonia vaccination. About 30 percent of Medicare beneficiaries did not receive an influenza vaccination, the task force says. 37 percent had never had a pneumonia vaccination, according to the report. Many Medicare beneficiaries may not know that they are at risk for health conditions that preventive care could detect, the report says. The task force's 2003 report shows that many Medicare beneficiaries still do not receive certain recommended preventive services. HHS in 1984 established the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. The task force recommends certain screening, immunization, and counseling services for people age 65 or older. Medicare covers some, but not all, of these services (see table 1). Medicare’s fee-for-service program does not cover regular periodic examinations, where clinicians might assess an individual's health risk and provide needed preventive services. Beneficiaries could and still can, however, receive some of this services during office visits. Nationally representative survey data show that Medicare beneficiaries visit physicians often and that most report receiving “routine checkups.” Despite the frequency of visits, many Medicare beneficiaries do not receive the full range of recommended preventive services. Data also show that many beneficiaries may not know about their risk for health conditions that preventive care is meant to detect. We estimated that beneficiaries visited a physician at least six times that year, on average, mainly for illnesses or medical conditions. Only about 1 in 10 visits occurred when beneficiaries were well (see fig. 1). CDC data show that 32 percent of those with high blood pressure had not been told about it before. 21 million Medicare beneficiaries may have been at risk during the period when the survey was conducted. An estimated 20 million of them may not be receiving the full range of recommended preventive services, according to the CDC's NHANES study. The study was conducted between 1999 and 2000. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. 32 percent of those found to have a high cholesterol level reported that no one had told them that they had high cholesterol. Projected nationally, this percentage translates into 2.1 million Medicare beneficiaries who may have high cholesterol without knowing it. A one-time initial preventive care examination covered by Medicare may offer opportunity to deliver some preventive services but alone is not enough to ensure better health among beneficiaries, the study says. The study concludes that the Medicare program should be expanded to include more people with high cholesterol levels. CMS is exploring an alternative for Medicare preventive care that would provide systematic health risk assessments to fee-for-service beneficiaries. Such programs collect information from individuals; identify their risk factors; and refer the individuals to at least one intervention to promote health, sustain function, or prevent disease. The program will use a beneficiary-focused health risk assessment questionnaire to assess health risks, such as lifestyle behaviors, and use of clinical preventive and screening services. It will also refer beneficiaries to health-promoting community services including physical activity and social support groups. ensuring receipt of follow-up care will be important to improving beneficiaries’ health. A proposed CMS demonstration, currently in design, will explore another preventive care delivery option. It could be used to orient new beneficiaries to Medicare and encourage them to make informed choices about providers and services. The proposed demonstration could be a means to better ensure that health care providers have enough time to identify individual Medicare beneficiaries' health risks and provide preventive services appropriate for their risks. The proposal is still in the design stage. may not be aware that these services are available and covered by Medicare. Many people may have a health condition that preventive services can easily diagnose, and yet they may not know that they have this condition. A one-time preventive care examination will add a dedicated opportunity for delivering preventive care and could help reduce the gap in the preventive services that Medicare beneficiaries receive. At the same time, it is not a panacea. Ensuring that beneficiaries receive needed services is key to ensuring their well-being. researchers, the program will tailor preventive interventions to individual risks. It will track patient risks and health over time; and provide beneficiaries with self-management tools and information. The design phase had not been finalized as of last week and still required approval from HHS and the Office of Management and Budget. Although some beneficiaries may not choose to seek these services, others may, according to a CMS official, others will benefit from the program's services. The program is expected to be rolled out over the next few years. Primary care physicians typically cannot provide services such as mammography screenings for breast cancer or colonoscopies for colon cancer. It also is uncertain whether a one-time or periodic examination would be an effective way to improve beneficiaries’ health. For example, one previous CMS initiative that included preventive health care visits ended with mixed results, the agency says. The agency conducted a congressionally mandated demonstration to test varied health promotion and disease prevention services in the late 1980s and early 1990s. such as free preventive visits, health risk assessment, and behavior counseling, to see if they would increase use of preventive services. The agency’s final report, published in 1998, concluded that the demonstration services were marginally effective in raising the use of some simple disease-prevention measures. The report tempered these results by pointing out that the relatively brief period during which the services were provided (roughly 2 years) The report did not consistently improve beneficiary health or reduce theUse of hospital or skilled nursing services. In late 2003, MMA added coverage under Medicare for a one-time “initial preventive physician evaluation” if performed within 6 months after an individual’s enrollment under Part B of the program. Covered services under the examination include measurement of height, weight, and blood pressure; an electrocardiogram; and education, counseling, and referral services for screenings and other preventive services. The new coverage applies to services provided on or after.visits for other health issues.. MMA also added coverage for various screening tests to identify cardiovascular disease (and related abnormalities) in “elevated risk” beneficiaries. and follow-up care is likely to remain a challenge. I will be happy to answer any questions that you or Members of this Committee may have. For future contacts regarding this testimony, please call Janet Heinrich at (202) 512-7119. Katherine Iritani, Matt Byer, Ellen W. Chu, Lisa Lusk, and Behn Miller Kelly also made key contributions to this testimony. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material. permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army in the region of the country where you live on the continent of Africa.