==================== [1/100] ====================
Summary:
To look at coordination of physician placements, we cross-tabulated the agency data on waiver requests received by the agencies between 1994 and 1995 by state. We obtained the number of physicians who were NHSC scholarship or federal loan repayment recipients who were practicing in each state as of December 31, 1995. This is a conservative number of NHSC physicians; however, it doesn't include physicians who are NHSC state loan repayment recipient practicing in shortage areas. We used data from the requesting agencies and states on theNumber of waiver applications sent to USIA from 1994 to 1995. primarily by awarding scholarships to students who agree to serve in a shortage area after their health professions training is complete. On December 31, 1995, 848 NHSC physicians and 685 other NHSC professionals who received scholarships or federal loan repayment were practicing in underserved areas of the country. In addition to NHSC, HHS has other programs to address medical underservice. For example, HHS provides federal grant funding to community health centers that are required to accept all patients regardless of gender. We obtained data from HHS’ Health Resources and Services Administration. We compared waivers with the number of NHSC physicians practicing in underserved areas on September 30, 1995. We also compared waivers to those who did not have NHSC scholarship or federal loan repayment obligations. We estimated the number who completed graduate medical education and training in 1995 who would be subject to the 2-year foreign residence. We used this data to estimate the number. of physicians who completed Graduate Medical Education and Training (GME) in 1995. who were willing to practice there. She said it would be a “travesty’ to health care in rural areas if these waiver physicians were not available. Other reasons cited for hiring these physicians are their superior foreign language skills and cultural familiarity with a facility’s patient population. For example, several physicians received waivers to practice at a migrant health center in Eastern Washington. These physicians were recruited, in part, because they are native Spanish speakers, which enables them to effectively treat the center's Spanish-speaking patients. by professional recruiters or immigration attorneys regarding the availability of a physician to meet their facility’s needs. Some facility officials and physicians reported paying up to $25,000 in immigration attorney or recruiter fees for assistance in matching a physician with a facility and processing the waiver. During our site visits to facilities where physicians who had received waivers were practicing, physicians cited several reasons why they wanted waivers, including that they would not be able to apply the medical skills they had learned in the United States in their home countries. the requesting agencies’ and states’ policies do not all require that a waiver physician in such an area accept Medicaid, have a sliding fee scale, or accept anyone for services regardless of his or her ability to pay. In one area where the identified need was care for migrant farm workers, a waiver. physician was in a group practice a block away from a federally funded migrant health. center. A senior official at the migrant health center said that the waiver physician did not impact the center’s patient load because they both served different patient populations. practicing in nonprofit community or migrant health centers and about one-fourth are in a private or group practice. The rest are practicing in hospitals, for-profit health centers, or other settings (see fig. 3). See appendix VI for more detailed information on the results of our survey of facilities. Using our survey results, we estimate that almost all physicians practicing on January 1, 1996, whose waivers were processed through federal agencies were practicing in primary care specialties. Overall, more than half of them were practiced in internal medicine. with state and other health officials, visited 14 sites where waiver physicians were practicing, and interviewed health care facility officials and 20 physicians who received waivers. We conducted our work between November 1995 and September 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing. We selected the sites in order to visit physicians in a variety of practice settings, including federally funded community and migrant health centers, and a capitated-rate program for the Medicare- and Medicaid-eligible elderly, and private and group practices affiliated with both public and for-profit hospitals. practice. The most prevalent subspecialty was nephrology (medicine concerned with kidney disease), which was reported for about 7 percent of the primary care physicians. Requesting facilities and state officials had mixed views on the usefulness of subspecialties for meeting their needs. Officials from some states said that physicians with sub Specialties are not as desirable because they may not remain in the area to practice primary care. In fact, several states have policies to not request waivers for specialties. with the number of full-time-equivalent physicians needed to remove primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations in that state as of December 31, 1995. We used the shortage area dedesignation level because it is the primary measurement used by HHS and the requesting agencies to establish the need for physicians. We identified instances where physicians did not comply with the terms of the waiver received NHSC scholarships or federal loan repayment who were practicing in the state. Although physicians with waivers may also practice in designated Medically Underserved Areas, HHS does not remove this designation. from NHSC at the time of our review. As shown in table VII.1, the degree to which the identified physician shortage can be offset by the waiver physicians practicing in a state varied between the states. When combined with the NHSC physicians practicing there, the number exceeded the number of physicians needed to remove some states’ primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations. OtherStates’ identified physician needs were not met by these two physician sources. In addition to those named above, the following individuals made important contributions. could not identify the number of physicians in practice at any given point in time. Instead, we used the dates that the agencies and states submitted their requests for waivers to USIA. We assumed that those physicians whose waivers were requested in 1994 or 1995 were either already practicing at the facility listed in agency data on December 31, 1995, or had their waivers in process to begin practicing shortly thereafter. Table VI.2: Practice Settings of Waiver Physicians Practicing on January 1, 1996 DOT (n=2) ARC ( n=38) HUD (n =29) USDA (n--81) number of physicians identified by HHS as needed to remove the shortage area designations in a state. In five states (Alabama, Kansas, Kentucky, North Dakota, and West Virginia), the number of physicians for whom waivers were processed equaled more than 75 percent. In other states, such as California, such physicians equal less than 10 percent of the identified need. Waivers for physicians also are not well-coordinated with other programs addressing underservice, like those operated by HHS and NHSC. The number of waivers being processed for physicians to practice in underserved areas each year has grown from 70 in 1990, to 1,374 in 1995. Indications are that in 1995, about half of the foreign physicians that were supposed to return home were granted waivers of this requirement. In 1996, waiver physicians were practicing in 49 states and the District of Columbia—every state except Alaska. However, the degree to which they are relied on to relieve physician shortages varies greatly from state to state. three agencies that provided formal written comments also expressed their support for the need for better coordination between the participating agencies, states, and other programs. One agency, USDA, also expressed concern about the lack of available funding to operate its program effectively. USDA suggested that an alternative to funding the program from appropriated research funds would be to initiate a fee-for-service type application fee to offset operational costs. We concur that any entity involved in managing waiver requests for physicians should commit adequate resources for oversight and operational support. HHS has started to collect information on the number of physicians practicing under waivers. Lack of information could result in more physicians practicing in an area than are needed. There is a lack of coordination with state efforts to address physicians shortages. The Community Health Center program is not well-coordinated with HHS programs such as NHSC or the Community Health Centre program. It means that federal managing the waivers nor require the waivers to be coordinated with HHS Programs such as the NHSC and the community health center. HHS endorses the philosophy that exchange visitors return home after completing their training to make their new knowledge and skills available to their home countries. HHS does not support waivers for physicians to remain in the United States to practice in underserved areas. Instead, HHS administers other federal programs, such as NHSC, to address physician shortages in the U.S. NHSC supplies physicians and other health professionals to underserved area.favorable recommendation. HHS is the federal agency responsible for addressing physician shortages it does not use waivers to do so. agencies and states may not know of problems identified by HHS when considering requests from community health centers. For example, waivers were requested through HUD for several physicians to practice at a health center that had its HHS funding discontinued due to financial management problems. When requesting the waivers for these physicians, HUD officials did not know that HHS had identified problems with the health center. As a result, they could not take those problems into consideration when deciding whether the waivers were in the public’s interest. underservice in the United States. Many health care facilities and states cite examples of the utility of these waivers in providing a qualified physician for an underserved area. Federal efforts to address physician shortages are not coordinated among the federal agencies or with the states. The rapid growth in waivers for physicians makes this an opportune time for the Congress to reassess what it wants the waiver provision to accomplish, the authors say. The running disagreement between HHS and other federal agencies about the role of waivers in addressing physician shortages in underserved areas needs to be resolved. as eligible practice locations and state involvement and the consequences of the physician’s failure to complete the agreed-upon length of service. For example, ARC restricts physicians to practice locations in federally designated Health Professional Shortage Areas. The physicians who received waivers through USDA and HUD have been allowed to practice in other areas, including designated Medically Underserved Areas. ARC officials said that they excluded the MedicallyUnderserved Area designations because this designation is not an accurate measure of physician shortage. Under existing procedures, locating a waiver physician in a medical shortage area is no guarantee that the needs of the underserved will be addressed. HUD officials also said that their monitoring efforts were limited by the availability of staff resources. An area’s underserved may be only a specific part of the population (such as migrant workers or low-income people), and not all federal agencies’ and states’ policies contain requirements or monitoring to ensure that a physician's practice includes such groups. The use of waivers to address physician shortages is not authorized or funded as a program. It is unclear whether agencies would devote sufficient resources to effectively monitor compliance. USDA, for example, relies on employers to enforce the employment contracts, citing a lack of staff resources to conduct its own monitoring. However, as we and ARC’s Inspector General found, many of the examples of physicians who failed to comply with agency policies resulted from actions taken by the employers. and regulations do not require waivers to be used only as a last resort. practices or in locations not designated as shortage areas. Agency controls to help ensure that physicians comply with waiver agreements vary among the federal agencies and states. ARC requires the facilities to verify and the waiver physicians to certify that they are complying with ARC policies. HUD and USDA officials said that they had started or planned to start requiring periodic reports. USIA has proposed regulations to make the waiver requests easier to obtain. The growth in the number of waiver physicians has not gone unnoticed by federal agency officials and legislators. coordinated with other federal programs. Designating leadership responsibility for managing the program. Establishing penalties against facilities that fail to comply with requirements of the waiver. Directing the entity(ies) managing program to implement procedures and criteria for the selection and placement of physicians and for monitoring compliance with waiver requirements. For example, requiring the state to clearly support the use of the physician for the purposes of this waiver. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/health-care/healthcare-reform-wavier/index.html. virtually all waiver requests. USIA officials said that while they check for required documentation, they almost always rely on the interested government agencies’ assertions that the waivers are in the public interest. INS officials say that refusal of the waiver is extremely rare if USIA has given a favorable recommendation. “when the application demonstrates that the exchange visitor is needed merely to provide services for a limited geographical geographical area,” USIA says. INS says it is not in a position to second-guess USIA or theinterested government agency as to whether public interest would be served if the waiver was granted. USIA, INS, HHS, and the requesting federal agencies have been meeting since late 1995 to discuss the use of waivers to address physician shortages. The officials formed an informal interagency group that has discussed revising regulations addressing waiver requests. USIA, in working with the other agencies, has been working to make waiver requests more consistent. The new regulations, if finalized, and 1996 amendments could address many of the coordination and compliance problems, but not all of them, says USIA's director of medical services. published a proposed regulation in the Federal Register on September 5, 1996. In the preamble to the proposed regulation, USIA noted that with the entry of USDA and HUD into the waiver process, inconsistency in the administration of waiver requests among the different agencies has created some confusion. For a request by a U.S. government agency, the regulation would condition approval on the physician’s commitment to practice primary care for at least 3 years in a designated Health Professional Shortage Area or a Medically Underserved Area. The number of waivers also increased because the authority for states to request waivers was passed in 1994. 23 states requested waivers in calendar year 1995. HUD officials have recently decided to reassess the department’s waiver policy and stopped accepting requests after August 30, 1996, to conduct a review. For the physicians in our sample and in the states we visited, several reasons they were not practicing at the location for which the waiver was requested had to do with changes made by the facility. We found cases in which a facility made the request and then determined that the physician was no longer needed. to practice in one rural area where the U.S. Coast Guard operates. The rapid growth in waivers began in late 1993 and 1994, when the Departments of Agriculture (USDA) and Housing and Urban Development (HUD) began requesting them for physicians to serve their rural and urban constituents. Agency officials said that they would like to limit the number of waivers processed by their agencies, but have not yet done so. They said they initially responded to a constituent request to support a specific physician; however, their offices were subsequently flooded with requests for waivers for other physicians. USIA and INS officials said they recommended or approved virtually all the physician waiver requests made by the interested U.S. government agencies. Because the agencies requesting waivers do not consistently track the practice dates of the physicians, we requested waivers between 1990 and 1992. We selected a random sample of 211 of 1,994 physicians for whom ARC, DOT, HUD, and USDA received waiver requests in 1994 and 1995. We sent a questionnaire to the contact person at the facility that had requested the waivers, using the information provided by the federal agencies. United States Information Agency, the Federal Co-Chairman of the Appalachian Regional Commission, and the Attorney General. We also will make copies available to others on request. Please contact me on (202) 512-7119 if you or your staff have any questions. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix XI. To accomplish our objectives, we interviewed (1) federal agency officials responsible for requesting the waivers at ARC, HUD, USDA, and DOT; (2) HHS officials in the department’s Office of International Affairs and the Health Resources and Services Administration; and (3) officials at USIA and INS. any location in Appalachia. There is no mechanism for each federal agency to know how many waivers the other has requested to address the physician shortage in an area. State health officials do not always know where physicians receiving waivers through federal agencies are practicing and, therefore, they cannot coordinate these placements with state programs to address medical underservice. While ARC requires that facilities’ requests for waivers come through the states, other agencies do not. This leads to situations where the states are unaware of the level of placements. Not all the agencies processing the waiver requests have expertise in addressing health care issues. USDA and HUD officials said that their offices lacked expertise in health issues. In an effort to ensure that the employers have a true need for a physician, ARC, USDA, and HUD policies, as well as proposed USIA regulations, require the facilities to provide some documentation of past recruitment efforts. This procedure, however, does not ensure the use of waivers for physicians is the option of last resort for areas with physician shortages. addressing unmet need and to show that it has sought other options for fulfilling this need. We provided a draft copy of this report to seven agencies that are involved with waivers for physicians to practice in underserved areas. ARC, USDA, and USIA provided formal written comments (see apps. VIII, IX, and X) These comments indicate general agreement with our conclusions and matters for congressional consideration. HUD and Justice chose not to provide formal comments. However, we discussed our findings with HUD and INS officials, and they raised no objections to our findings or matters. through (1) discussions with the ARC Inspector General and a review of reports from that office. We also reviewed case files at the requesting agencies and USIA. If a facility indicated that the physician never worked there, we contacted the facility, INS, or both to obtain information on the reason the physiciannever worked there and to confirm that a waiver had been granted. If the physician was supposed to be practicing, we made site visits to facilities where the physicians were supposed to have been practicing, and we also contacted USIA and other agency officials. that he had heard that the physician was pursuing additional graduate medical education in the United States. In the second instance, the facility reported the physician’s firing directly to INS, which revoked his nonimmigrant work status. Six of eight reviews conducted by the Inspector General from 1994 to 1995 found that some physicians were not practicing primary care at least 40 hours per week in a Health Professional Shortage Area. Instead, employers were using the physicians in subspecialty areas, according to the reviews. received the waiver. A clinic in Illinois said that the physicians were needed to help meet an urgent primary care delivery crises. Six months after one of the physicians began working there, she was terminated because the clinic had determined that it was overstaffed. She is now practicing in another city in Illinois that has an identified shortage of physicians who serve Medicaid patients. The second physician was transferred from the rural community to a city that has a shortage of doctors who serve the state's Medicaid patients, the USDA said. A medical group asked HUD to request waivers for three physicians to work at a practice purchased from a retiring physician outside of Atlanta. When we called the practice site, we were told that only one of the three physicians was working there. The third physician was practicing only part-time at the practice sites for which the waiver was requested. He said that because there were not enough patients in that location, he spends about half his time working at the main clinic in Champaign, Illinois. The location on the waiver request to another location that is not in a federally designated shortage area. One physician never worked at the site, one physician worked a brief period and then went to practice at a prison in Michigan. One physician remained to work for the new employer after the practice was sold. HUD officials were unaware that the facility had been sold and that two physicians were practicing there. INS officials said that waivers had been approved for all three physicians, including the one who was never employed there. The practice no longer had enough patients to support these physicians, an official from the medical group said. of the physicians were not practicing there. We also found instances in which the reason for not meeting the requirements of an agreement resulted from the physician’s actions. For example, in two separate cases, physicians were fired when they refused to complete the requirement for working 40 hours a week at the requesting facility. In one instance, the fired physician notified USDA that he was going to practice at another hospital and when USDA officials told him he could not because the hospital was not in a shortage area, the physician broke off contact with them. a 95-percent confidence level, the rate of compliance among the 1990 to 1992 requests is at least 80 percent. We counted those physicians who were working on January 1, 1996, for the facility listed in agency data as in compliance. We also used the survey results of the 1994 to 1995 samples to estimate the practice specialties and practice settings of physicians who are still practicing on that date. The estimates at the 95- percent confidence intervals are shown in tables VI.2 and VI.3. in many cases for less than 1 year. We estimate that 90 percent completed the minimum employment period required by ARC. On January 1, 1996, over one-fourth (28 percent) were still practicing at the same facility that requested the waiver. We counted those physicians who worked for at least 1.75 years as meeting the ARC minimum contract period at that time, which was 2 years. For example, none of (38 of 40 ARC physicians, 2 of 2 DOT physicians, 49 of 49 HUD physicians, and 111 of 120 USDA physicians) How many J-1 visa waivers did your state receive from employers between October 1, 1995 and March 31, 1996? (enter 0 if no applications were received during that time) 112 (total) applications please continue on next page--> ) 5. Based on your current situation, how. adequate is the annual limit of 20 state J- 1 visa waivers to meet your state’s needs for. physicians under this program? (check one) 6. We require periodic reports by the 6% less than adequate 0% much less thanadequate 50% if any, does your state consider in deciding whether to request state J-1 visa waivers? (check all that apply) 15% We rely on other federal or state 38% We act in response to reports from other federal and state agencies 32% other (please specify) 97% Whether the practice location is in a health professional shortage area (HPSA) Please continue on next page to read the rest of the survey. If you have any comments on the J- 1 visa waiver program, such as the reasons for participation or nonparticipation, please enter them in the space below. We are sending this questionnaire to all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands of the United States. Please complete the questionnaire and return it, along with a copy of your state’s policies on J-1 visa waivers for physicians, if any, within ONE WEEK of receipt. You can use the enclosed pre-addressed envelope or send it via FAX on (206) 287-4872. The questionnaire should take about 15 minutes to complete. By 1995, four U.S. government agencies and 23 states were requesting waivers of J-1 visa requirements for physicians. Before 1993, the only agency requesting waivers for a number of physicians to practice in underserved areas was ARC. ARC requested around 200 or fewer waivers per year, peaking at 266 waivers in 1993. Health care facility officials, as well as state and federal health officials, said they have been inundated with inquiries from physicians who would like to obtain a waiver by working in a shortage area. residence requirement. Congress should consider requiring that the use of such waivers be managed as a program. Clarifying how use of waivers for these physicians fits into the overall federal strategy to address medical underservice. This should include determining the size of the waiver program and establishing how it should be. The amendments neither designate an agency as responsible for resolution, and better coordination and management of the overall effort are needed if it is to be continued, the authors say. The changes (1) make the waiver conditions much more consistent, which may help to alleviate the confusion cited by agency officials, they say. facility for failing to comply with agency policies. The new regulations and the 1996 amendments do not establish any penalties for employers who fail to comply. The use of waivers for physicians with J-1 visa requirements has become so extensive that this exception policy now resembles a full-fledged program for addressing medical issues. The ARC Inspector General noted that the most significant programmatic issue that surfaced during that office’s review was the limited accountability of employers and the lack of potential actions against employers who did not use physicians with waivers. HHS did not submit formal comments by the end of our 30-day comment period. DOT has had limited involvement in waivers for physicians with J-1 visas and did not have comments on the draft report. The Director of the department’s Office of International Affairs (who also chairs the department's Exchange Visitor Waiver Review Board) said that HHS favored the option of delegating responsibility for the waivers to the states. For congressional consideration, he said, HHS favors delegating the waivers. for physicians who have subspecialties. Requests for waivers for physicians with J-1 visas are not coordinated effectively. No single entity is responsible for coordinating practice locations of waiver physicians. The use of waivers is now a ready means for acquiring physicians, some of whom are being actively marketed by the physicians themselves or placement specialists such as recruiters. “The Department does not view waivers as a mechanism to help resolve the problems of shortage areas,” the agency says in a statement. The U.S. General Accounting Office is conducting a review of J-1 visa waivers for physicians to practice in medically underserved communities. We sent the questionnaire to the facilities for 211 physicians who had their waivers requested through ARC, DOT, HUD, and USDA from 1994 to 1995. 33 states provided written policies. When our study is complete, we will send you a copy of our report. This appendix contains the responses to questions we asked facilities that requested waivers of the J- 1 visa foreign residence requirement for physicians. The number of physicians receiving waivers of the 2-year foreign residence requirement for J-1 exchange visitors has grown more than tenfold in the past 5 years. Waiver physicians are practicing in virtually every state; most are primary care physicians. weak controls mean there is little to deter physicians or their employers from failing to comply if they choose to break these terms. For example, we found instances in which a physician never practiced at the intended facility, unbeknownst to the agency processing the request. Journal of Medicine, Vol. 333, No. 7 (1995), pp. 454-56. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. The U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts) GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. Orders may also be placed by calling (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. General Accounting Office. Health Care Shortage Areas: Designations Not a Useful Tool for Directing Resources to the Underserved. National Health Service Corps: Opportunities to Stretch Scarce Dollars and Improve Provider Placement. U.S. Information Agency: Inappropriate Uses of Educational and Cultural Exchange Visas. The New England Journal of Medicine: “Correcting the Oversupply of Specialists by Limiting Residencies for Graduates of Foreign Medical Schools.” “ U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1988. Council on Graduate Medical Education. Sixth Report: Managed Health Care: Implications for the Physician Workforce and Medical. Education. Washington, D.C.: U.S.-based Council. First Report of the Council, Vols. I and II, 1988; Fourth Report, Vol. I, 1989; Fifth Report, vol. II, 1989. Third Report, v. III, 1991; Fourth, viv. IV, 1991. Services, 1995. Institute of Medicine. The Nation’s Physician Workforce: Options for Balancing Supply and. Requirements. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1996. Pew Health Professions Commission. Critical Challenges: Revitalizing the Health. Professions for the Twenty-First Century. San Francisco: University of California San Francisco Center for the HealthProfessions, 1995, p. 1521-27. The New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 334, No. 25 (1996), pp. 1679-83. the contact person to tell us if the physician worked or planned to work at the facility. The physician’s medical specialty, subspecialty, and practice setting were also asked. We received responses for 39 of the 40 physicians in our 1990 to 1992 ARC sample and for 200 of 211 physicians in 1994 to 1995 samples. We also asked for the date the physician left the facility and whether the physician obtained permanent residency during his or her employment. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/features/healthcare/employee-benefits/employees-benefiting-from-pension-reimbursement.html. For physicians that did not work at or left the facilities, we tried to locate the physician through AMA data. Exchange visitors are only a portion of physicians in graduate medical education programs. As shown in table II.1, about 1 in 10 physicians in programs accredited by ACGME was an exchange visitor in August 1995. Of those who were international medical graduates,physicians who did not exchange were more likely to be noncompliant or to have left the facility or been fired for noncompliance. U.S. officials were required to issue an annual report to the Congress on participants who had submitted affidavits. The House Committee on the Judiciary “notes the flagrant abuse of the exchange program during the past decade.” It said that the affidavits were to ensure that the physicians comply with the terms of their agreement. The legislation seeks to alleviate possible ‘brain drain’ from various countries, the committee said in a letter to the Senate Judiciary Committee. The bill was passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives. J-1 visas allow foreign nationals to participate as exchange visitors in cultural and educational programs in the United States. ECFMG is the designated sponsor for exchange visitors participating in graduate medical education. After completing this program, it is expected that participants will return to their home countries and impart what they have learned and experienced. In 1995, over 9,000 foreign physicians with J-1 visa were in the U.S. for graduate medicaleducation or training. These exchange visitors constituted about one-tenth of all individuals receiving medical education (see app. II). requirement, we subtracted the number of exchange visitor physicians who were continuing applicants in the 1995-96 academic year from the number. physicians sponsored by ECFMG in the prior academic year. While this number is not exact because it may include a small number of physicians. who were involved in research and some physicians who did not complete their training, it does represent a reasonable estimate of the number with J-1 visas who completed graduate medical education or training who would be required to return home without a waiver. not graduate from U.S. or Canadian medical schools. About 1 in 3 was an exchange visitor. Only these exchange visitor physicians are subject to the J-visa 2-year foreign residence requirement. Medical school type was not indicated for 454 residents (0.5 percent of all residents). Under the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961, the Exchange visitor (J-visA) Nonimmigrant (H-visas) does not include graduates of Canadian medical school. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Congress has imposed restrictions on J-1 visa holders, including physicians in graduate medical education. These physicians are required to return to their home country (or to their country of last legal residence) for at least 2 years after completion of training. However, they may obtain a waiver of this requirement and remain in the United States. For most physicians, the waivers are requested on including INS service centers, officials from the Department of Labor and the State Department, and the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates. Section 212(e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act requires that certain J-1 visa program participants, including participants in graduate medical education, reside at least 2 years in the countries of their nationalities or last residences after leaving the United States. They must meet this requirement before they are eligible to apply for nonimmigrant visas (H and L) as temporary workers, for permanent residencies in the US, or as immigrants. There was no 2-year foreign residence requirement or waiver provision in the exchange visitor program authorized with the passage of the U.S. legislation in 1994. an interested U.S. government agency showing the waiver to be in the public interest. “To make available the services of exchangees who possess talents desired by our universities, foundations and other institutions, the language of the House bill was modified to permit the waiver of the foreign residence requirement on the request of an interested government agency,” the bill says. An amendment to the foreign residency provision in 1970 removed the blanket application of theforeign residence requirement for exchange visitors and imposed it only on participants whose participation was financed in some way by the United States. countries or (2) whose home countries clearly needed their services. Participants could no longer meet the 2-year foreign residence requirement by residing in other foreign countries but had to reside in the countries of their nationalities or their last foreign residences before coming to the United States. The 1970 act also established two additional bases for waivers: persecution because of race, religion, or political opinion and statements by the participant’s home countries that they had no objections to the waivers. These bases still apply except the statement of no-objection waiver is no longer available. The 2-year foreign residence requirement and its related waiver provision evolved through a number of legislative changes after the exchange visitor program was authorized in 1948. “The exchange program is not an immigration program and should not be used to circumvent the operation of the immigration laws,” a 1956 amendment to the act said. The act required participants to depart the United States after completing their programs. The 1956 amendment also provided for a waiver of the foreign residence requirements on the basis of a request from a foreign national. In 1981, USIA asked the Congress to extend the limit up to 7 years for medical doctors to encourage them to study in the United States. The House Committee on the Judiciary questioned USIA officials regarding the likelihood that physicians would be willing to return home after 7 years. The Congress increased the usual permissible duration of stay to7 years, but it imposed additional requirements. Graduate medical education or training participants were required, as a continuing reminder, to furnish annual affidavits to INS attesting that they would return to their home countries. The Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act, 1997, included amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act. The amendments subject physicians seeking waivers through interested U.S. government agencies to some of the same requirements as those sponsored by state agencies. They also extend authorization for waivers for aliens entering the United States with a J-visa or acquiring such status through May 31, 2002. For example, the amendments require such physicians to (1) agree to work for at least 3 years for the health facility named in the application, and (2) work in an area designated by the Secretary of State. Federal agencies and states generally request waivers of the 2-year foreign residence requirement so that the physicians can practice for several years in underserved areas. No single agency has management responsibility for use of the waivers to address physician shortages. Because of the lack of coordination, the number of waivers processed for physicians to practice in some states has been more than the amount needed to alleviate the identified physician shortage in that state. USIA reviews the program, policy, and foreign relations aspects of the case and forwards its recommendations to the INS Commissioner. maintaining a nonimmigrant work status (H-1B visa) The alien physician must agree to practice medicine for at least 3 years in a geographic area or areas designated by the Secretary of HHS as having a shortage of health care professionals. If the alien physician is otherwise contractually obligated to return to a foreign country, that country’s government must furnish a statement to the Director of USIA that it has no objection to a waiver. if the physician fails to fulfill the contract, he or she may be deported.

ROUGE-1: 70.37, ROUGE-2: 66.10, ROUGE-L: 27.34
BERTScore: 62.13

==============================================
==================== [2/100] ====================
Summary:
Full-Time PAS Positions, as of the End of the 111 th Congress CNCS Nomination Action During the 111th Congress Incumbents in Full- time PASPositions. FHFA Nomination action During the 11th Congress. EPA action During 11th Congress. NFAH action during 11th congressional session. ODNI action during 12th Congressional session. SSA action during 13th Congressional recess. OMB action during 14th Congress recess. and nominations withdrawn. The table also provides, for each of the four categories, the mean and median number of days to confirm a nomination. Appendix C provides a list of department abbreviations. Incumbents in Full-Time PAS Positions, as of the End of the 111 th Congress ARC Nomination Action During the 111Th Congress Incumbent in Full time PAS positions as of end of 111th Congress. AOC Nomination action during 111th Congress. The GAO nomination action during 110th  Congress. The IMF nomination action During 111th th Congress. Government Ethics ONHIR—Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation OPIC—Overseas Private Investment Corporation SBA—Small Business Administration SSA—Social Security Administration SSS—Selective Service System TDA—Trade Development Agency USAID—United States Agency for International Development Executive Office of the President (EOP) CEA—Council of Economic Advisers CEQ—Council on Environmental Quality OMB —Office of Management and Budget ONDCP --Office of National Drug Control Policy OSTP--Office of Science and Technology Policy. Development IJC—International Joint Commission, U.S. and Canada IMF—International Monetary Fund Legislative Branch Agencies AC—Architect of the Capitol GAO—Government Accountability Office GPO —Government Printing Office LC—Library of Congress. IJC is the International Joint Commission of the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom. IMF is the IMF's legislative branch of the International Monetary Fund. GPO is the Government Printing Office. LC is the Library of Congress' library of records. and Other Agencies Appendix B. Nomination Action by Agency Type, 111 th Congress Appendix C. Agency Abbreviations Independent Agencies ARC—Appalachian Regional Commission BBG—Broadcasting Board of Governors CIA—Central Intelligence Agency CNCS—Corporation for National and Community Service CSOSA—Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia DRA—Delta Regional Authority EPA—Environmental Protection Agency FMCS—Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service GSA—General Services Administration MCC—Millennium Challenge Corporation is in recess, either during a session (intrasession recess appointment) or between sessions. Recess appointments expire at the end of the following session of Congress. Presidents have occasionally used the recess appointment power to circumvent the confirmation process. In response, Congress has enacted provisions that restrict the pay of recess appointees under certain circumstances. Under the provisions, if the position falls vacant while the Senate is in session and the President fills it by recess appointment, the appointee may not be paid from the Treasury until he or she is confirmed. preclude payment of an appointee who is given successive recess appointments to the same position. Although recess appointees whose nominations to a full term are subsequently rejected by the Senate may continue to serve until the end of their recess appointment. A provision of the FY2008 Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act that is still in effect today may prevent them from being paid after their rejection. The provision reads, "Hereafter, no part of any appropriation contained in this or any other Act shall be paid to any person for the filling of any position for which he or she has been nominated" inadequate amount of time for consideration, or factors that may not be directly related to the merits of the nomination. Pending nominations also may be returned automatically to the President at the beginning of a recess of more than 30 days, but by the Senate within 30 days before the end of the session and an individual other than the one whose nomination was rejected thereafter receives a recess appointment. A recess appointment falling under any one of these three exceptions must be followed by a nomination to the position not later than 40 days after the start of the next session. Nominees must be returned to the White House if the Senate goes on recess for more than 30 days. The Senate sometimes waives those rules, but just before the August recess, it returned 16 controversial nominees. The practice reportedly stemmed from a lack of agreement between the Senate majority leader and the Senate minority leader regarding the disposition of pending nominations over the break. The move is part of an ongoing tug-of-war between President Obama and Senate Republicans, who are opposed to Obama's nominees. she has been nominated after the Senate has voted not to approve the nomination of said person." Prior to this provision, similar wording was included in annual funding measures for most or all of the previous 50 years. Another recent congressional response to the President's use of recess appointments was the decision to restructure the Senate's longer recesses into a series of shorter recesses divided by pro forma sessions. Premised on the notion that the President can be restricted from making recess appointments during a recess. is no more than three days, the Senate sought to prevent recess appointments. The Senate did not use the pro forma session practices during the first session of the 111 th Congress. At the end of the 2010 pre-election break as a series of shorter recesses separated by proforma sessions. In this case, the use of the pro-forma session practice was used during the final week of the second session of Congress, when the Senate was in session for the first time in a year. The Senate will avoid a lengthy recess by having short pro-forma sessions ... every few days. Congress has provided limited statutory authority for the temporary filling of vacant positions requiring Senate confirmation. Under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, when an executive agency position requiring confirmation becomes vacant, it may be filled temporarily in one of the pro-Forma sessions. Those pro- forma sessions will keep the White House's nominations alive but also block any recess appointments. The two sides this week could not agree on which nominees to return to the House and which to keep active. three ways: (1) the first assistant to such a position may automatically assume the functions and duties of the office; (2) the President may direct an officer in any agency who is occupying a position requiring Senate confirmation to perform those tasks; or (3) the president may select any officer or employee of the subject agency who has been with the agency for at least 90 of the preceding 365 days. The temporary position is filled by a temporary employee who is paid at the minimum rate of pay at the GS-15 level. Some agencies had no nomination activity during this period of time. The first of these two tables identifies, as of the end of the 111 th Congress, each full-time PAS position in the department, its incumbent, and its pay level. For most presidentially appointed positions requiring Senate confirmation, the pay levels fall under the Executive Schedule. As of January 2011, pay levels ranged from level I ($199,700) for Cabinet-level offices to level V $145,700 for the lowest-ranked positions. This report explains the process for filling positions to which the President makes appointments with the advice and consent of the Senate. It identifies, for the 111 th Congress, all nominations to full-time positions requiring Senate confirmation in 41 organizations in the executive branch. Of these nominations, 92 were confirmed, 14 were returned to the President, and 1 was withdrawn. The length of time a given nomination may be pending in the Senate varies widely. Some nominations are confirmed within a few days, others may not be confirmed for several months, and some are never confirmed.  appendix B provides a table with summary information on appointments and nominations by four agency categories. It identifies the agency involved and the dates of nomination. The table indicates if and when a nomination was confirmed, withdrawn, or returned. The mean and median numbers of days taken to confirm a nomination are also provided. For each of these categories, the table provides the number of positions, nominations, individual nominees, confirmations, nominations returned, and the date of confirmation of a nomination to the White House. for each independent agency nomination confirmed in the 111 th Congress, the number of days between nomination and confirmation ("days to confirm") The mean (average) number of. days taken by the Senate to confirm a nomination to a position covered by this report was 93.1. The median number of Days to Confirm a nominee was 65.5. The agency profiles provide data on presidential nominations and appointments to full-time positions requiring Senate confirmation, and Senate action on the nominations. Data on appointment actions during the 111th Congress appear in two tables for each agency. the same position. This was typically because the President submitted a nomination following a recess appointment (recess appointments are also included in the table). When a nominee is awaiting Senate action and he or she is given a recess appointments, a follow-up nomination is usually submitted to comply with the requirements of 5 U.S.C. §5503(b) (see section entitled " Recess Appointments ," above). The nomination tables that have more than one nominee to a position also give statistics on the length of time between nomination and confirmation. incumbent's name followed by "(A)" indicates an official who was, at that time, serving in an acting capacity. Vacancies are also noted in the first table. The nomination action table provides, in chronological order, information concerning each nomination. It shows the name of the nominee, position involved, and date of nomination, date of confirmation, and number of days between receipt of a nomination and confirmation. The numbers of days shown in the tables in this report include days during the longer recesses around August and between sessions of Congress. appointment is for 210 days, but the time restriction is suspended if a first or second nomination for the position is pending. The act does not apply to positions on multi-headed regulatory boards and commissions or to certain other specific positions which may be filled temporarily under other statutory provisions. During the 111 th Congress, President Barack Obama submitted to the Senate 107 nominations for the Supreme Court seat vacated by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia. The Senate voted 107-0 to approve the nomination of Elena Kagan to be the next Supreme Court Justice. mean and median. Presenting both numbers is a better way to look at the central tendency of the data. A nomination that took an extraordinarily long time might cause a significant change in the mean, but the median would be unaffected. Appendix A presents a table of all nominations and recess appointments to positions in independent and other agencies, organized alphabetically by last name and following a similar format to the table in Appendix A. The data is presented in terms of both the mean and the median, which is a more familiar measure but may be influenced by outliers. by the Senate executive clerk, who arranges for the referral of the nominations to committee. Committee nomination activity has generally included investigation, hearing, and reporting stages. Hearings provide a public forum to discuss a nomination and any issues related to the program or agency for which the nominee would be responsible. Senators have used hearings to explore nominees' qualifications, articulate policy perspectives, or raise related oversight issues. If the committee votes to report a nomination to the full Senate, it has three options: it may report the nomination favorably, unfavorably, or without recommendation. determines whether or not to confirm a nomination. The Senate has shown particular interest in the nominee's views and how they are likely to affect public policy. Two other factors have sometimes affected the examination of a nominee's personal and professional qualities: whether the President's party controlled the Senate, and the degree to which the President became involved in supporting the nomination. Much of the Senate confirmation process occurs at the committee level. Administratively, nominations are received by the White House and sent to the Senate. report means the nomination will not be reported to the Senate. If the committee declines to report a nomination, the Senate may discharge the committee from further consideration of the nomination. Rarely, however, has a vote to confirm a nomination failed on the Senate floor. Failure of a nomination to make it out of committee has occurred for a variety of reasons, including opposition to the nomination, and the lack of support for the nomination from the Senate majority leader at the time. The Senate historically has confirmed most, but not all, executive nominations. appointment by 90 days. This provision might give some additional flexibility to an incoming President. It might also lengthen the appointment process for some positions by, in effect, extending the deadline by which a permanent appointment must be completed. For positions located within a state, the President normally nominates an individual recommended by one or both Senators (if they are from the same party as the President) from that state. If neither Senator is from the President's party, he usually defers to the recommendations of party leaders from the state. The President solicits recommendations from Senators of the opposition party because of their positions in the Senate. If circumstances permit and conditions are met, the President could give the nominee a recess appointment. Recess appointments have sometimes had political consequences, however, particularly where Senators perceived that such an appointment was an effort to circumvent their constitutional role. Some Senate-confirmed positions can be filled by recess appointments. The President would likely consider how it will fare in the confirmation process before making a nomination to a federal position. may also be temporarily filled under the Vacancies Act. A nominee who is hired by the agency as a consultant while awaiting confirmation may serve only in an advisory capacity. Authority to act comes once there is Senate confirmation and presidential appointment, or if another method of appointment, such as a recess appointment or a temporary appointment, is utilized. For further information on these methods, see section entitled " Recess Appointments " and " Temporary Appointment " below. In the second stage, the Senate alone must approve the nominee. providing information on Senate activity (confirmations, rejections, returns to the President) as well as further related presidential activity. The profiles also identify, for each agency, positions requiring Senate confirmation, the incumbents in those positions as of the end of the 111 th Congress, and the pay levels of those officials. The Constitution (Article II, Section 2) empowers the President to nominate and, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to appoint the principal officers of the United States. Three distinct stages mark the appointment process: selection and nomination, confirmation, and appointment. In the first stage, the White House selects and clears a prospective appointee before sending a formal nomination to the Senate. There are a number of steps in this stage of the process for most Senate-confirmed positions. First, with the assistance of, and preliminary vetting by, theWhite House Office of Presidential Personnel, the President selects the nominee. Then, the Senate confirms the nominee, and the President nominates a successor. the Senate rule providing for this return is often waived. In the final stage, the confirmed nominee is given a commission, which bears the Great Seal of the United States and is signed by the President. The President may sign the commission at any time after confirmation, at which point the appointment becomes official. Once the appointee is given the commission and sworn in, he or she has full authority to carry out the responsibilities of the office. The Constitution also empowers the President to make a limited-term appointment without Senate confirmation. a candidate for the position. Members of Congress and interest groups sometimes recommend candidates for specific PAS positions. They may offer their suggestions by letter, for example, or by contact with a White House liaison. In general, the White House is under no obligation to follow such recommendations. In the case of the Senate, however, it has been argued that Senators are constitutionally entitled, by virtue of the advice and consent clause noted above, to provide advice to the President regarding his selection. The extent of this entitlement is a matter of some debate. Senators have sometimes exercised their procedural prerogatives to delay or even effectively block consideration of a nomination. During the clearance process, the candidate prepares and submits several forms, including the "Public Financial Disclosure Report" (Standard Form (SF) 278) and the "Questionnaire for National Security Positions" (SF 86) The Office of the Counsel to the President oversees the clearanceprocess, which often includes background investigations conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and Office of Government Ethics (OGE) which the candidate is to be appointed. If conflicts of interest are found during the background investigation, OGE and the agency ethics officer may work with the candidate to mitigate the conflicts. Once the Office of the Counsel to the President has cleared the candidate, the nomination is ready to be submitted to the Senate. The selection and clearance stage has often been the longest part of the appointment process. There have been, at times, lengthy delays, particularly when many candidates have been processed simultaneously, such as at the beginning of an Administration. Amendments to the Presidential Transition Act of 1963 encourage a President-elect to submit potential nominees to high-level national security positions as soon as possible after the election. A separate provision of law, enacted as part of the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, lengthens, during presidential transitions, the potential duration of a temporary position. The White House says it will continue to seek qualified candidates for the position of national security adviser until a nominee is confirmed by the Senate or House of Representatives.

ROUGE-1: 76.17, ROUGE-2: 70.34, ROUGE-L: 30.01
BERTScore: 51.94

==============================================
==================== [3/100] ====================
Summary:
Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium (InTASC) standards are commonly used standards for TPP quality. 27 states reported taking steps to modify the process for identifying low-performing TPPs. California reported modifying its process for approving TPPs to assess alignment with new K-12 standards. No states reported identifying a TPP as low- performing during the 2013-2014 academic year because of limited alignment with K- 12 standards. States also used modified licensing tests designed to assess individual teaching candidates’ preparation. Officials from all 14 TPPs highlighted the importance of providing candidates with ample opportunities to apply the new K-12 standards in real classrooms. Many states are beginning to adopt assessments to measure K- 12 students’ performance on the new standards. Officials from five TPPs said it will be important for candidates to make connections between different subject areas. Several TPPs we spoke with said that they planned to make further modifications to their teaching programs as states continue to implement the new Standards. For example, one TPP recently surveyed faculty and administrators to evaluate its efforts and identify any ongoing needs. to evaluate TPP performance) and to reflect different types of college- and career-ready K-12 standards. As part of these case studies, we reviewed state documents and interviewed officials from the state oversight agency. In total, we interviewed 14 TPPs. We ensured that this non-generalizable sample of TPPs varied in a number of ways including whether they were located within or separate from colleges and universities. We also ensured that the TPPs represented a range of sizes and urban, suburban and rural areas. TPPs with written resources, information sessions, or both. One state convened a half-day workshop that included information about the new standards. Officials then posted a recording of the session and additional resources about the standards online. Three states reported inviting TPPs to K-12 conferences that discussed the new Standards. Officials in one of those states said that this approach allowed them to foster a positive environment for TPPs. The standards are set to go into effect on January 1, 2015. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Education's website. communication and coordination among K-12 districts and TPPs. Most states reported that they modified their oversight activities to verify that TPPs were aligning with new K- 12 standards. 34 states reported deliberately modifying their TPP approval process to assess such alignment. Twelve other states did not report modifying their approval process for this specific reason, but did report assessing some or all TPPs against standards for TPP quality that may nonetheless provide information about alignment. For example, the Interstate Highway System provides transportation links between states and the federal government. such tests are used by 43 states. The testing companies both reported modifying those tests to align with new K-12 standards. Among the 8 states that do not use such tests, 4 reported in our survey that they modified their licensure requirements in other ways in response to thenew K- 12 standards. For example, all four of these states contract with testing companies to design customized tests and may request revisions. Pearson officials described working with one such state to modify its testing requirements to comply with the new standards.  states are now using or developing academic standards that are explicitly tied to college and career preparation. In 2010, the Council of Chief State School Officers and the National Governors Association spearheaded the effort to help states develop common college- and career-ready standards for grades K-12 in math and English. As of the beginning of the 2014-15 academic year, 44 states and the District of Columbia have adopted the Common Core State Standards. The Common Core Standards will be rolled out to all states by the end of the year. coursework or coursework requirements to ensure that teaching candidates had sufficient subject-matter knowledge to teach to the new K-12 standards. The three TPPs that did not make such changes were graduate-level programs or otherwise required teaching candidates to obtain a bachelor’s degree before attending the TPP. Officials from a few TPPs stated that most or all subject- Matter knowledge should be obtained prior to starting theTPP. The TPPs did make changes sometimes coordinated with other departments, such as math and English. For example, one TPP began offering courses that were co-taught by subject-area and TPP faculty. some academic departments were more receptive to modifying their curriculum than others, due to department priorities or other factors. For example, officials from one TPP observed that the new K-12 standards for English require the participation of teachers from multiple academic disciplines. TPP faculty members who were not in the English department were sometimes reluctant to modify their courses accordingly. Modifying coursework related to teaching techniques: Officials from all but one of the 14 TPPs we contacted described modifying courseworkrelated to teaching Techniques. For. example, one TPP said that candidates should learn teaching techniques that focus on the individual student. All 14 TPPs we interviewed made changes that ranged from large-scale reforms to more modest modifications. The changes generally fell within increasing subject-matter knowledge, modifying coursework related to teaching techniques, and using classroom training to provide real world experience. Examples of such changes, and related challenges, are listed below. Officials from 11 of 14TPPs described changing coursework.custom tests to align with new K-12 standards by adding more questions that measure teaching candidates’ ability to teach non-fiction texts. Officials from 9 of the 14 TPPs described assessing candidates’ preparedness for the new K-12 standards. Officials from half of the TPPs acknowledged the difficulty of training new teachers in real classroom settings. In particular, officials from 6 TPPs said that school districts are training veteran teachers in the new standards at varying rates. Several TPPs also acknowledged that veteran teachers are being retrained at a higher rate than they were in the past. That could be a problem for the future of the profession. to us that, while they may use some data elements, others are not useful. States are frequently required to complete some reporting requirements that they report are not contributing to their oversight activities. Most of the TPPs and K-12 districts and several other stakeholders questioned the usefulness of some Title II data to themselves and other stakeholders. Officials from 6 of the 14 TPPs with whom we spoke reported spending at least a month completing the annual Title II reports. The results suggest that, even among states that find the Title IIData generally useful, states are frequently requiring them to complete the annual reports. it takes a relatively large number of staff hours to prepare the data. States most frequently reported spending between 21-100 staff hours completing the annual Title II state- level reports. After devoting this time to the task, 5 states said the Title II data were “very useful,” 19 said they were ‘moderately useful, and 25 states said it was “neither useful nor not useful” or “not useful.” States most often reported using the data to inform the approval of legislation. Title II of the Higher Education Act requires states and institutions of higher education that conduct TPPs to annually report specific information. Education does not have direct oversight authority over TPPs. States and most colleges or universities that offer TPPs submit the required data using reporting templates developed by Education (see table 2). In this report we use the term “college or university” to mean “institution of higherEducation” as defined by the act. For the statutory reporting requirements, see 20 U.S.C. §§ 1022d-1022f. Under the Higher Education Act, Education has responsibility for ensuring the quality of the data submitted in Title II reports. State officials are expected to certify the accuracy of the Title II data they submit to Education and Education reviews the state reports for obvious instances of non- compliance. Agency officials were not aware that two states did not describe a process to identify low-performing programs in their most recent Title II report. The Education Department says it has no plans to change the way Title II is administered in the future. The Office of Postsecondary Education administers Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements. However, the agency does not have mechanisms in place to promote regular, sustained information-sharing among these offices. Education officials said the agency and its Title II contractor occasionally create custom Title II data runs for Education program offices. But there is no systematic effort to share Title IIData within the agency, officials said. Officials in one office that administers competitive grants related to TPP quality described discussing grant results internally, but did not systematically discuss TPP quality. A large online TPP defines most of its teaching candidates as enrolled in the state where the TPP is headquartered. The Title II report lists that state as one of the nation’s top teacher-producing states, while state officials told us that in fact the state faces teacher shortages. A TPP completer is someone who has met all the educational or training requirements in a state-approved course. Other requirements such as a certain sequence of courses can make it difficult for students to complete the program. of study for initial teacher certification or licensure. However, this definition allows for states or TPPs to choose whether they require their students to take and pass all state licensing tests before they can complete all of those educational or training requirements. As a result, different definitions of completer can lead to inconsistent data and make it difficult to make comparisons across TPPs or obtain a national picture. These varying ways of calculating and reporting key Title II data have persisted despite Education’s efforts to clarify guidance and improve reporting tools. Education permits states to report some Title II data in different ways to account for their differing approaches to overseeing TPPs and the differing structures of the TPPs. This affects the consistency and clarity of the data that Education ultimately disseminates. Education does not include clarifications about potentially inconsistent data elements, such as alternative route TPPs or definitions of enrollees and completers. Education officials told us they did not include such explanatory material in these other formats because they considered the explanations in the previous annual report to be sufficient. colleges and universities offering TPPs provide the required information. The agency also compiles and disseminates the information to the public in annual reports, webpages and data spreadsheets. The proposed rule was available for Title II reporting requirements through February 2, 2015. On December 2, 2014, Education published a notice of proposed rulemaking, which among other things, proposed to modify the proposed rule. As part of this announcement, the Department of Education is releasing a list of proposed changes to the rules. Education officials said they have to continue to collect the current data, due to statutory requirements. Education described some benefits to the existing data, including that it provides a robust picture of the demographics of teaching candidates. We recommend that the Secretary of Education take the following four actions: 1. Develop a risk-based, cost-effective strategy to verify that states are implementing a process for assessing whether any teacher preparation programs are low-performing. 2. Study the usefulness of Title II data elements for policymakers and practitioners and, if warranted, develop a proposal for Congress to eliminate or revise any statutorily-required elements that are not providing meaningful information. The current Title II data requirements may be of limited use in helping to improve the quality of TPPs. Education has not taken steps to evaluate whether any of them should be eliminated. Few states reported using the data to inform state funding decisions or to provide information to school districts that are hiring teachers fromTPPs. Nearly every state reported some cases where certain requirements may not be helpful. Less than half the states told us that they use the goals and assurances section of the Title II reports, which includes information about institutions’ goals for addressing teacher shortage areas. 8 of the 14 TPPs told us that very little of the Title II data was useful to them for assessing the performance of their own programs. Officials from several TPPs also expressed confusion about the overarching goal of Title II reporting requirements. Education identified some potential data inconsistencies, such as differences in state definitions be identified, potentially resulting in new teachers being ill- prepared to teach K-12 students. Without increasing information-sharing within the Department and with states, Education may miss opportunities to disseminate information. Title II reporting requirements and make recommendations to Congress to remove or revise requirements, as warranted. identify potential limitations in the Title II data and disclose such limitations in its reports, websites, and data tables. enhance information-sharing about TPP quality within Education and relevant state agencies. We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of the Department of Education, and other interested parties. In addition, the report is available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. The majority of states (43) reported to us that they had a process for identifying low-performing TPPs. The most common criteria they used to identify low- performing TPPs were failure to meet the state’s TPP or teaching standards and denial or conditional approval during the state approval or renewal process. According to data that states submitted as part of their Title II report, 6 states identified one or more TPPs as low-performance and 13 states identified a TPP as at risk of becoming low performing in 2013 or 2014. TPPs of their status. Most also publicized this status (4) and increased their monitoring of the TPPs. Two of the six states that identified low-performing programs also identified programs at risk of becoming low- performing. 37 states reported in our survey that they provided may be unaware of information about good practices for TPP quality that could assist them in their oversight. Education is responsible for collecting and disseminating Higher Education Act Title II data and administering grant programs that provide an opportunity to contribute to TPPs’ continuous improvement. Seven states reported in our survey that they did not have a process for identifying low-performing TPPs in academic year 2014-2015. States have flexibility in the criteria they use to identify low- performing TPPs, but are required to describe those criteria to Education as part of their annual Title II reports. According to Standards for reports, Education does not verify that states are in fact implementing the procedures they describe in their reports. Without a monitoring Title II report that was reported in October, 2014, Education may miss instances of noncompliance. procedures are sufficient to ensure quality without having a process to identify low-performing TPPs. For example, officials in 2 of the 7 states that reported they do not have a process for identifying low- performing programs in our survey told us that it was not necessary. While it is possible that all TPPs are meeting states’ performance criteria and do not merit a low-performance designation, states are still required to have such a process in place, the report says. For more information on the report, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/healthcare/top-10-health-care-policies-and-reforms-in-the-united-states. that they assessed alternative route TPPs against state developed standards less frequently than traditional TPPs. Seven states reported using observations of alternative routeTPP courses or experiences less frequently (see table 3). The differences in how states approve alternative route. TPPs may be a consequence of several factors, including how states define alternative. routeTPPs and differences in state requirements for alternative route and traditional.TPPs define when a teaching candidate is formally enrolled and these definitions may range from when a. teaching candidate first takes a course to after they have completed. Some states reported not having a process for identifying low-performing TPPs, as required under the Higher Education Act. States are required to conduct an assessment to identify low- performing TPPs in the state and provide Education with an annual list of such programs and any programs. Some alternative TPPs may be approved through other mechanisms, according to one state representative. The requirements for traditional TPPs are set by state regulations while the requirements for alternative route and traditional TPP's are different, a representative from one state explained. Nearly all states reported that they review TPP program design and data about candidates before approving them to prepare new teachers. More than half also use one or more types of information to assess graduates’ effectiveness as teachers. These results are based on our survey of all 50 states and the District of Columbia. In some instances, the wording of the original survey question has been modified for brevity and to remove technical terminology. See the related article for more details on the results of this survey. The results of the survey were based on a survey of the states and D.C. traditional TPP graduates. Fifteen states reported assessing traditional TPPs based on other outcomes data such as the test scores (i.e., K-12 student assessment results) of public school students taught by recent TPP graduates (see fig. 2). One of our case study states uses such data to help TPPs identify potential problem areas in the training they provide to teaching candidates. As of the 2014-2015 academic year, at least 10 additional states reported that they planned to begin using such data. TPPs prepare teaching candidates to employ effective teaching techniques and gain real-world experience in the classroom. TPPs take many forms and may be operated by a variety of organizations (see table 1) State oversight responsibilities related to TPPs may be held by one or more state agencies, including the state department of education, the state board of Education, or a state agency. For example, the structure of TPPs can vary widely, from “traditional” TPPs such as four-year undergraduate programs with student teaching requirements, to “alternative route’ TPPs. a variety of methods to examine all three objectives. We reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations; federal internal controls standards; and leading practices for program management. We also conducted a web-based survey of the state entities responsible for overseeing TPPs in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. In addition, we conducted interviews with a wide range of stakeholders including Education officials and contractors; companies responsible for administering state licensing tests; researchers; and the national accreditation organization for teacher preparation programs. See below for more information about this survey. state independent standards board. States have discretion in how they conduct oversight of TPP quality. States can define the types of TPPs that may operate in the state, such as undergraduate or post-baccalaureate TPPs, or alternative route TPPs. They can also set licensing requirements that teaching candidates must satisfy that often include completing an approved TPP and passing licensing tests that assess subject-matter knowledge or other other criteria. State can also assess whether any TPPs are low-performing, as required under the Higher Education Act. of subject matter knowledge. States may use teams made up of peers from other TPPs, state staff, national accreditation organization staff, or a combination. 43 states reported that they consider information collected by an external TPP accreditation. organization for at least some of their programs. 41 states said they typically reviewed program design for traditional TPPs by reviewing syllabi or other course material, and interviewing TPP faculty or staff. For more information, visit the National Education Association’s Teacher Preparation Council website. in an e-publication supplemental to this report, “Teacher Preparation Programs: Survey of State Entities that Oversee Teacher Preparation programs” (GAO-15-599SP, July, 2015). The quality of survey data can be affected by nonsampling error. We included steps in developing the survey, and collecting, editing, and analyzing survey data, to minimize such nonsampled error. By allowing state officials to enter their responses directly into an electronic instrument, this method automatically created a record for each state official in a data file. and the District of Columbia, achieving a 100 percent response rate. The survey used self-administered, electronic questionnaires that were posted on the Internet. We sent the survey to the official responsible for submitting each state’s Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements and requested that this person consult with other officials in order to provide an official state response. We reviewed state responses and followed up by e-mail or telephone with select states for additional clarification and obtained corrected information for our final survey analysis. using graduate effectiveness information or expand their current use of such information as part of their approval process. For example, officials in Tennessee told us that they currently review some effectiveness data. They plan to begin reviewing recent TPP graduates’ teacher evaluation results in the future. Officials in Arizona told us they plan to start reviewing data on graduate effectiveness. They told us the impetus behind adding this new data is to better align the state’s TPP with the national average for graduate effectiveness and teacher evaluation. quality standards with recommended requirements presented by CAEP. States and TPPs reported challenges collecting information on graduates’ effectiveness. Officials from 3 of our 5 case study states and 7 of the 14 TPPs we spoke to said that collecting this type of data is difficult. For example, state oversight offices or TPPs would need to obtain key information about TPP graduates from local districts. Several of these officials noted districts may be difficult to identify or not be be easy to find. The report recommends that TPPs that already have CAEP approval may receive an expedited state approval process. “Pre-service assessments” could include evaluations of candidates’ performance as student teachers. More than half of states reported that they also review certain information about graduate effectiveness when assessing TPPs for approval or renewal. States that incorporate this information reported doing so in several ways. Most commonly, 30 states reported using surveys that assessed principals’ and other district personnel’s satisfaction with recent recent events in the schools. See questions 9a, 9f, 9h, and 9i in the related e- supplement. as well as organizations representing teachers, teacher preparation programs, officials who head state departments of education, and governors. We also conducted case studies in 5 states. In each of these states we interviewed officials from state oversight entities, officials from two or three TPPs, and officials in at least one K-12 school district. Finally, we analyzed data collected to fulfill Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements and Education’s related reports and technical assistance guidance. We conducted our work from March 2014. to July 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. To identify how states oversee TPPs, modified their practices in response to new K-12 standards, and used Higher Education Act Title II data and Department of Education information about TPPs. We surveyed state oversight entities from all 50 states, including the District of Columbia, New Jersey, New Mexico, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina and Virginia. and Education’s reports, data spreadsheets and web pages that compile data from Title II state reports. We interviewed Education officials and contractors responsible for collecting, analyzing and reporting such data. We also compared Education's reports and spreadsheets against federal standards for internal controls and leading practices for data-driven program management.reliability of fields in Education”s Title II data spreadsheet regarding the number of TPPs that states reported identifying as low-performing or at risk of being low- performing. testing the accuracy of these reporting fields for a non-generalizable sample of states. We determined that Education’s compilation of state data about TPPs that have been identified as low-performing was sufficiently reliable to include in our report. In addition to the contact named above, Scott Spicer (Assistant Director); Barbara Steel-Lowney and Daren Sweeney (analysts-in-charge); Lucas Alvarez, and Hedieh Fusfield made key contributions. Also contributing to this report were: Deborah Bland, Kate Blumenreich, Joanna Chan, Sarah Cornetto, Holly Dye, Kirsten Lauber, Ashley McCall. Education has made few efforts to share expertise about TPP quality among its offices. By not providing the explanatory material, the data may be potentially misleading and make it difficult for users to compare across states or programs. Education officials also noted that sharing information with states can be challenging for some competitive grant programs. Without such an approach, Education may be missing opportunities to support state efforts to enhance TPP quality. For example, states may not have access to clear and useful information aboutTPP quality. The agency may consider adding such material in the future. Teacher quality workgroup has been inactive since the office in which it was housed reorganized in the fall of 2014. Education officials noted that such workgroups, particularly when operating out of high-level offices in the agency, have been very helpful for systematically sharing information across offices. This represents a missed opportunity to use relevant information, officials said. The agency has not subsequently resumed these information-sharing efforts, they said. It is unclear when the agency will resume the teacher quality workgroups. Education administers several competitive grant programs that provide funding for TPP reforms. Of these competitive grants, the largest that is focused specifically on improving TPP quality is the Teacher Quality Partnership Grant program. In September 2014, Education selected 24 partnerships, including TPPs and partnering school districts, to receive a combined $35 million in Teacher Quality partnership grant funds. The Transition to Teaching grant program also provides grants to recruit and retain teachers in high-need schools and encourage the development and expansion of alternative route TPPs. in each state, as well as the number of individuals who complete a program. However, Education also noted in the preamble to its December 2014 proposed rule that “data that are collected and reported have not led to an identification of significant improvements in teacher preparation program performance” Education officials told us they have not conducted a study to inform Congress or the agency about whether any current reporting requirements are not useful. Therefore, Education has an incomplete picture of the usefulness of various data fields. distribute the results. This could include more detailed information about data elements where definitions vary substantially from state to state. Develop and implement mechanisms to systematically share information about teacher preparation program quality with relevant Department of Education program offices and states. We provided a draft of the report to the Department of education for review and comment. Education’s comments are reproduced in Appendix II. Education agreed with our four recommendations, but noted that its proposed regulations include new requirements for how teacher preparation programs are to be distributed. states reported in our survey that they oversee TPPs through an independent standards board. Four states expressed concern about their access to Education resources for TPP improvements. Gaps in the agency’s efforts to disseminate information result from information- sharing being left to individual offices’ initiative rather than an agency-wide mechanism, Education officials noted in a follow-up inquires. The Education Department says more could be done to improve the TPP system in the U.S. and that it is looking into the matter. The objectives of this study were to answer the following questions: (1) How do states oversee teacher preparation programs (TPP)? (2) What are states and select TPPs doing to prepare new teachers for new K-12 standards? (3) To what extent does the U.S. Department of Education’s (Education) data reporting and other information-sharing support and encourage high quality TPPs? We used the information from the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) to conduct our study. to Education officials, several technical assistance and research entities and the office that administers competitive grants such as the Teacher Quality Partnership Grant Program. Only about one third of states reported receiving information from Education about TPP oversight or enhancing TPP quality. About half of all states said they would like additional support from Education on this topic. This suggests that Education is also missing opportunities to support states that could use relevant research and assistance from Education to enhance TPP quality, according to the report. 15 states surveyed said they want more information from the Department of Education about teacher preparation. We conducted case studies of five states: Arizona, California, Maine, Tennessee and Virginia. We selected K-12 districts that worked with these TPPs, by providing student teaching experiences, hiring graduates, or both. We reviewed select state Title II reports; Education’s reporting templates for the state reports and institutional and program reports. We also reviewed the December 2014 proposed rule; technical assistance documents developed by Education and its contractor; and Department of Education grants and information-sharing related to TPPs. 22 states reported using fewer sources of information for alternative route TPPs compared to traditional TPPs. States more commonly reported using information about the effectiveness of graduates teaching in public schools within their state versus information about those teaching in private schools or in other states. Officials in one of our case study states noted that it was especially challenging to obtain data on teachers who work in another state or in private school. For example, eight states reported eight states were not willing to provide such information about teachers in their state.

ROUGE-1: 76.46, ROUGE-2: 70.33, ROUGE-L: 28.27
BERTScore: 61.19

==============================================
==================== [4/100] ====================
Summary:
The Army’s 90-day rotation policy has presented some challenges for the Army in quickly filling these gaps when a medical provider is not able to deploy. For example, the 9l5th Forward Surgical Team was authorized to deploy to Iraq in September 2009 with three general surgeons, according to theater medical officials. The Army Reserve identified a doctor to fill one of the two vacancies; however this individual could not deploy due to an inability to be credentialed as a general surgeon. By the time the Army Reserve was able to identify a surgeon who could deploy, the team had been in Iraq for a month. was evacuated out of theater. It was critical that this personnel requirement be filled in a timely manner. Theater officials requested a replacement from U.S. Army Forces Command. The individual identified as a replacement could not deploy for at least 30 days. Task Force 1st Medical Brigade identified an operating room nurse that it could borrow from another unit in theater until the replacement could be found. The nurse was able to be deployed to the Middle East in the next few days, the brigade said. The operation was a success.  personnel gaps that occur in theater cannot always be prevented. Theater commanders assess the risk associated with the gap and decide on an appropriate course of action. Cross-leveling in particular requires the assessment of risk associated. with the personnel gap and the gap that would be created by the relocation of a medical provider from another unit. According to theater commanders we spoke with, Cross-Leveling can be done in a variety of ways, depending on the needs of the theater and the situation at hand. capabilities in both locations as expected without three authorized general surgeons. Task Force 1st Medical Brigade temporarily relocated medical personnel already in theater from other medical units to the 9l5th Forward Surgical Team so it could meet its mission. Army data show the magnitude of these unfilled gaps or late arrivals for the reserve components ranged from about 3 percent to 7 percent from January 2008 to July 2010. Although we found examples of the 915th Forward surgical Team not having all of its medical personnel before the end of each 90-day rotation. About 4 percent of mobilized Army reserve component 90-day medical rotators did not deploy to theater or arrive in theater on time for 2008. In 2009, that figure reached 7 percent (38 medical providers out of 519) and through the first 6 months of 2010, this figure was over 3 percent. Unfilled reserve component personnel requirements can have serious consequences depending on the needed medical specialty. Therefore, medical commanders in theater typically cross-level to fill short-term temporary personnel gaps, although medical officials in theater will fill the gaps. another dentist not in Iraq who was eligible to deploy to fill this need. Cross-leveling involves the temporary relocation of personnel from one unit in theater to another. For example, an operating room nurse assigned to a forward surgical team in Iraq had an unexpected medical situation and needed to be replaced. DOD officials told us that selecting and deploying an active component medical provider to backfill a position typically takes about 45 days. It is often used as an interim measure to minimize risk when a gap in medical personnel coverage occurs. Cross-leveling can present risk to medical operations in theater, especially when conducted on a recurring basis. Army officials told us that they are willing to accept some risks in order to mitigate other risks they believe are higher. According to medical officials, when medical personnel gaps in an Army reserve component medical unit occur, it can be challenging to fill the gap before the start of the next 90-day rotation. It can take around 120 to 180 days to fill a gap in a medical unit. Gaps in medical capabilities can occur when medical providers do not deploy as expected for reasons such as resignation. Medical personnel gaps can also occur when individual medical personnel need to leave the unit. Army commanders have used two approaches to fill those gaps, according to medical officials in theater.or wounded does not lead to unnecessary staffing challenges. According to the U.S. Army, medical personnel gaps in Iraq and Afghanistan can lead to an increase in the number of wounded and sick soldiers in the military. Backfilling involves the identification and deployment of medical personnel into theater from the United States or elsewhere. Cross-leveling involves deploying medical personnel who were not originally scheduled to deploy overseas at that time. For example, a dentist assigned to a brigade combat team in southern Iraq was evacuated out of theater for medical reasons. Given the backlog of needed dental work, commanders expressed concern about losing a dentist. In response, Army Forces Command initiated an effort to identify and deploy medical personnel from the U.S. and elsewhere. Secretary of the Army direct the Army Medical Department to update its doctrine and the organization of medical units concerning their size, composition, and use. DOD concurred with our first recommendation that the department clarify the level of care that deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater. DOD noted that there is an unquestionable need to formally update doctrinal publications. The department also noted that the Army continues to capture lessons learned and input from commanders. The Army is constantly reviewing and assessing medical capability, the use of those capabilities, and updating doctrine to evolving staffing requirements. to which the Army has adapted the composition and use of its medical units to provide advanced medical care in Iraq and Afghanistan. We reviewed reports from the medical task forces in theater, Army documentation of the composition of medical units. For the third objective, we reviewed the approaches used by Army theater medical commanders to meet medical personnel. We interviewed representatives from the Army Medical Department Center and School, Directorate of Combat and Doctrine Development about the relevance of doctrine and the organization ofmedical units. We also looked at how the Army fills medical personnel gaps that arise. GAO examined the Department of Defense’s efforts to identify and fill its military medical personnel requirements in support of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. We evaluated the extent to which the Army has adapted the composition and use of its medical units to provide advanced medical care. We analyzed DOD and service policies and processes that govern the determination of medical personnel requirement, including service doctrine, DOD doctrine, and DOD procedures. GAO staff who made major contributions to the report are listed in appendix IV.may be found on the last page of this report. played a role in their decisions in determining medical personnel requirements. Local base commanders can request additional medical personnel if they believe that the number of U.S. soldiers or civilians merits an increase. The official stated that an increase of about 800 to 1500 civilians would have to occur before they would consider revising military medical personnel requirement. An Army official agreed that if there is an inconsistency between departmental guidance and theater guidance, it should be examined. As long as there is no inconsistency, the Army will continue to provide medical personnel. deployment policy for reservists applicable to physicians, dentists, and nurse anesthetists. To determine the extent to which the Army’s reserve component medical units deployed their authorized medical personnel in 2008, 2009, and through the first 6 months of 2010 to Iraq and Afghanistan. We assessed the reliability of the data by interviewing the agency official responsible for manually collecting and summarizing the data. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. Additionally, to better understand how military medical personnel are deployed, we reviewed Army. deployment data on late deployments of medical providers. medical mission of the fixed military treatment facilities. In addition, the processes attempt to distribute the burden of deployments within and across medical specialties (e.g., orthopedic surgeons, critical care nurses, and psychiatrists) to comply with service guidelines. To maintain a healthy inventory of medical specialists, the military needs to keep an inventory of specialists in place, says the director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) The National Institute of Health is a private, nonprofit organization based in Washington, D.C. their size, composition and use, as applicable, to incorporate current practices of splitting and reconfiguring deployed medical units in theater. DOD also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense and appropriate DOD organizations. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3604. The total number of U.S. forces allowed in Iraq and Afghanistan requires balancing medical personnel with other forces. For instance, officials in Afghanistan told us that when they initiate requests for additional personnel, the requesting unit is asked to offset the increase in forces on a one-to-one basis within the unit. If they are unable to do so, operational and medical officials determine if the request for additional medical forces takes precedence over the need for other types of personnel already in the theater. The force cap has limited the overall numbers of military personnel that can be in theater. Two Army sustainment brigades deployed to Afghanistan without enough medical personnel. Task Force 62nd Medical Command in Afghanistan requested additional forces for these two brigades. DOD met this requirement by deploying 22 Air Force medics to Afghanistan. Medical officials in Iraq and Afghanistan told us that they must consider two operational limitations which affect how many medical personnel they formally request. First, the cap on how many medics can be sent to Iraq or Afghanistan. Second, there is a cap on the number of medical personnel that can be deployed at any one time. The theater surgeon and medical task forces command mostly Army medical facilities. The other services maintain and operate additional medical facilities in theater that may be outside the direct command of the medical task force. For example, the Air Force operates a theater hospital in Balad, Iraq but coordinates closely with the task force medical brigade in Iraq. The positions of United States Forces-Afghanistan Surgeon and the commander of the task Force medical command in Afghanistan are filled by the same individual. According to a DOD official, the U.S. Forces-Iraq Surgeon collaborates with the Task Force medical brigade commander and staff in Iraq to coordinate medical policy and care. About 4,000 medical personnel were in Iraq and about 6,000 were in Afghanistan at the end of July 2010. The United States’ military presence in Iraq is scheduled to end no later than December 31, 2011. As of September 2010, about 104,000 U.S. military personnel were deployed in Afghanistan, according to administration estimates. Figure 1 shows the breakdown of all military medical personnel inIraq and Afghanistan by service at the start of July. The DOD has established a database of medical personnel by service. The U.S. command structure in Iraq and Afghanistan has evolved over time. For purposes of this report, we focused primarily on level 2 and level 3 facilities and their personnel. The commanding generals of United States Forces-Iraq and United States forces-Afghanistan both are advised by a lead surgeon on medical policy and procedures, according to theater medical officials. In 2009, the designation of U.s. troops in Afghanistan became United States Armed Forces-Afghistan. In 2010, the designated troops in Iraq became United US Forces- Iraq. of operations. U.S. Central Command requested additional medical personnel to provide medical care to the increased number of military personnel in theater. During the offensive in Bastion, Afghanistan, officials relocated some mental health providers in Afghanistan to Bastion so this type of care could be better provided in the area. In addition, officials with the Task Force 30th Medical Command told us that they relocated some mentally health providers to the Bastion area for the duration of the heightened operational tempo. For more on this story, visit CNN.com. while in theater. Care can be provided by the wounded soldiers, medics or corpsmen, or battalion aid stations. Level 2 – Forward resuscitative care. This level provides advanced emergency medical treatment as close to the point of injury as possible to attain stabilization of the patient. In addition, it can provide postsurgical inpatient services, such as critical care nursing and temporary holding. Examples of level 2 units include forward surgical teams, forward surgical team, and forward resuscitative teams, among others. shock trauma platoons, area support medical companies, and combat stress control units. Level 3 facilities provide significant preventative and curative health care. Examples include Army combat support hospitals, Air Force theater hospitals, and Navy expeditionary medical facilities. Level 4 – Overseas definitive care. This level provides the full range of preventative, curative, acute, convalescent, restorative and rehabilitative care. An example of a level 4 facility is Landstuhl Regional Medical Center in Germany. five levels of medical care to treat injured or sick military personnel. Each level provides progressively more intensive treatment. Over the course of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, the military has integrated more advanced medical care into the first three levels of care, which are typically provided in theater. In order to provide the most comprehensive care possible closest to the point of injury, each level of care is designed to be progressively more expensive and intensive. In the U.S., each of the five levels of treatment costs about $1 million per person. Not all patients progress through all five levels of care. Patients being evacuated may skip one or more levels. Joint and service definitions for each level of care vary marginally due to service-specific support requirements. However, they essentially align for most patients in the U.S. military. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. For support in the United States, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The Army Medical Department Center and School recently updated the forward surgical team field manual. The updated manual did not specifically suggest what those changes in the number and mix of medical specialists that make up aforward surgical team should be. The Army would benefit by fully updating the organization of medical units concerning forward surgical teams, the authors say. They say the Army continues to capture lessons learned and input from the commanders, and we noted in our report that the Army medical department center and school has updated its forward surgicalteam field manual although updates to this field manual are not specifically noted. Army medical officials have been developing specialized personnel documents to staff these medical units. The goal is to identify the medical skill sets now needed to operate split medical units across multiple locations for counterinsurgency operations. However, the process is difficult and it came about because current doctrine and organizational design were not sufficient to address the capabilities needed for splitting. Officials with the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade noted to us that staffing of medical units is now done in a “very non-doctrinal fashion” reflect the current practice of splitting medical units such as combat support hospitals. Officials with the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade told us that they were concerned about outdated policies, guidance, doctrine, and field concerns about splitting area support medical companies. The U.S. Forces-Iraq Surgeon Office told us in a separate interview that medical doctrine, specifically the organizational design for both personnel and equipment, should be updated. The medical brigade’s report also went on to note that personnel with these smaller combatsupport hospitals are spread so thinly that when personnel take leave or are evacuated out of theater due to injury. Dispersed environment in the theater of operations have generated a requirement for additional medical structure. Updating doctrine and organizational design of these split medical units used in theater could help to assure that these units will be resourced with the needed number and mix of medical personnel. By leveraging lessons learned collected from this practice, the Army could benefit from integrating these lessons systematically into Army doctrine and the design ofThese medical units. The Army maintains a lessons learned program to, among other things, systematically update Army doctrine to enhance the Army’s preparedness. The splitting of combat support hospitals and forward surgical teams has gained acceptance over time but should be examined given how counterinsurgency doctrine is implemented in Iraq. Officials with the Surgeon Office in Iraq also said that flexibility in the doctrine is critical, but that doctrine needs to reflect the realities of operations on the ground and the degree to which current practice of splitting medical units has filtered into medical doctrine has been limited. Recognizing these lessons learned in an environment that is continuing to change is key. medical units such as combat support hospitals and area support medical companies. Army medical officials said that they believe splitting and reconfiguring units in theater is necessary and helps to increase survival rates. By being in more geographical areas, these critical life-saving medical units are better able to achieve their goal of providing advanced emergency medical care within 60 minutes of injury, the Army said in a response to a draft of this report. Acknowledging the current practice of splitting medical units, the medical brigade that provided oversight over medical units. Commanders in Iraq and Afghanistan have been splitting or reconfiguring medical units typically designed to operate in one location. Splitting medical units increases the opportunities to provide advanced emergency care quicker and could save more lives. According to documents from the 28th Combat Support Hospital, the number of surgical sites has increased due to increased access to advanced medical care in Iraq. The number and mix of skilled medical personnel these units should have, has not been updated to reflect current practice in theater, the authors say. to the emphasis on providing troops access to surgical care within 60 minutes of being injured. Studies show that for those severely injured or wounded, 90 percent do not survive if advanced medical care is not provided. Medical officials in Iraq acknowledged that Army doctrine and the organizational design of medical units were top issues that needed to be updated to better serve the troops in the war zone. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. to DOD officials, DOD meets theater medical personnel requirements through its Global Force Management process. Once the Secretary of Defense designates a service to meet a medical requirement, that service identifies and selects units and personnel to fill the requirement. Medical officials in theater continually assess the number and the types of military medical personnel they need to support ongoing contingency operations in requirements are met. More information on the Global Force management process and the services’ personnel filling processes can be found in appendix II. the U.S. Army Forces Command, U.N. Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, and the Air Force Personnel Center. The services use unique yet similar processes to identify and select medical units and personnel to fill requirements for Iraq and Afghanistan. Once the Secretary of Defense designates a service to meet an emergent or rotational requirement, the service’s force provider then begins the process of filling the requirement with personnel. In addition, each of the services maintains a list of specialties that are in high demand relative to available personnel. The services identified critical care nurse, physician assistant, psychiatry, and clinical psychology as high-demand specialties. select the appropriate medical personnel vary, the services’ processes for filling requirements all result in a unit and its personnel deploying to an operational theater to carry out a mission. Medical personnel across the services typically are assigned to fixed military treatment facilities caring for active duty personnel, their dependents, and retirees. In wartime, each service’s medical personnel processes allow for the deployment of medical personnel to support contingency operations, such as Iraq and Afghanistan, while considering potential impacts on the military. The identification of individual medical personnel is important because medical personnel are needed to fill the requirements. ongoing operations, this process periodically examines requirements for rotational forces as well as emerging requirements as they arise. For the rotational force management process, requirements are identified 2 years in advance. In both Iraq and Afghanistan, medical personnel and unit requirements are included in the Global Force Management Allocation Plan. This provides an approach for U.S. Central Command, the services, and the services’ force providers to manage the sourcing of rotational requirements, such as a combat support hospital in Afghanistan. relative priority of the request, as is done at the Global Force Management Boards for rotational requirements. Risk assessments include violations of the services’ rotation policies regarding the required time at home for servicemembers. The impact to current missions and operations, such as the staffing of U.S. military treatment facilities in the case of medical personnel, if a service is selected to meet a request. If a service does not, the request for forces can be denied. If the request is approved, the force provider must provide information on the availability and readiness of both active and reserve forces. generated by combatant commanders and submitted to the Joint Staff for validation, and then to the joint and service force providers to identify potential sourcing solutions. In sourcing requests through the emergent process, requirements are prioritized according to a force allocation decision model. While emergent requirements are considered within the model’s general framework, each request for forces is individually evaluated as it is received. Officials focus on whether or not forces are ready and available to fill the request rather than trying to determine the force allocation model. organizations and offices we contacted, see table 1. We conducted this performance audit from August 2009 through January 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. The Department of Defense (DOD) uses its Global Force Management process to meet its requirements, including those for medical personnel and units. For more information, visit the Defense Department’s website at: http://www.dod.mil/. states that DOD civilians are eligible for emergency care but most routine care for them is subject to availability. This differs from the DOD directive that states care should be at the same level and scope provided to military personnel. In addition, we found that the theater guidance document for care in Afghanistan provided additional guidance that is inconsistent with both the DOD Directive and with guidance provided elsewhere in the document as to the level of care to be provided to DOD deployed civilians. Medical officials in Afghanistan told us that they provide routine medical care to U.S. federal civilians. It is unclear what level of care deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater. A DOD directive governing medical care for DOD deployed civilians is inconsistent with in-theater guidance with regard to eligibility for routine medical care. Theater officials also analyze gaps in medical care and the associated risks given different potential scenarios. DOD relies on its own deployed civilians to carry out or support a range of essential missions, including logistics support, maintenance, intelligence collection, criminal investigations, and weapon systems acquisition. About 2,600 DOD civilian. employees were deployed to Iraq, and about 2,000 DOD. civilian employees were Deployed to Afghanistan. DOD deployed civilians and federal civilian employees that might be injured or wounded in support of contingency operations and reported to Congress on the results in April 2010. DOD noted in its report that with each new mission, the need for new civilian skills has resulted in an increase in the number of deployed civilians. These civilians are not immune to the dangers associated with contingency operations, since they too incur injuries or wounds in their efforts to support the missions in Iraq and Afghanistan. Although DOD guidance clearly provides that deployed DOD civilians will receive life-saving emergency care, DOD noted that these civilians will also need medical attention. a space-available basis, and that they would not turn away any person with injuries that presented a danger to life, limb, or eyesight, regardless of the employment status of an individual. This issue has received continuing congressional interest. In April 2008 the House Armed Services Committee Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations issued a report on deploying federal civilians and addressed the medical care provided to them when they are wounded, ill, or injured while in a war zone. Furthermore, DOD’s report to Congress on deployed DOD civilians stated that the department believes it is imperative that each federal civilian be provided with the same medical care. how many and the types of medical personnel needed to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan through an ongoing assessment. Army doctrine, which is the starting point for defining and planning a unit’s capabilities, has not been updated fully to reflect these changes in theater. Theater officials also analyze gaps in medical care given different potential scenarios and the associated risks. The military medical personnel requirements planning process may not be fully informed by department-level expectations, the authors say. The authors interviewed officials with the theater-level medical task forces and Surgeons’ offices. In determining the number of military medical personnel and the medical specialties needed, theater operational and medical officials told us that they begin by evaluating various mission planning factors. Officials said that this information allows them to determine the level and structure of medical care they expect to need to support missions throughout the theater. Including the limit on the total number of forces in theater and shortages of and high demand for certain medical personnel, officials said.including the limiton the totalNumber of Forces in Theater and shortages in certain medical. specialties. medical evacuations in theater. Officials also analyze gaps and risks in the medical care structure under different possible scenarios. Further, when confronted with a need for additional medical personnel, the theater commanding general can submit a request for forces through DOD’s Global Force Management process. For example, the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade in Iraq conducted an analysis that identified possible requirements for extra medical personnel with certain specialties, such as general surgeons, at locations in northern Iraq given the possibility of adverse weather conditions.  shortages of and high demand for medical personnel in certain specialties also plays a role in decisions about whether to request medical forces. For example, officials in Iraq determined that 16 additional veterinary food inspectors were needed for food safety inspections, but they did not formally initiate that request due to the current shortage of these specialists. Although DOD primarily provides both emergency life-saving medical care as well as routine medical care to U.S. military personnel in Iraq and Afghanistan, the need for medical forces is also a factor. DOD medical officials analyze data from the Joint Theater Trauma Registry, the Joint Medical Work Station, and service and joint data on disease and non-battle injuries to determine trends in medical workload. Officials use this information to increase or decrease the number of medical personnel in line with demand for medical services. For example, DOD medical officials conducted an analysis to determine the need for cardiovascular specialists in Iraq and Afghanistan based on, among other variables, the volume of cardiovascular-related injuries.experiencing hostilities. number of deployed civilians and that these civilians are not immune to the dangers associated with contingency operations. Inconsistent guidance could potentially impact the medical personnel requirements planning process if medical officials in theater are uncertain about deployed DOD civilian employees’ access to routine medical care. While we did not learn of any deployed DOD civilians being turned away for medical care in theater during the time of our audit, DOD could still benefit by assessing the implications the inconsistencies in guidance could have if there were a sizeable increase in the number of DOD deployed civilians in theater. DOD Directive 1404.10 states that the department’s civilian employees who become ill, are injured, or are wounded are eligible to receive health care treatment and services at the same level and scope provided to military personnel. Theater operational and medical officials determine care, it is unclear to what extent DOD civilians can expect routine medical care in theater. DOD mentioned to us that its operating units have sufficient organic medical support and the medical needs of deployed civilians are being met. DOD agreed that the Commander of U.S. Central Command should revise its guidance to clarify the level of care that deployed civilians should receive. Iraq we spoke with said cross-leveling is a less than ideal approach to fill these medical personnel gaps. DOD has noted that, increasingly, deployed civilians also face dangerous circumstances in ongoing contingency operations. To enhance medical units’ preparedness to conduct current and future operations, we recommend that the Secretary of Defense direct the Combatant Commander of U.S. Central Command to clarify the level of care that deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater, including their eligibility for routine care, we say.

ROUGE-1: 73.53, ROUGE-2: 67.25, ROUGE-L: 20.39
BERTScore: 54.94

==============================================
==================== [5/100] ====================
Summary:
not act on the legislation, some fear that the court will order a remedy, which may differ from the Settlement. A key legislative issue is how to finance Settlement implementation, specifically how to resolve congressional Pay-As-You-Go (PAYGO) issues. Other challenges are how to achieve the Settlement's dual goals of fisheries restoration and water management, and how to address concerns of stakeholders not party to the Settlement without disrupting the negotiated agreement. This report provides a brief overview of the Settlement, its legal history, and the legislative process. The Settlement Agreement was accepted by the District Court on October 23, 2006. The stated goals of the Settlement are twofold: (1) to restore and maintain fish populations in "good condition"—the § 5937 standard—in the Bay Area, and (2) to protect the environment. The terms of the settlement were then vetted with selected stakeholders, finalized, and presented to Congress in September 2006. It was approved by Congress on September 13, 2006, and signed on September 14, 2006 by the U.S. District Court. in addition to integration of federal, state, local, and private infrastructure projects. Whether Congress addresses this issue—in California and elsewhere—given current water resource authorization and appropriations practices and a restrictive budgetary climate remains to be seen. This is a common dilemma for resource agencies implementing projects and programs which are based on societal and political trade-offs made decades ago. While the issues discussed here have confronted prior Administrations and Congresses, a Settlement Agreement was not reached until the U.S. District Court acted. election of a party, at which point litigation might resume. To date, no party has officially elected to void the Settlement. In September 2006, the settling parties presented the Settlement, including its legislative proposal, to various Members of Congress. The parties hoped implementing legislation would be enacted prior to the Settlement's adoption. The Settlement was signed into law on September 14, 2006. It is the largest settlement in U.S. history, and the largest since the ratification of the United States Constitution in 1788. to adjournment of the 109 th Congress. However, numerous entities who were not party to the Settlement (i.e., third parties ), objected to the legislative proposal included in the Settlement. Shortly thereafter, many third parties met with the Settlement parties and certain Members of the California delegation. An agreement was reached to address certain third party interests; in exchange, these third parties agreed to support new legislation. Although many parties who had opposed the draft legislation in September 2006 supported the new legislation, other parties emerged that were for construction of numerous projects and other activities that could cost between $250 million and $1.1 billion. Federal funding for these projects and activities is sought by the parties and is contemplated under the Settlement. Direct spending funding mechanisms included in the legislation would typically require a budgetary offset under congressional PAYGO rules. While short-term (10 year) direct spending in H.R. 146 has been reduced substantially, the budget effects of the legislation in its entirety are still at issue for some. Historically, Central California's San Joaquin River supported large Chinook salmon populations. Since the Bureau of Reclamation's Friant Dam became fully operational in the 1940s, much of the river's water has been diverted for agricultural uses. In 1988, a coalition of conservation and fishing groups. advocating for river restoration to support Chinook. salmon recovery sued the bureau. Chinook Salmon are not listed under the ESA, but are identified as a species of concern. The lawsuit and the negotiated Settlement Agreement are discussed below. dry today, except during flood events. Reclamation's operation of Friant Dam largely destroyed numerous species of native fish from the Upper San Joaquin River, including spring- and fall-run Chinook salmon. The diverted water helped develop and continues to support a diverse agricultural economy from north of Fresno to Bakersfield. Today Central Valley spring-run chinook salmon are listed as threatened under the ESA; they may have exceeded 200,000 fish annually in the 1940s and 1950s. Central Valley spring-run Chinook salmon have been entirely extirpated from the San Joaquin River drainage, and currently inhabit only the Sacramento River drainage. Native fall and late-fall-run chinook salmon continue to spawn in small numbers in the SanJoaquin River tributaries such as the Mokelumne, Stanislaus, Tuolumne and Merced Rivers. These fish spawn at lower elevations and have been less affected by dam construction than were spring- run Chinook Salmon. Claims have been litigated in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California. The implications of this decision are far reaching for California water management and for both the directly affected water users and the indirectly affected communities, landowners, and water users. Several broad policy issues are raised by the Settlement. These issues partially derive from constraints imposed by the pressure to react to a settlement responding to a judicial ruling, as opposed to managing or legislating on an issue prior to, or absent, such a settlement. environmental grounds. Plaintiffs argued that Reclamation had violated Section 8 of the Reclamation Act of 1902. Reclamation will act in conformity with state laws "relating to the control, appropriation, use or distribution of water used in irrigation," the suit says. The state law that is at issue here is California Fish and Game Code, according to the suit. In addition to claims that the process under which Reclamation. had begun contract renewals violated the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and that the lack of water in the river. violated the ESA (16 U.S.C. §§ 1531-1544), the plaintiffs argued that. San Joaquin River restoration Settlement legislation was first introduced in early December 2006. No action was taken on the bills before adjournment of the 109 th Congress. Settlement bills were reintroduced in the 110 th Congress as H.R. 24 and S. 27. Hearings were held in both houses of Congress; however, the legislation was not enacted. The Settlement aims to end a 19-year lawsuit and comports with a court ruling, the Settlement would affect others outside the Friant Division Service Area. the San Joaquin River, finding that Reclamation had violated the state law. The court did not declare what amount of water was necessary to satisfy the law or declare any other type of relief. It set a 2006 trial date to determine a proper remedy. Faced with the prospect of a court-imposed remedy, and mounting legal fees in preparation for trial, the parties (NRDC et al) decided to go to court. The case was settled out of court in a settlement reached in 2005. agricultural industry over commercial and sport fishing industries, or timber harvest over species habitat). It is hard to say what is fair or just when such significant trade-offs were made decades ago, causing harm to some, but providing benefit to others. In the eyes of many, the San Joaquin river restoration is an effort to respond to fisheries economic and ecological damage begun 60 years ago. For others, the potential of reduced water supplies for off-stream use is a breach of promises made 60 year ago. recapture, recirculate, and/or reuse San Joaquin River restoration flows. At minimum, it appears the restoration effort will necessitate multi-year water planning and investments. The funding on hand and infrastructure in place to buy and put to use surplus water (e.g., for groundwater recharge) should be in place, the authors say. The future of water resource management in the Central Valley is not just conjunctive water management, they say, but multi- year management with financial resources. the Settlement and implementing legislation, increased water flows for restoring fisheries would reduce diversions of water for off-stream purposes, such as irrigation, hydropower, and municipal and industrial uses. The quantity of water used for restoration flows and the quantity by which water deliveries would be reduced are related, but the relationship would not necessarily be one-for-one. In some of the wettest years, flood water releases could provide a significant amount of the restoration flows, thereby lowering the reduction in deliveries to agricultural and municipal users. driest of years; thus, no reductions in deliveries to Friant contractors would be made due to the Settlement in those years. In some years, the restoration flows released in late winter and early spring may free up space for additional runoff in Millerton Lake. Consequently, how deliveries toFriant water contractors might be reduced in any given year would depend on many factors. Regardless of the specifics of how much water might be released for fisheries restoration vis-à-vis water diverted for off-stream purposes, there will be water diverted. operates Friant Dam ( Natural Resources Defense Council v. Rodgers ). Most long-term water service contractors who receive the diverted water were added to the case shortly thereafter as defendant intervenors. A U.S. District Court judge has since ruled that operation ofFriant Dam violates state law because of its destruction of downstream fisheries. If Congress does not act on the legislation, some fear that the court will order a remedy, which may differ from the Settlement and which may have more severe consequences for some area water users. Be impacts to existing surface and groundwater supplies in and around the Friant Division Service Area and adjustments in local economies. Majority of Friant water contractor organizations, and environmental, fisheries, and community groups support proceeding with the Settlement Agreement. For some groups, going to trial risks considerable uncertainty and expense; others may be more willing to take such risks. Congressional authorization and appropriations are required for full implementation of the Settlement. If Congress does not approve the Settlement, the agreement will not go into effect. it is a matter of Friant Dam operations comporting with state law. It is not a question of whether or not the dam should be closed. It's a matter for the state of California to decide. The dam is open to the public as long as it is in compliance with the law. The state has no plans to close the dam at this time. It will be closed if the dam needs to be closed for safety reasons. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. Friant Dam is one of the largest federal dams of the Bureau of Reclamation's Central Valley Project (CVP) in California. The Settlement calls for new releases of water from Friant Dam to restore fisheries in the San Joaquin River and for efforts to mitigate water supply losses due to the new releases. Full implementation of the Settlement would require congressional authorization and appropriations. For more information on fisheries restoration, water management, funding, economic, and third party issues, see CRS Report RL34237, SanJoaquin River Restoration Settlement. Friant Dam was built on the San Joaquin River by Reclamation in the early 1940s. By the late 1940s, Reclamation's operation of Friant Dam had caused long stretches of the river to dry up. The Friant Division serves irrigation and water districts in the Fresno, Kern, Madera, Merced, and Tulare counties. The Settlement states that if legislation is not enacted by December 31, 2006, the Settlement may become void at the end of the year. The San Joaquin Valley (SJV) is an eight-county region extending 250 miles from Stockton in the north to Bakersfield in the south. The Friant Division Service Area includes four of these counties: Fresno, Tulare, Kern, and Merced. The SJV faces significant environmental and natural resource challenges, including the court-ordered restoration of the SanJoaquin River discussed in this report. It is home to five of the nation's ten most agriculturally productive counties. Other CVP management decisions, as well as state and local water systems. Recent court decisions regarding the health of threatened Delta Smelt have constrained water exports and may constrain future exports. The degree to which some of the water management goals identified in the Settlement might rely on moving water in and out of the Bay-Delta could affect the ultimate ability to move water. The CVP and State Water Project (SWP) are operating under regulations that limit the amount (and timing) of water that can be exported south.

ROUGE-1: 72.95, ROUGE-2: 66.46, ROUGE-L: 25.76
BERTScore: 57.15

==============================================
==================== [6/100] ====================
Summary:
faced in implementation. PACOM’s plan did not address training limitations in South Korea and Japan. In 2005, we reported that without more complete, clear, and consistent reporting of various items, Congress lacked the complete picture it needed to evaluate the annual military construction funding request. These agreements depend largely on the political environment and economic conditions in host nations. They can affect the extent of host nation support—access to facilities or funding—to U.S. forces. Accordingly, the resulting agreements may increase or decrease costs for future infrastructure changes. The plans continue to improve each year by providing more complete, clear, and consistent information and descriptions of the challenges DOD faces overseas. Congress should consider requiring the Secretary of Defense to ensure that future overseas master plans address the extent to which the regional commands are seeking residual value compensation for U.S. capital improvements at installations returned to host nations. We believe that identifying these issues would provide Congress an awareness of potential challenges of recouping funds. To help ensure the best application of limited federal funds and the leveraging of all available options. recommended that overseas regional commands address residual value issues and that PACOM explain how it plans to address existing training limitations. We believe that identifying these issues would make Congress aware of potential challenges to obtaining residual value and to training U.S. forces in South Korea, which may affect facility requirements and funding in this country. Even though our prior recommendations have not been fully addressed, we continue to believe that they have merit and that Congress would benefit from disclosure of this information. DOD’s planning effort for the buildup of military forces and infrastructure on South Korea. needed to address their concerns about the status of residual value negotiations or the implications for U.S. funding. We continue to believe that the Secretary of Defense should require commands to explain the issues with obtaining residual value from each host nation. In commenting on our matter for congressional consideration that future PACOM plans may not be clear enough to all users of the plans, we urge Congress to consider requiring commands to report on the implications of their plans. We believe that this would be a wise move for the secretary of defense. necessary. In commenting on our matter for congressional consideration, the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense stated that DOD already provides status reports on its residual value negotiations to the Committees on Appropriations and Armed Services. Prior legislation outlines reporting requirements on the closure of foreign military installations worldwide, with specific reporting requirements throughout the residual value negotiation process. While we were aware of these reporting requirements, these reports do not provide users of the master plans the kind of information that is needed, the official said. The bill would require that future overseas master plans address the extent to which commands are seeking residual value compensation. The master plans do not address the issue of residual value. Remaining value is based on the reuse of property being turned over to the host nation. DOD officials believe that residual value cannot be readily predicted and therefore should not be included in the plans. The master plans are expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year. The plans will be released to the public at a date to be announced later this year or in the spring. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. be assumed in the master plans. The U.S. government has received approximately $592 million since 1989 in residual value and payment-in-kind compensation from property returns in EUCOM’s area of responsibility. EUCOM continues to aggressively seek compensation for U.s. capital improvements at installations returned to host nations. We continue to believe that OSD should require commands, at a minimum, to explain the issues with obtaining residual value in each host nation and report the implications for funding requirements. year, all of the commands identified a common strategic end state date of 2013, which identifies the last fiscal year of the construction time frame. Previously, OSD had provided the commands the discretion in choosing an end date from 2011 to 2015. Host nation funding levels were reported at the project level for fiscal year 2008 and at the aggregate level for 2008. The strategic endState date provides users a more complete and clearer basis for tracking progress in meeting the command infrastructure objectives for their areas of responsibility. master plans for the changing infrastructure requirements for U.S. military facilities in each of its overseas regional commands. At a minimum, the plans are to identify precise facility requirements and the status of properties being returned to host nations. The Senate report also directed DOD to provide congressional defense committees a report on the status and implementation of those plans with each yearly military construction budget submission through fiscal year 2015. The plans should also identify funding requirements and. the division of funding responsibilities between the United States and cognizant host nations, according to the report. Congress lacked the complete picture it needed to evaluate the annual military construction funding requests. This year, the plans provided a much more comprehensive description of challenges and the potential effects on implementation. All of the regional commands describe to varying degrees the status of recent negotiations and agreements with host nations in their fiscal year 2008 master plans. In our review of the overseas master plans in 2005, we found that none of the commands fully explained the status or potential effects of their projects. We found that the prior plans did not always describe such challenges and their potential effects. The first report was due with the fiscal year 2005 military construction budget submission and is to be updated each succeeding year. The House conference report accompanying the 2004 military construction appropriation bill also directed the department to prepare comprehensive master plans with yearly updates through fiscal year 2009. The Senate report also directed GAO to monitor the comprehensive master plan being developed and implemented for the 2008 fiscal year.year 2008. The first report is due to be released in time for the start of the new fiscal year on October 1. future requirements. In 2006, we reported that the master plans did not always explain how their implementation could be affected by other relevant and related defense plans and activities. We also reported that while the plans addressed a number of challenges that DOD faced, they did not explain how they would affect other activities. Without such explanations and linkage, it was difficult to determine the extent to which the master plan was coordinated and synchronized with other defense plans, we said at the time. We said it was also difficult to see the effects these other activities had on infrastructure and funding requirements. result, the fiscal year 2008 master plans identify how implementation of the plans could be affected by other relevant and related defense plans and activities. For example, PACOM’s force structure plans are linked to the military buildup on Guam. CENTCOM's increased troop strength and facilities in Iraq and Afghanistan are also linked to ongoing operations. Facility requirements and costs, time frames for an end state, base categories, host nation funding levels, and effects of other defense activities are included in the master plans. The fiscal year 2008 overseas master plans have been updated to reflect our prior recommendations for improving the plans. They do not address the issue of residual value as we recommended in 2004. As a result, OSD provided additional guidance on October 12, 2006, to the regional commands in preparing this year’s plans. The commands provide information involving environmental activities. This provides the users of the plans with the ability to compare and comprehend how costs have varied and how these costs may affect planned U.S. funding levels. We compared the reporting requirements in the congressional mandate and the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) guidance, which incorporated our prior recommendations. In order to identify improvements to the overseas master plan, we compared and contrasted the fiscal year 2007 and 2008 plans. We assessed the quantity and quality of information provided by the Defense Department. We also assessed the extent to which the plans address the challenges faced by the Department of Defense during implementation.members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. effort and to develop a master plan. JGPO falls under the direct oversight of the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Installations and Environment. In our prior work, we found that while DOD’s master plans generally exceeded the reporting requirements established by Congress, opportunities existed for the plans to provide more complete, clear, and consistent information and to present a more definitive picture of what is going on in the Navy. The Navy has been working with the Department of the Interior to create an interagency task force to address issues relating to commerce, transportation, environment and other areas. quality of one plan’s responses for each of the data elements, including details on base categories, host nation funding levels, facility requirements and costs. We compared them to equivalent responses in other plans; formed conclusions as to the completeness, clarity, and consistency of the latest plan's responses. We also discussed with DOD officials our observations and recommendations, specific reporting requirements, and whether improvements in the guidance and reporting were needed. we also interviewed cognizant officials from DOD about the plans. In September 2001, DOD issued its Quadrennial Defense Review Report. The report called for developing a permanent basing system that provides greater flexibility for U.S. forces. In August 2004, President Bush announced plans for a permanent base in the United States. The Pentagon has been reexamining overseas basing requirements to allow for greater flexibility to combat conventional and asymmetric threats worldwide. The U.N. Security Council has approved a resolution that would allow for permanent bases in the U.K., France and Germany. The integrated global presence and basing strategy is the culmination of various DOD studies. The initiative is intended to close bases no longer needed to meet Cold War threats. It also aims to bring home many U.S. forces while stationing more flexible, deployable capabilities in strategic locations around the world. In 2004 the United States.announced what has been described as the most comprehensive restructuring of U.s. military forces overseas since the end of the Korean War. The integrated global. presence and. basing. strategy is a culmination of several DOD studies, including the overseas basing and requirements study, the overseas presence. study, and the U.N. global posture study. In 2004, before DOD issued its initial overseas master plans, we reported that various factors could affect the funding of U.S. infrastructure overseas. At that time, we recommended that the overseas regional commands address these and other factors in the development of their plans. This year’s plans provide information to respond to most of our prior recommendations. But they do not address residual value, that is, the value of property being turned over to the host nation based as changes occurred and decisions were made. European Command, U.S. Army Europe, and Special Operations Command. In general, we discussed the reporting requirements contained in OSD’s guidance, host nation agreements and funding levels. We also analyzed available reports, documents, policies, directives, international agreements, guidance, and media articles to keep abreast of ongoing changes in overseas defense basing strategies and requirements. To see firsthand the condition of the bases, go to www.cnn.com/cnndefense. forces from Seoul and other locations. Last year, CENTCOM did not report any environmental issues. This year, EUCOM identified areas for cleanup, groundwater investigation, and monitoring. CENTCOM’s master plan identified funding requirements for a wastewater treatment plant and a water treatment and distribution system at Bagram Airfield, Afghanistan, in hopes of avoiding potential environmental problems. The extent to which there were no environmental issues last year in the command's area of responsibility has not been determined. The amount of contamination at one site did not present an unacceptable risk to human health or the mission. This year, all of the regional commands identified their precise facility requirements and costs for fiscal year 2008 and for fiscal years 2009 through 2013. CENTCOM provided information on supplemental appropriations for facilities and projects at Bagram Airfield, Afghanistan. Base categories. All of the commands categorized their installations into applicable base categories of main operating base, forward operating site, and cooperative security location. The commands also supplemented the information on the infrastructure plans and requirements at these sites. The bases also provided a clearer picture of the infrastructure Plans and requirements. The plan discussed the challenge of ongoing operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The plan also reflected land return actions in Kuwait and Uzbekistan. CENTCOM’s plan identified how future basing and infrastructure will be defined by ongoing contingencies and global defense posture. The master plans have continued to evolve and have provided more comprehensive data every year since 2004. But two key topics continue to be omitted from the master plans, CENTCOM officials said. The plans also discussed efforts to solicit host nation contributions and the amount of coordination. focus first on the mission and then on requirements by providing the type of mission the site has, the unit that it could host, and its role in the region. All of the commands provide similar information for their main operating bases, forward operating sites, and cooperative security locations. Even with the department’s effort to update the plans, there are still some areas that need to be addressed, such as the need to strengthen capabilities for rapid and flexible response in the central Asian states, the report says. base categories with detailed data on the installations’ capabilities, overall mission, population, and types of equipment and facilities located at each site. CENTCOM and EUCOM also identified adjustments to the base categories, such as redesignating a main operating base as a forward operating site. EUCOM provided specific details on sites no longer considered cooperative security locations in Bulgaria, Romania, and Poland. Sites with no operational importance and a commercial facility readily available for military use that did not require U.S. investment or presence. Last year, EUCOM’s master plan did not explain the potential effect of implementing base realignment and closure recommendations on the movement of troops from Germany to bases in the United States. This year, PACOM discussed this topic as well as the progress of bilateral negotiations with Japan and challenges associated with this realignment. EUCOM and Army officials told us that any delay in implementing the recommendations could have a negative impact on the U.S.-Japan relationship. The U.N. Security Council is expected to vote on a resolution on the issue this week. in the implementation of base realignment and closure recommendations would cause them to delay the movement of Army servicemembers and their families. This would delay the closings of Army installations in Europe and increase costs to operate those installations while they remain open. Last year, CENTCOM’s master plan only made general references to operations in Iraq and did not fully explain the potential for overseas restructuring. This year, the overseas master plan identified that the baserealignment andclosure recommendations supported overseas restructuring and that EUCOM's transformation depends on this effort. installations, such as Naval Air Station Keflavik, Iceland; Naval Support Activity La Maddalena, Italy; selected sites in Germany, Belgium, and Turkey. The plan also recognized that current U.S. basing may not adequately support either strategic changes in an expanding North Atlantic Treaty Organization Alliance or the requirements of a rapidly changing area of responsibility. EUCOM also explained that its transformation execution depends on host nation negotiations, political-military considerations, base realignment and closure, and fiscal limitations. relation to this initiative, the command did identify the need for U.S. military construction funds to support realignment costs not paid by the Japanese government. EUCOM provided information on North Atlantic Treaty Organization contributions and discussed a burden-sharing arrangement with the Government of Norway. CENTCOM also provided host nation estimates and explained that its efforts to attain host nation funding were ongoing. All of the commands described the effects of other defense activities on implementation of their master plans. Last year, only PACOM’s plan gave some indication of how its implementation could be. EUCOM's master plan stated that the U.S. signed individual agreements with the governments of Romania and of Bulgaria in 2005 and 2006. EUCOM also provided additional details, such as the mission, planned capabilities, equipment and aircraft, and population. Furthermore, EUCOM provided a status of ongoing transformation realignments in its operations in Eastern Europe. The United States is working with South Korea to establish a military presence in South Korea. The goal is to create a network of forward operating sites and cooperative security locations. Under Secretary assigned overseas regional combatant commands responsibility for preparing comprehensive master plans for their areas of responsibility. As shown in figure 3, PACOM coordinates East Asia and South Asia; EUCOM coordinates much of sub- Saharan Africa and Europe. CENTCOM coordinates efforts in the Middle East, the Horn of Africa, and Central Asia. Not shown are Northern Command, which coordinates activities in North America, and Southern Command,. which coordinates Activities in South America, Central America,and the Caribbean.detailed, comprehensive master plan. cooperation, extend humanitarian assistance, and build partnership capacity on the African continent. At the time of our review, U.S. involvement in Africa is shared among three combatant commands. PACOM is responsible for Madagascar, the Seychelles, and the Indian Ocean area off the African coast. EUCOM isresponsible for the largest swath of the continent: North Africa; West Africa, including the Gulf of Guinea; and central and southern Africa. CENTCOM covers the Horn of Africa—including Somalia, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, Djibouti, and Sudan. area of responsibility, including listing the return of facilities to host nations, changes to its basing categories. The master plans also described recent efforts to proceed with formal negotiations with the governments of Poland and the Czech Republic on establishing missile defense sites. This year, DOD forecasted changes for next year’s master plans involving the development of a new command responsible for Africa, which is expected to be established by September 30, 2008. The President announced in February 2007 that the U.S. military will establish a new, separate U.s. Africa Command to enhance security. New U.S. Africa Command eventually will encompass the entire continent of Africa except for Egypt. Discussions are ongoing on the possible headquarters location and what kinds of military forces would be assigned to the command. This year, the changes identified in the plans provided useful information on evolving costs and facility requirements in overseas basing. In addition, the commands continue to focus first on the mission and then on the infrastructure requirements needed to support the mission. For example, in CENTCOM’s master plan, the descriptions of each forward operating site are included.  PACOM described the importance of relocating 8,000 marines and their dependents from Okinawa to Guam. PACOM provided information updating the status of the Land Partnership Plan and the Yongsan Relocation Plan, including a list of U.S. military camps and sites returned to the Government of South Korea, and describing the results from the South Korean military relocation program. The United States will retain a forward Marine Corps command and control capability to ensure a balanced, flexible contingency response capacity within the Asia-Pacific region. fiscal years 2009 through 2013, which provided users a better basis to determine the extent to which U.S. funding is needed for facility requirements. PACOM identified host nation funding for its bilateral agreements in South Korea, such as the Land Partnership Plan and the Yongsan Relocation Plan. While the Government of Japan’s share for the Guam relocation is $6.1 billion, the government of Japan has not made an official, public estimate of the costs for several major realignments within Japan. Potential Government of Japan financial constraints may result in U.S. facilities in Japan requiring more financial support. EUCOM’s master plan identified specific information on efforts to close or return bases. USFK provided details on current realignment efforts, including the Government of South Korea’S approval of the Land Partnership Plan and Yongsan Relocation Plan. The plans also discussed USFK's efforts to work with South Korea to complete the transition of wartime operational control from the United States to South Korea in the future. challenges in this year’s overseas master plans. In 2005, none of the commands identified environmental remediation and restoration issues. PACOM provided information on remediation actions taken by USFK before returning installations to South Korea, such as skimming fuel from groundwater at five camps. Last year, USFK also discussed its efforts to coordinate with the Government of South Korea on remediated U.S. bases. Officials expect these efforts will accelerate the return of vacated facilities and areas to the Government. We did not include Northern and Southern Commands in our review because they have significantly fewer facilities outside of the United States. There are also four functional unified combatant commands that are assigned worldwide functional responsibilities not bounded by geography. Initial implementation details for the movement of U.S. Marines to Guam and associated military construction projects took place under the leadership of PACOM. In August 2006, OSD directed the Navy to establish JGPO to facilitate, manage, and manage the military construction on Guam. various changes and challenges that were identified within the plans. We met with officials from OSD and each of the following commands and agencies: U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM); U. s. Army Pacific; Commander, U. S. Pacific Fleet; U.s. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific. U.N. Secretary-General's Security Council meeting to be held later this month in New York City to discuss military operations in the region. The meeting will also be held in Washington, D.C. to discuss the future of the military in Asia. OSD recognized that further changes will result as it continues to implement the global defense posture decisions. PACOM’s master plan discussed the progress of dynamic realignment initiatives, which will relocate military personnel and facilities in South Korea and Japan. The department reported that as the overseas political and military environment and strategic landscape further evolve,global defense posture plans will continue to mature to address new priorities. On its reuse of property, PACOM updated on its use of property. This year, PACO updated on how the U.S. Air Force uses its property. As EUCOM continues to return facilities in Germany, Italy, and Iceland, this figure may increase. We continue to believe that residual value should be addressed in the master plans. PACOM’s master plan provided details on other challenges, it did not describe the challenges the command faces in addressing training limitations for the Seventh Air Force in South Korea. Senior officials told us that these limitations could cause the United States to pursue alternatives, such as training in other locations, downsizing, or relocating. The Seventh Air Force may be unable to maintain combat capability in the long term because of a lack of adequate air-to-surface ranges. For decades, the Government of South Korea has attempted to relocate the Koon-Ni range. The air and ground range management of the Koonsi training range was transferred to the Government in 2005. While there is an agreement with the Government, there is no guarantee that the range will be relocated by the end of the current military mission in 2011. of South Korea to train at other ranges, according to senior Air Force and USFK officials. Other ranges do not provide electronic scoring capabilities necessary to meet Air Force’s air-to-surface training requirements. As a result, the Air Force has been using ranges in Japan and Alaska to meet its training requirements, which results in additional transportation costs to the U.S. government. In May 2007, officials said that some progress had been made in addressing the Air Air Force's training challenges in South Korea. address training limitations in its area of responsibility. Deputy Under Secretary of Defense responded that validated training requirements that are affected by force posture transformation plans should be addressed in overseas master plans. He further stated that nonprogrammed and nonvalidated training limitations experienced by service components were not appropriate for inclusion in the overseas commands’ risk assessment. While we are not aware of any nonProgrammed andnonvalidatedTraining limitations, our report discusses only those training limitations raised by senior command officials during our review. We assume that if there is a need to make a distinction between nonvalidations versus validated training limitations, OSD and the overseas Commands would work together to identify those validated limitations. be completed by mid-2007. PACOM plan described the training limitations involving bombing and live fire training ranges and the effects of airspace access restrictions in Japan on C-130 training. In addition, the plan discusses how noise and land use sensitivities and maneuver area limitations in Okinawa require U.S. forces to deploy to other Pacific Rim locations to supplement their training, which results in additional transportation requirements and costs. The plan also discussed efforts by U.s. Forces Japan and the Government of Japan to engage in bilateral discussions to address training shortfalls. Corps force, because of inadequacy in size or lack of availability. The services are in the process of conducting a training study that includes Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific, officials stated that live fire artillery training, amphibious landings, and tracked vehicle operations will be challenging. Still, they are optimistic that the study, which will include environmental limitations, facility, facility and other factors, will be successful. The study is expected to be completed by the end of the year. could also swell further because DOD’s estimates do not include DOD civilians, contractors, or Navy transient personnel from an aircraft carrier. Preliminary analysis indicates that 15,000 to 20,000 workers will be required to support the development on Guam. Foreign workers would have to temporarily enter the United States on temporary visas. The increased demand for workers may require workforce training for the local population and possibly a need for foreign workers. For example: Construction capacity on Guam has been approximately $800 million per year, as compared to more than $3 billion per year projected to be needed to meet the fiscal year 2014 completion date for realignment actions. requirements, real estate requirements, and estimated costs, will result in the identification and development of new training areas. The effects of the increase in military forces, in terms of population and military infrastructure, on Guam’s unique economic and infrastructure requirements have not been fully addressed. The population of Guam is estimated to be 171,000, and the projected future military population could increase it by more than 15 percent. The active duty military personnel and dependent population is estimated at 14,195 in Guam, and it is expected to increase to 39,130. nonagricultural workers visas, capped at 66,000 per year. DOD officials have already indicated that visa waivers might be needed in order to mitigate limitations on the number of visas allowed into the United States each year. Other challenges associated with an increase of foreign workers in Guam include providing support facilities and services, such as housing and medical care for these workers. Possible social tensions between the local population and foreign workers because of job competition. Public infrastructure. The effects of the increased demand on Guam’s roads, port capabilities, and utility services. Guam is strategically located in the Pacific Ocean approximately 3,810 miles southwest of Honolulu, Hawaii. It is 1,600 miles east of Manila, the Philippines; and 1,560 miles southeast of Tokyo, Japan. Given its strategic location, Guam is an integral part of DOD’s logistical support system and serves as an important forward operational hub for a mix of military mission requirements. About 29 percent of the U.S. territory is made up of the Hawaiian Islands, which are the westernmost territory of the United States. maintenance costs currently borne by the Government of Japan and for the costs of the additional strategic lift needed after the move. Additional costs will be incurred from building facilities that will house equipment and aircraft during inclement weather. Guam is located in an area of the Pacific commonly referred to as Typhoon Alley, where on average 31 tropical storms develop annually. Also, earthquake risk in Guam is caused by the island’s proximity to the Mariana Trench, which leads to earthquakes throughout the island. The Marine Corps move from Okinawa to Guam is estimated to cost about $10.3 billion. Of this amount for the move, the Government of Japan has agreed to contribute Afghanistan and procurement costs for weapons systems. Other costs not included in the $13 billion cost estimate associated with the Marine Corps’ move to Guam that will increase overall costs. For example, the relocation to Guam will increase the Marines’ annual funding requirements by $465 million for operations and maintenance. The costs of other defense agencies to support the additional military personnel and dependents on Guam will eventually be identified.  funding requirements for the military buildup on Guam are yet not fully identified and may be difficult to meet given other priorities and existing funding constraints. DOD agencies, such as the Defense Logistics Agency and Defense Education Activity, that will help support the services’ influx of personnel, missions, and equipment to Guam will likely incur additional costs that are not yet included in the current DOD $13 billion cost estimate. According to DOD officials, this cost estimate includes the costs to move Marine Corps forces in Guam, and authorized the Japan Bank for International Cooperation to invest in businesses for Guam development.  Guam is one of the more expensive locations for military construction in comparison with other locations in the United States and its territories. The construction costs for Guam are 2.64 times more expensive than the baseline average for the region. Additional costs will occur when constructing to Guam’s typhoon and seismic standards—including concrete and structural reinforcement and providing backup and redundant utility systems. Estimated costs to build infrastructure in Guam are based on the DOD Facilities Pricing Guide. The area cost factors identify Guam as a more expensive location for militaryConstruction. treatment, and solid waste disposal—have not been fully addressed. Future DOD operations may be constrained on Guam if improvements are not made to Guam’s infrastructure. The Government of Guam has estimated that it will cost about $2.6 billion to improve the local infrastructure to accommodate forecasted military and civilian growth. Although the Government of Japan has agreed to provide $700 million for utilities infrastructure on DOD bases in Guam, this funding is neither intended nor is it sufficient to improve infrastructure throughout the island. about $6.1 billion to develop facilities and infrastructure on Guam. Nearly half of Japan’s contribution, or $2.8 billion, is expected to be direct contributions. The remaining $3.3 billion will consist of investment incentives for family housing and on-base infrastructure, such as utilities, which over time could be recouped by Japan in the form of rent or service charges. For example, the Government of Japan will finance construction of family housing units in Guam, but these construction costs will be reimbursed by payments from the servicemembers’ housing allowance. are in poor condition and, when ordnance (ammunition and explosives) is unloaded from ships for the Air Force now and for the Marine Corps in the future, it must be transported on one of these major roads. The Government of Guam plans a number of projects to upgrade the capability and efficiency of Guam’s port facilities that total about $155 million with only $56 million funded at the time of our review. The utilities transmission lines are antiquated and the system is not reliable, and voltage and frequency fluctuations are common. Marine Corps Air Station Futenma in hopes that it will lessen the effect of military aviation operations on the local citizens of Japan. The Government of Japan may encounter challenges in funding its share of the Marine Corps move considering Japan’s other national priorities and its commitments associated with funding several other major realignments of U.S. forces in Japan under the Defense Policy Review Initiative. At the time of our review, the Japanese legislature had approved $228 million for planning and initial construction funds for force posture realignment. made available until it has agreed to specific infrastructure plans for Guam. DOD officials recognize that the failure or delay of one plan outlined in the Defense Policy Review Initiative may affect another. For example, if the Futenma replacement facility in Okinawa is not built, the Marine Corps relocation to Guam may be delayed. The facility is estimated to cost from $4 billion to $5 billion and is intended to replace the Marine Corp Air Station FutenMA. The initiative is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. DOD’s Defense Policy Review Initiative established a framework for the future of U.S. force structure in Japan. The initiative also includes a significant reduction and reorganization of the Marine Corps posture on Okinawa, Japan, to include a continuing presence for U.s. forces. The goal is to create the conditions to reduce the burden on local Japanese communities, including relocating units to other areas, including Guam, while repositioning U.N. forces to respond better to regional crises. The military construction appropriation request for fiscal year 2008 included approximately $21.3 billion for military construction and family housing. As of fiscal year 2006, DOD had 3,731 installations, with 766 installations located overseas. In recent years, DOD has been undergoing a transformation to develop a defense strategy and force structure capable of meeting changing global threats. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. The area cost factor is used by planners to adjust average historical facility costs to a specific project location. It takes into consideration the costs of construction material, labor, and equipment, along with factors such as weather, climate, seismic conditions, mobilization, overhead and profit. Marine Corps officials expect there will be additional facility repair costs periodically as a result of damage from typhoons and seismic shocks. Several operational challenges, such as providing appropriate mobility support and training capabilities to meet Marine Corps requirements, have not yet been addressed. Examine the Navy’s plan to enhance the infrastructure, logistic capabilities, and pier/waterfront facilities to support transient nuclear aircraft carrier berthing at Naval Base Guam. Evaluate placing a ballistic missile defense task force (approximately 630 servicemembers and 950 family members) in Guam. The environmental impact statement will examine potential effects from activities associated with the task force to include operations, training, and infrastructure changes. DOD officials recognize that the results of this environmental assessment process may affect the development and timing of DOD's plans. The Navy is planning on periodically berthing an aircraft carrier in Guam. A new carrier pier with additional capabilities will need to be constructed in order to accommodate this plan. Most of the aircraft from the aircraft carrier will also require temporary beddown at Andersen Air Force Base, which may cause additional facilities requirements. The exact size and mix of the Army missile defense task force as well as the infrastructure requirements are still being determined. The Army is currently training with the U.S. Air Force on how to defend against missile attacks. analysis and the individual service and joint planning processes. The Marine Corps is still determining the specific mix of units and capabilities needed to meet mission requirements on both Guam and Okinawa. Approximately 10,000 marines plus their dependents are expected to remain on the island of Okinawa following the realignment of forces to Guam. Marine Corps forces remaining on Okinawa will consist of Marine Air-Ground Task Force elements, such as command, ground, aviation, and combat service support, as well as a base support capability. relocating 8,000 marines and their estimated 9,000 dependents to Guam. The initiatives also include the relocation of Carrier Air Wing Five from Atsugi Naval Air Facility to Iwakuni Marine Corps Air Station, Japan. The relocation of a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier at Yokosuka Naval Base, Japan; deployment of a transportable ballistic missile defense radar system; relocation of training activities; land returns; and shared use of facilities. Guam is a U.S. territory. been fully addressed. The Marine Corps depends on strategic lift for its operational and training- related movement needs, including transportation of forces and equipment. For example, in a contingency operation that requires sealift, the ships may have to deploy from Sasebo, Japan, or another location to transport soldiers and equipment in Guam and then return to the U.S. Marine Corps in Guam will depend on strategic sealift and airlift to reach destinations in Asia that will be farther away than was the case when the units were based in Okinawa. area of responsibility where the contingency is taking place. The Marine Corps estimated additional costs for strategic lift operating from Guam to be nearly $88 million annually. Existing training facilities and ranges on Guam are not sufficient to meet the training requirements of the projected Marine Corps force. A DOD analysis of training opportunities in Guam concluded that no ranges are suitable for the needs of a projected Marine force of about 1,000. The contingency may include expanding staging facilities and systems support for both sealift and airlift. The results of this environmental impact statement will influence many of the key decisions on the exact location, size, and makeup of the military infrastructure development on Guam. DOD officials said that additional time is needed to fully address the challenges related to funding uncertainties, operational requirements, and Guam’s unique economic and infrastructure requirements. In the absence of this information on how challenges will be addressed in the future, Congress is not in a position to help ensure the best application of limited federal funds. GAO is not recommending executive action. for supporting the military buildup on Guam until DOD prepares a master plan. Congress should consider requiring the Secretary of Defense to report periodically to all the defense committees on the status of DOD’s planning efforts for Guam. DOD also provided technical comments on a draft of this report, which we incorporated where appropriated. We are sending the comments to the Department of Defense for further study and consideration. The Deputy Under Secretary of defense for Installations and Environment responded that congressional action is not costs for the U.S. government. years to identify U.S. funding levels and sources planned for the military buildup in Guam. To identify challenges associated with the buildup in this planning effort, we met with the aforementioned DOD officials and other interested parties. We did not evaluate concerns raised by the officials, but we reviewed relevant federal laws and discussed them with DOD officials. We also analyzed available reports, documents, international agreements, and other available documents and information. The Guam Women’s Group, the Chamber of Commerce, the Civil Military Task Force, and the Office of the Delegate from Guam to the House of Representatives were also consulted. implement force structure plans with currently held land although they are now reviewing the possibility of using additional land to prevent future encroachment. In terms of existing land, DOD owned about 40,000 acres of land in Guam at the time of this review. There are political sensitivities to using former DOD land areas, since local community officials in Guam are concerned with the community’s possible expansion of land holdings on the island. Until DOD provides further information on how these challenges will be resolved, it will not know the precise costs of the Guam realignment plans to the U.S. government. land is controlled by DOD (see fig. 2), 52 percent is privately owned, and 19 percent is under the supervision of the Government of Guam. In 2003, the Senate Appropriations Committee expressed concern that the overseas basing structure had not been updated to reflect the new realities of the post-Cold War world. The committee has also expressed concern about the use of military construction budget authority for projects at bases that may soon be obsolete because of changes being considered in overseas presence and basing. The Senate Appropriations Committee noted the ambitiousness of the military construction program and the need for a well-developed master plan. In July 2006, the committee recommended deferral of two military construction projects at Andersen Air Force Base that were included in the President’s budget request until such time as they can be incorporated into a master plan for Guam. The committee also asked the military to provide the congressional defense committees with a report each year giving an assessment of the plans for the U.S. military presence on Guam. in addition to military construction funds; environmental remediation and restoration issues; population levels; and facility requirements and funding levels for Hawaii, Guam, U.S. territories, and other insular areas in the Pacific. Congress and other users did not have the best data available to facilitate their annual review and oversight. Also, we reported that without the detailed information on individual construction projects and the anticipated strategic end state of the command’s overseas basing infrastructure, Congress did not has the best available and consistent data on which to track progress. The Guam Integrated Military Development Plan provides the best available information on the projected military population, units, and infrastructure that may be needed for future Guam realignments. DOD officials told us that their planning effort was still in its initial phases with many key decisions and challenges yet to be addressed. We visited and toured facilities at Camp Schwab, Camp Kinser, Camp Foster, Torii Station, Yokosuka Naval Base, and Yokota Air Base, Japan; Camp Humphreys and Kunsan Air Force Base, South Korea. DOD is planning on basing a ballistic missile defense task force in Guam. The size and mix of this task force as well as the infrastructure requirements are still being determined. At the time of this review, Army officials projected that the missile defense site will be located at Andersen Air Force Base. DOD faces several significant challenges associated with its master planning effort for Guam, including funding requirements, operational challenges, and community impacts that could adversely affect the development of the island. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. to generate land and facility requirements for basing, operations, logistics, training, and quality of life involving the Marine Corps, Army, Air Force, Navy, and Special Operations Forces in Guam. DOD officials told us that the plan was not a master plan because it did not include specific information on facility requirements, associated costs, and a timeline for specific actions. In addition, the development plan does not direct individual service programming actions or provide for specific funding requirements. We conducted our review from September 2006 through July 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing. GAO: DOD needs several more years to complete a master plan. DOD faces a variety of funding challenges, operational challenges, and community impacts that may both affect the development and timing of the Guam master plan and increase the cost of the project. Congress would benefit from disclosure of this information. We continue to believe that these recommendations have merit and that Congress wouldbenefit from disclosure.and viewed in that context. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. inconsistency led to our recommendation that Congress require such reporting. We continue to believe that this information is necessary to provide a complete picture of the potential effects on infrastructure and funding requirements in South Korea. In commenting on our matter for congressional consideration that the Secretary of Defense report periodically to all the defense committees on the status of DOD’s planning efforts for Guam, the Deputy Under Secretary of defense responded that the Guam master plan is scheduled to be completed in 2008, at which time a copy will be provided. Guam Integrated Military Development Plan provides information on projected military population, units, and infrastructure that may be needed for the Guam realignments. Additional time is needed for DOD to address several challenges before JGPO can develop a Guam master plan. The results of the environmental statement will affect many of the key decisions on the exact location, size, and makeup of the military infrastructure development. Based on the expected completion of theEnvironmental impact statement, the master plan may not be completed until fiscal year 2009.  execute requirements associated with the rebasing of Marine Corps assets from Okinawa to Guam, including master planning efforts. The office’s responsibilities include integration of operational support requirements, development, program, and budget synchronization; oversight of the construction; and coordination of government and business activities. JGPO was tasked to lead the coordinated planning efforts among the DOD components and other stakeholders to consolidate, optimize, and integrate the existing DOD infrastructure capabilities on Guam. It is expected to work closely with the Government of Japan and the local Guam government, other federal agencies, and Congress. JGPO is initiating a master plan that will reflect the building of flexible infrastructure that could accommodate any type of military units that may relocate to Guam. This determination will define the training and facility requirements, such as barracks, family housing, schools, and other infrastructure. However, in the absence of information on the number and mix of forces, it will be difficult to provide an accurate assessment of specific facility requirements to support the Guam realignment actions. DOD is still determining requirements for the Guam base. to prepare an environmental impact statement pursuant to the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) Examine the potential environmental effects associated with relocating Marine Corps command, air, ground, and logistics units from Okinawa to Guam. Examine potential effects from activities associated with Marine Corps units’ relocation to include operations, training, and infrastructure changes. The notice of intent in the Federal Register states that the Environmental Impact Statement will examine the potential effects of relocating the Marine Corps. An environmental impact statement must include a purpose and need statement, a description of all reasonable project alternatives and their associated environmental impacts. An analysis of the environmental impacts of the proposed action and each alternative are essential to implementing NEPA. For example, federal agencies such as DOD such as the U.S. Navy may need to consider the environmental impact of a proposed military base on Guam. The statement must also include the purpose of the project and the need for the project, as well as an analysis of each alternative. are required to ensure the professional integrity, including scientific integrity, of the discussions and analyses in the environmental impact statement. Federal agencies such as DOD are required to obtain the comments of any federal agency that has jurisdiction by law or certain special expertise. Until an agency issues a finalEnvironmental impact statement and record of decision, it generally may not take any action concerning the proposal that is being considered by the agency. The agency is also required to seek the comment of appropriate state and local agencies, Native American tribes, and any agency that requests it receive such statements. copies of this report to the Secretaries of Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force; the Commandant of the Marine Corps; and the Director, Office of Management and Budget. Copies will be made available to others upon request. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-4523. standards.com. In addition to the contact named above, Mark Little, Assistant Director; Nelsie Alcoser; Kate Lenane; Erika Prochaska; Roger Tomlinson; and Cheryl Weissman made major contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.

ROUGE-1: 80.96, ROUGE-2: 74.14, ROUGE-L: 28.67
BERTScore: 57.21

==============================================
==================== [7/100] ====================
Summary:
stated that this could lead to changes in OCC or interagency guidance. At the Federal Reserve, senior officials believed that the existing 2006 guidance was largely sufficient, but noted that efforts to clarify expectations for stress testing and capital planning were ongoing. The examiners and senior officials with whom we spoke agreed that determining certain limits on CRE concentrations, or requiring specific amounts of additional capital for certain levels of CRE concentrations would be difficult and require significant study. Federal Reserve officials also noted that limits or specific capital requirements would require studies on the potential effect on credit availability. All of the agencies provided written comments that we have reprinted in appendixes III, IV, and V. The agencies also provided technical comments, which we considered and have incorporated as appropriate. In written comments, the Federal Reserve welcomed our recommendations to improve CRE concentrations guidance to help banks and examiners comply with it. The Federal Reserve stated that it intends to work with its counterparts at the OCC and FDIC to develop and implement enhancements to CRE concentration guidance. The OCC agreed with our recommendations. Some districts of the Federal Reserve System reviewed implementation of the 2006 CRE concentration guidance and found instances of inconsistency. Senior regulatory officials with whom we spoke had differing views on whether the 2006 guidance was sufficient for examiners to address the buildup in CRE concentration risks. OCC noted that community banks’ increased CRE concentrations exposes them to CRE market declines, which may require more explicit regulatory expectations for the robustness of risk- management systems, stress testing, capital planning, and capital levels when CRE concentrations increase. impact of bank supervision is difficult. The recent severe cycle of credit upswings followed by the downturn serves as a useful reminder of the supervisory balance needed to help ensure the safety and soundness of the banking system. To improve supervision of CRE-related risks, we recommend that the Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation enhance and either re-issue or supplement interagency CRE concentration guidance. We recommend that FDIC, the Federal Reserve, and OCC provide greater clarity on CRE concentration. Bankers say examiners told them they exceeded 300 percent concentration threshold for CRE, but according to the calculations in the guidance they actually were under the threshold. Some examiners were including owner-occupied CRE and some were using the wrong type of capital for the calculation, which inflated the concentration levels. Banks ignored examiners’ concerns on CRE risk management. A number of examiners admitted that during strong economic times they could have been more assertive in asking banks to implement risk-management changes related to CRE concentrations. that examiners have been requiring additional ALLL and criticizing the ALLL methodology. In addition, a few bankers noted that some examiners want ALLL increased based on their peers’ ALLL rather than the bank’s individual situation. Many bank officials with whom we spoke were concerned that examiners had been misapplying the 2006 guidance. The 2006 guidance states that the CRE and ADC concentration levels are not limits, but some bank officials told us that examiner have been interpreting them that way. increases the scrutiny placed on the banks’ risk- management systems. While FDIC clarified to its examiners in April 2010 how to calculate CRE concentrations, other regulators have not done so. Two of the FDIC ROEs in our sample that use only tier 1 capital in the calculation were issued after the April 2010 clarification. A number of field examiners from all the agencies stated they did not have the tools to proactively address growing CRE concentrations when the economy was strong or that some of the banks were overleveraged. concentration calculation (14 of 47), although the 2006 CRE guidance specifically excludes this type of CRE. We also found that 23 of these 47 ROEs include CRE concentrations calculated by using some combination of tier 1 capital. Another 24 ROEs specify using either total risk-based capital or equity capital. The effect of calculating these concentrations differently can be to increase the total CRE concentration number, which can lead to a loss of revenue for the bank. We found that this effect can be significant. guidance based on the feedback received. Issued in final form in December 2006, the interagency guidance provides levels of CRE concentrations that will result in additional regulatory attention on risk-management systems. The concentration numbers are not limits, but rather indicate when banks will receive closer scrutiny of risk- management systems and loans. In determining the concentration ratio, owner-occupied CRE is removed. The guidance also states that the concentration numbers aren't limits, and that the numbers are just a starting point. Revising or supplementing the guidance would help both examiners and bankers better understand how to assess and manage such concentrations. incorporating CRE-specific analyses into the scope of internal and quality assurance reviews will help ensure consistent application of the guidance. In this way, regulatory management can better ensure that examination practices related to CRE concentrations and risks will be carried out consistently. The guidance should provide more details about risk- management practices and examples of when to reduce CRE concentrations. It should also produce clearly articulated support in examination reports for requiring reduced concentrations. inconsistent with the 2006 CRE concentration guidance. In two other instances the ROEs state that the bank must reduce its CRE concentrations but do not focus on the bank’s risk-management systems. Differences in message between an ROE and an enforcement action could be confusing to bank boards and management as they seek to comply with regulatory requirements for risk management related to CRE concentrations. Such confusion could lead bank officials to misunderstand whether they should focus on improving their risk- management systems or just reduce their total CRE concentration numbers. agencies reviewed CRE concentrations and risk-management systems across banks. The findings include concerns on the bank’s need to update or enhance internal policies on CRE concentration limits and CRE underwriting acceptable to the bank. The ROE requires a bank with a CRE concentration of about 600 percent of tier 1 capital to address a matter requiring immediate attention to improve stress testing. However, the ROE states that the bank was in compliance with the 2006 CRE guidance—which requires robust stress testing for CRE portfolios when banks reach certain levels of CRE. and whether regulatory guidance has been applied consistently. According to bank and regulatory officials with whom we spoke, when bank officials have raised concerns, they tend to first approach the examination team. Bank officials also can contact the ombudsman offices at the regulators to seek confidential assistance. In addition to these avenues, banks formally can appeal regulatory decisions. Some bank officials were cautious about raising issues because of potential repercussions from regulatory officials, the authors say.. Many bank officials’ overarching concern was that examiners have been applying guidance more stringently than before the financial crisis. was needed to address banks with high risk profiles or weak risk-management practices. We also found in past work that regulators identified a number of weaknesses in institutions’ risk- management systems before the financial crisis began but did not always take forceful actions to address them. A number of nonmanagement regulatory staff in the field offices we visited acknowledged they could have better followed up on outstanding issues. In response to the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission report notes areas in which regulators could have been more proactive in using regulatory tools to address certain risks. Capital provides an important cushion against losses for banks. Capital can be measured as total capital or tier 1 capital. Regulators oversee the capital adequacy of their regulated institutions through ongoing monitoring, including on-site examinations and off-site tools. When banks fail to meet these goals, they may face fines or other penalties from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and other authorities. When a bank fails to meet the minimum capital requirements, it may be fined or other sanctions may be imposed by the federal government. regulators require banks to hold capital above regulatory minimums. These requirements may result from an enforcement action through an agreement between the regulator and the bank. Examinations and ratings: Federal banking laws and regulatory guidance require on-site examinations. At each full-scope examination, examiners review the bank’s risk exposure on a number of components. It may reduce the availability of bank credit and reduce returns on equity to shareholders. It can also affect a bank”s financial health. The purpose of federal banking supervision is to help ensure that banks throughout the financial system are operating in a safe and sound manner. Financial regulation more broadly has sought to achieve four goals: to ensure adequate consumer protections, ensure the integrity and fairness of markets, monitor the safety and soundness of institutions, and act to ensure the stability of the overall financial system. Federal banking regulators use a number of tools to achieve these goals, the authors say. For more information, visit www.banks.gov. The Basel Committee released the framework for Basel III in December 2010. It includes increased and higher-quality capital requirements, enhanced risk coverage, and steps to encourage the “build up” of capital. The Basel committee has established procedures to help ensure the consistent global application of this framework. It has also introduced two global liquidity standards to help with the development of the global capital market for the banking sector in the future. The framework is expected to be in place by the end of 2014. Regulators have been incorporating lessons from the financial crisis in their supervisory practices. Many bankers remain concerned that regulators have become more stringent in reviewing CRE loans since the crisis. Given the key role community banks play in business lending, bank regulators are aware of the potential effects of their actions in exacerbating the credit cycle. If such requirements are too stringent, they can unduly limit lending. Such limits on lending can have widespread effects on the economy, as acknowledged in Basel Committee for Banking Supervision discussions on capital requirements. The recent financial crisis underscored how important it is for regulators to evenly apply guidance during strong economic periods. Consistent application of guidance is important to avoid unduly hampering credit provision throughout the economy. CRE still is working through a downturn sparked by the broader financial crisis, presenting an ongoing challenge to community banks and regulators. While community banks have been working through the challenges associated with many years of past growth, CRE is still working through its own challenges of the past few years, officials say. economic upturns or downturns. Bank examiners with whom we spoke in the field offices also noted that problems can be difficult to identify during strong economic times. Discussions about the procyclicality of regulation have been a central feature of recent deliberations on revised capital requirements among U.S. banking regulators and the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision. The discussions have been seeking to address the pro cyclical effects of banking regulation in the United States and around the rest of the world. developed standards that will be implemented gradually so that banks make the shift to higher capital and liquidity standards while “supporting lending to the economy” Federal bank regulators also have acknowledged the importance of addressing procyclicality in regulatory requirements and have made efforts in this regard. In addition, FASB has issued accounting guidance aimed at changes in accounting standards for the financial sector. The Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Forum have worked to address this as it relates to capital requirements. For example, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve has stated the. importance of regulators acknowledging the significance of procyclicals. stringent during the past credit crunch, even holding financial conditions constant. Regulators should be aware of how their actions can affect broader credit markets. The procyclical effects of regulation may not adequately discourage overly risky behavior during economic upswings or may inhibit bank lending during downturns, as banks may need to meet their obligations. The U.S. and foreign regulators have been attempting to address the procyclicals effects of their actions in the aftermath of the recent financial crisis in the United States and abroad. more stringent requirements during times when it is more difficult to do so. For instance, if regulators increase capital requirements at the same time that losses from an economic downturn decrease banks’ capital, banks may be less able to lend while they seek to rapidly raise additional capital. This can exacerbate downswings in credit cycles. Consistent and balanced application of policy guidance in strong and weak economic times is important to avoiding unnecessary procyclical effects, according to the IMF. The IMF urges regulators to ensure that guidance is applied consistently during strong andweak economic periods. through training, internal reviews, quality assurance processes, and processes for obtaining input from banks. Such processes reflect federal internal control standards, which provide reasonable assurance that management directives are carried out. Regulators’ internal reviews include comprehensive audits that recur periodically, and real-time and post-ROE quality processes. We also noted in our report some concerns raised by bank examiners and bankers about applying the 2006 guidance, such as whether the current CRE concentration thresholds are hard to hit. The report concludes that no regulator was immune from consistency issues. The regulators’ examination drafting and review process is iterative, with multiple levels of internal review. Different perceptions about the 2006 guidance among regulators could send mixed signals to examiners. Monitoring and revising existing controls, such as guidance, is a key component of a strong internal control system. Regulators require banks to maintain certain minimum capital requirements to help ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry. For all examinations, a team of examiners will conduct on-site work, led by an examiner-in-charge. ensure consistent application of policy guidance, we reviewed the examination report review process at all of the regulators. We also collected, compared, and analyzed examination review reports and quality assurance processes for the three regulators to determine what processes were in place to identify and address inconsistencies among examiners. We reviewed reports conducted by FDIC’s Internal Control and Review Section for the Atlanta, Dallas, New York, and San Francisco regions, because these regions covered the states in our nonprobability sample. learned from the crisis. Regulators have mixed views about the adequacy of the 2006 guidance. Our findings from an analysis of ROEs were similar to those of the regulators’ internal reviews and assessments. Given these findings, and in light of lessons learned from the recent financial crisis and CRE market downturn, the regulators could reassess the inadequacy of 2006 guidance, the authors say. The authors conclude that the 2006 CRE guidance is no longer appropriate for commercial real estate investment trusts (CREITs) they are appropriate. Regulators also provide training on new guidance to help ensure consistent application. In certain instances, the regulators’ headquarters offices in Washington, D.C., may participate. We sought to determine if there were different views or practices related to CRE. The interviews were conducted by telephone, video teleconference, and in person at district, regional, and field offices in California, Colorado, Georgia, Massachusetts, and Texas. We interviewed more than 230 regulatory field staff at FDIC, throughout the Federal Reserve System, and at OCC. further understand how FDIC, the Federal Reserve, and OCC have responded to the CRE downturn and its effect on community banks. We collected and analyzed interagency policy guidance to examiners related to CRE loan treatment and interagency statements on lending. We also assessed regulatory efforts to address CRE-related concerns. As part of this work, we observed examiner training at FFIEC provided to commissioned examiners, to include a week-long training on CRE and a day-longTraining on regulatory updates related to policy guidance on CRE loans. examination workpapers sometimes lacked sufficient documentation to determine if the examiner adequately assessed compliance with the guidance. According to Federal Reserve officials, Washington staff also coordinated separate reviews related to implementation of the 2006 guidance. The reviews resulted in internal clarifications of the appraisal review process, ALLL assessment guidance, examiner training sessions on the use of interest reserves and TDRs, and contributions to the 2009 loan workout guidance. In June 2010, the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank implemented a “look back” process in June 2010 in which a a bank’s financial condition; (2) examiners review risks associated with concentrations and wholesale funding sources; and (3) appropriate capital is maintained. Based on our analysis of a nonprobability sample of 55 ROEs, examiners’ findings were generally consistent with policy guidance, with some exceptions. ROEs in our sample that comment broadly on banks’ CRE loan workouts tend to cite areas for improvement (20 of 27). loan workouts (8 of 20) specifically note concerns about the nature of banks' loan workouts. years, because examiners are usually commissioned within 5 years). Individual meetings with EICs were held based on our nonprobability sample. Of the field staff we interviewed, about 200 were directly involved in drafting or reviewing ROEs. We reviewed how examiners supported statements related to banks’ CRE loan workouts, concerns about CRE concentrations, and how examiner calculated CRE concentrations. To understand the controls the regulators have in place, we analyzed 55 ROEs of banks in California, Georgia, Massachusetts, and Texas. The regulators began to address CRE concerns before the financial crisis. Beginning in the early 2000s, the capital adequacy.part may explain bank officials’ experience of increased stringency in supervision. In October 2009, regulators issued interagency guidance on CRE loan workouts. According to the regulators, the guidance was issued to help ensure consistent CRE loan and workout treatment among the regulators and to inform banks of examiner expectations. The guidance is not intended to be a “safe harbor” and banks with lower concentrations may still receive scrutiny. example, on what is considered to be satisfactory stress testing. While more bank officials than not noted that examiners’ actions have been consistent with the letter of the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance, a few said examiners were not always complying with its spirit. Two bankers with whom we spoke stated that it was their experience that examiner were particularly stringent in 2008 when the financial crisis was escalating, but moderated their approach in late 2009, which is around the time that the 2009 guidance was issued. 97 percent of respondents stated that the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance has been helpful. Nearly 88 percent of banks stated that no specific guidance was inhibiting them from working with troubled borrowers. Just over three-quarters of them raised concerns about accounting-related guidance and reporting of TDRs. Based on this information, regulatory officials from FDIC, the Federal Reserve, and OCC believe that the2009 CRE Loan Workflow Guidance has been Helpful. The report was published by the American Bankers Association. The 2009 guidance was not intended as forbearance, but to encourage prudent loan workouts. The examples provide scenarios for different CRE loan classification outcomes. Examiners told us that the examples have helped to resolve differences of opinion with bankers on how to treat certain CRE- related loans. In addition to the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance, the regulators issued statements on lending to creditworthy borrowers and creditworthy small business borrowers to encouraging prudent lending among banks and balanced supervision among examiners. Federal banking regulators help ensure consistency among examinations, and appropriate application of guidance.  increases in capital requirements can raise the cost of providing loans. This would lead to higher interest rates for borrowers, tighter credit terms, or reduced lending. Holding more capital against each loan means less equity is available to return to shareholders or back new loans. Using the “capital crunch hypothesis,” the researchers found that institutions with lower capital ratios had slower loan growth (or loans shrank more rapidly) to try to meet regulatory requirements for capital.system. The study found that banks with “low or no profits and an inability to obtain new capital at reasonable rates” decreased their assets and liabilities. on credit cycles; however, the studies that exist suggest the effects are minimal. In an analysis of the credit crunch from 1989 to 1992, researchers found modest support for the hypothesis that increased regulatory “toughness” occurred. In a comprehensive study spanning the last financial crisis, three hypotheses were tested regarding changes in regulatory toughness and its impact on bank lending. The data provided what the authors call “modest support” for all three hypotheses that: (1) toughness increased during the creditCrunch from 1989 through 1992, and (2) it declined during the boom from 1993. through 1998, and (3) differences in toughness affected bank lending. During the credit crunch they studied, the data show no more than 1 percent additional loans receiving classification or worsening of classification status. The authors also reviewed the economic significance of changes in regulatory “toughness” and found that growth in the number of classified assets by 1 percent would be predicted to decrease the ratio of real estate loans to gross total assets by less than 1 percentage point over the long term. The data show a similar change for a decrease in loan classifications. Opinion Survey have suggested that new CRE borrowers have faced tighter credit conditions. Banks tightening their underwriting standards in response to the downturn. Trend of tighter credit standards suggests that borrowers who previously were considered creditworthy might not meet banks’ higher standards. The regulators have been aware for some time of the risk-management challenges related to growing CRE banks. The January 2011 survey found that 10.6 percent of respondents reported easing credit standards over the previous 3 months, compared to 10.5 percent who reported tightening them. the amount of financing a bank is willing to lend against that collateral typically declines as well. Conversely, increases in collateral values lower the premium on external financing. Falling property prices can generate a cycle of declining CRE values because they can accompany reduced credit. A report by the Bank for International Settlements notes that falling CRE prices decrease the value of collateral held by banks and, therefore, can give rise to significant losses by these banks and ultimately contract the supply of credit. The report was published by the BIS. or chooses not to because the cost of capital is prohibitive, then it could, among other options, reduce its assets. Reducing assets is often referred to as “shrinking the balance sheet’ However, banks in better financial condition may be able to respond differently in the face of loan losses. They may be. able to continue lending without raising additional capital or can rely on their stronger financial position to secure new. capital to secure their new capital. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The authors cite the possibility that high-CRE banks may have failed at a greater rate than banks without that level of CRE exposure. Bankers attributed the CRE downturn to market factors such as problems in residential real estate that affected the CRE market and the severity of the broader financial and economic crisis. Although bankers did not state that regulatory policies were the cause of theCRE downturn, many noted that examiner actions were exacerbating it and a few stated banks needed to be given time to work through their troubled assets so they could continue to lend.  limited research exists on the impact of CRE loan concentrations on a bank’s ability to lend. High CRE concentrations can limit loan growth during economic downturns. Banks with capital bases that have been negatively affected by losses in their CRE portfolios may need to reduce lending to maintain an adequate capital-to-assets ratio on their balance sheets. To further demonstrate how loan losses, allowance for loan and lease losses, and capital requirements can affect lending, we developed an illustrative example of how Loan losses affect capital ratios on a banks’ balance sheet. the economy during this crisis at a “significantly slower rate’ than banks that did not have high CRE exposure. The higher the bank’s CRE concentration prior to the crisis, the more its non-CRE lending slowed during the crisis. The authors hypothesize that the rise in CRE lending and the substantially increased delinquencies on these loans “could have inhibited banks’ willingness or ability to lend to other segments of the economy.” The reasons for the contraction of non- CRE lending during the Crisis are being examined. and examiners better understand how to comply with CRE risk management requirements. FDIC also cited a study by the Bank for International Settlements that concluded the social benefits of higher bank capital requirements outweigh the large reductions in economic activity from a banking collapse. As our report notes, additional capital provides an important cushion against losses, though this comes at a cost. From our review of the literature, there is disagreement on the magnitude of such costs on lending. We added information to the report to clarify this issue. charged off the bank’s balance sheet. The end result of an on-site examination is an ROE that includes the CAMELS ratings. CRE encompasses many different property types that present different risks. Table 4 describes the key CRE property types. Regulators define CRE loans to include construction loans, loans to finance CRE that are not secured by CRE, loans secured by multifamily property, and nonfarm, nonresidential property in which the primary source of repayment derives from the rental income associated. Banks report on four broad categories of CRE in their quarterly call reports. CLD: loans secured by real estate to finance land development and construction. Multifamily: loans for residential properties with five or more dwelling units, such as apartment buildings. Nonfarm nonresidential: Loans secured byreal estate for business and industrial properties, as well as properties such as hotels, churches, hospitals, schools, and charitable organizations. This category includes offices, retail, and other nonfarm commercial properties.  CRE loans in which the primary source of repayment is not the property itself are called owner-occupied loans. For example, a line of credit for a business’s operating expenses might be secured in part by commercial property, such as an office. Owner-occupied properties generally are considered to carry less risk than non-owner- occupied properties because regulators consider them to be less sensitive to the condition of the CRE market. For more information on CRE loans, go to www.securitizer.gov. warehouse space. Loans to finance CRE, construction, and land development (not secured by CRE). Interagency guidance issued in 2006 on concentrations in CRE and sound risk-management practices define CRE loans within these categories to include those in which repayment is dependent on the cash flow generated from the real estate itself. CRE as an asset class—and especially properties in the ADC category—is prone to volatility and cyclical behavior, as illustrated in this chart. When evaluating concentrations inCRE, examiners are instructed not to include owner-occupied properties in which the income or value of the property is not the primary source of repayment. Construction and land development (CLD) loans are considered to be the riskiest class of CRE. They can include properties that are built before having firm commitments from buyers or lessees. By the time the construction phase is completed, market demand may have fallen, putting downward pressure on sales prices or rents. In recent years, this type of loan also has tended to have a much higher loss rate than other types of CRE, according to a report by the Bank of America Merrill Lynch. is slow to respond to an increase in demand, which drives prices up when investor optimism rises. Conversely, the marketplace isslow to respond when the market supply of CRE catches up and new construction projects are delivered, resulting in oversupply and declining property values. According to regulatory officials, the weakness in the ADC sector during this crisis was primarily due to residential housing construction. That weakness affected the performance of other areas of CRE, such as strip malls. The recent downturn in the CRE sector has been particularly bad. the current CRE market downturn. This volatility and cyclical behavior is attributed to characteristics such as information-gathering difficulties, infrequent transactions, high transaction costs, rigid and constrained supply, long construction times, and a two-fold reliance on external finance. CRE is by nature diverse and localized. For example, shopping centers are one type of CRE, but even within this category properties can have significant differences depending on design, types of tenants, and other factors that can affect their value. Because of these factors, the supply of CRE in the marketplace has been constrained. The increased exposure of community banks to CRE loans has been pronounced over the last 10–15 years. While in CRE concentrations, CRE portfolios continue to have a significant effect on community bank balance sheets as loan delinquencies and charge-offs remain historically high. Community banks continue to seek ways to work with their borrowers and shore up capital to remain solvent. But the current economic environment and the expectation that refinancing of CRE loans will bring a new round of market stress suggest many community banks may face these challenges for some time. many other MLRs we reviewed—states that the rapid growth of its CRE portfolio “increased the institution’s exposure to a sustained downturn in the real estate market and reduced its ability to absorb losses due to unforeseen events” CRE market value declines could reduce overall small business lending by community banks. Because CRE can be used as collateral for small business loans, diminished CRE values also can negatively affect credit availability to small businesses. Specifically, when the value of collateral declines, community banks tend to have a larger portion of small-business related loans. Low rental rates and high vacancies indicate that demand for office, retail, multifamily housing, and warehouse space remains relatively weak. Although CRE markets nationally have experienced a downturn, some regions have experienced more distress than others. The South, Midwest, and West have experienced greater stress and deterioration than the East. Community banks increasingly have moved toward providing CRE loans more than other kinds of loan products, in part in part because of the CRE market's strength. The CRE market has performed well more recently.  decline in CRE values has contributed to more noncurrent CRE loans, charge-offs, and bank failures. From the first quarter of 2008 through the fourth quarter of 2010, the percent of CRE loans at community banks that were noncurrent increased from 2.2 to 5.3 percent, well above the average rate of 0.9 percent from 2000 through 2007. However, the data show that the volume of non Current CRE loans has begun to level off (see fig. 3). CRE loan charge-off increased from 0.19 to 1.34 percent. CRE collateral backed about 30 percent of total loans and leases at community banks in 2000. A decade later that rate increased to more than 43 percent. Concentrations have been less pronounced at larger banks, which tend to rely less heavily on CRE lending. Nearly a third of community banks are exposing three times their total capital to risks related to their CRE Corporation, according to FDIC guidance on CRE. The average CRE concentration as a percentage of total risk-based capital increased from about 168 percent in 1996–2000 to about 289 percent in 2005–2010. As of December 2010, overall CRE market values were down more than 42 percent from their peak in 2007. By January 2011, the delinquency rate on loans included in CMBS was at a record high, above 9 percent. Although CRE market price deterioration appears to have leveled off recently, vacancies at many properties remain high. High-value properties in markets such as New York, Washington, San Francisco, and Boston are showing signs of a market recovery in different areas of the U.S. We analyzed monthly data from Moody’s/REAL Commercial Property Price Index from January 2002 through December 2010. We assessed their reliability for the purposes of providing a picture of the trends in CRE prices. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of determining price trends. To determine when CRE loans would be repaid, we looked at when the CRE market was at its peak. We also looked at the implications for community banks of CRE loans being repaid at the end of the cycle. Trepp LLC estimates that about $1.7 trillion in CRE mortgages will mature between 2011 and 2015. About 60 percent of CRE debt maturing in 2011 is “underwater’ Due to price declines and stricter bank underwriting standards, those mortgages will be difficult to refinance.bank could work with the borrower to restructure the loan and avoid default. Results from the Federal Reserve’s Senior Loan Officer be up for refinancing and what percentage of CRE loans were ‘underwater' problem of CRE loan refinancing may exacerbate the negative CRE trends and limit lending to small businesses. CRE loans usually are written for 3–10 years, with a 20–30 year amortization schedule and a balloon payment at the end. Small businesses that are looking to refinance a loan against a property that has lost a significant amount of market value may have to put up more equity. Alternatively, such borrowers might default on the loan, or the lender might be forced to sell the property. There are three classification categories used by the federal banking regulators: substandard, doubtful, and loss. These loan classifications, and the internal ratings that banks produce for all of their loans, are incorporated into how each bank calculates its allowance for loan and lease loss (ALLL) If additional loans are classified substandard or doubtful, this information is included in a bank’s updated ALLL estimates. If Loans are classified loss, they are not performing or may not perform in the future. Bank examiners have been asking bankers to place more loans on nonaccrual. Classifications also can reduce earnings because they factor into ALLL. As more loans are classified, more is generally reserved in ALLL to anticipate future losses from nonperforming loans. In our interviews with bank officials, some stated that some stated.that a bank should place a classified loan on non Accrual—which means the bank cannot accrue the interest income as earnings. It is not clear if the bank has made such a move. total capital ratio of 10 percent (calculated by dividing total capital by total assets) In this example the bank has analyzed the collectibility of its loans and decided to add $20 to its ALLL in anticipation of loan losses. Provisions for these losses increase the ALLL, which in turn are charged to the bank’s expenses, reduce income, and therefore reduce retained earnings that are included as part of total capital. As a result, the capital ratio falls to 8.2 percent. from certified public accountants. Increases in capital requirements or the allowance for loan and lease loss (ALLL) can affect a bank’s ability to lend. Figure 6 illustrates relationships between loan losses, bank balance sheets, and capital requirements under certain assumptions. In this simplified example, the bank begins with $1,000 in assets ($1,010 in loans and $10 in ALLL), $900 in liabilities, and $100 in capital, which equates to a $100 loan loss. to mark-to-market accounting for assessing asset values in inactive markets. More recently, in May 2010, FASB released a proposed Accounting Standards Update, which encompassed proposals on the impairment of financial assets and suggested implementing a more forward-looking impairment model. Efforts such as these seek to address procyclicality concerns related to capital and accounting requirements, while the potential procyclicals effects of examiners’ application of policy. Based on exposure draft comments, in January 2011 FasB proposed with the International Accounting Standards Board a common solution on how to account for financial assets. Lee, Analyst-in-Charge, managed this review. Emily Biskup and Jason Wildhagen also led portions of the research and made significant contributions throughout the report. Anna Maria Ortiz and Rudy Chatlos provided methodological assistance related to our nonprobability sample. Michael Hoffman provided assistance reviewing the methodologies of our research studies and assistance on capital-related issues. Bill Cordrey, Jay Thomas, and Gary Chupka provided accounting assistance. Paul Thompson provided legal assistance. Marc Molino developed the report’s graphics. Barbara Roesmann provided editorial assistance. Lauren Nunnally, Michael Pahr, Ellen Ramachandran, Maria Soriano, Winnie Tsen, Gavin Ugale, and Carrie Watkins held various roles in verifying our findings. For more, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories, or follow us on Twitter @CNNSoulmatters and @CNNOpinion. For the latest from CNN iReport, visit the site here. For all the latest news from CNN, check out the news hub here. Bank officials expressed concerns with examiner- required loan classifications. A loan is performing when the borrower continues to pay and should not be classified. According to regulatory guidance, such a loan may be classified if identified weaknesses suggest a reduction in the borrower’s capacity to repay that in turn could lead to future nonpayment. The renewed focus on global cash flow analysis led many bank officials to conclude that examiners were classifying loans based on collateral value or because the bank lacked updated financial statements. In the current economic downturn examiners have been focusing more closely on analysis and documentation of borrowers’ and guarantors’ global cash flows. The purpose of such analysis is to determine whether they have sufficient income and liquid assets to support loan payments. In some cases, such analysis shows that a borrower is unable to pay the loan, even if the borrower is currently paying. For example, the borrower’s income and other debt obligations, when reviewed as a whole, could show that the borrower's debt obligations exceed income. Case managers review draft ROEs for consistency and adequate support of findings for a portfolio of banks. The analyst function at OCC serves a similar role: reviewing many ROEs, although not assigned to a specific portfolio. According to Federal Reserve officials, case managers and senior management hold discussions with the examination teams as examination findings are being finalized, to ensure that they are accurate and adequate for CAMELS ratings in a broad range of ROEs. Particular helps ensure consistency.particular helps ensuring consistency. loan treatment among regulatory roles or between those in headquarters and the field offices. The staff with whom we spoke in field locations included field examiners, their supervisors, case managers, analysts (at OCC), and senior management. Examiners were interviewed both in group settings and individually, and included those who served as examiners-in-charge (EIC) for ROEs in our sample. Based on our request, had a range of experience (either less than 5 years or more than 5) changed before the ROEs were finalized and were consistent with the bank’s internal loan ratings. All OCC districts instituted a real-time review process in which experienced staff reviewed the accuracy of CRE loan classifications. Among those classifications that were corrected, 3 percent of classifications were corrected. For example, in January 2009, OCC reported that 95 percent of examiners’ ratings decisions on CRE loans, and 99 percent of their accrual decisions, were determined to be accurate. The western district’s quality assurance process concluded that 4 percent of risk ratings were incorrect. Based on these findings, the district concluded that the vast majority of examiner loan classifications were accurate but recommended more training to address the discrepancies. Regulators also use surveys to gather information on how to improve the examination process and understand the impact of policies on the banking industry. For example, the regulators issued an interagency survey for examinations conducted between May 31 and July 9, 2010. According to an FDIC analysis of the resulting data, more than more than 2 percent were downgraded. senior official reviews the sufficiency of support for downgraded CRE loans for all issued ROEs. Of 11 CRE loan downgrades reviewed in the third and fourth quarter of 2010, this official stated that 2 should not have been downgraded. The loans initially were considered collateral dependent, but after closer review the official determined that the borrowers had some capacity to repay, so the loans should have been classified but not yet charged off. In these two cases, the downgrades were reviewed and the loans were classified. Bank officials say examiners have been more critical of recent appraisals. If the borrower lacks the ability to repay, the loan then could be considered “collateral dependent.” Such loans are classified based on the value of the property, and tend to rely on values established in appra isals. Classifications are a major concern for banks primarily because they can result in reduced earnings. For example, an examiner may determine that an applicant may not be able to repay the loan. Changes in CAMEL ratings were not found to have a “consistent’ impact on future lending behavior. When there was an impact, the data show that it was minimal. The researchers also noted that, based on their research, banks may respond “asymmetrically” to changes in CAMel ratings. These studies suggest examiners’ actions can affect lending, albeit minimally. However, research suggests that regulators were more regulators.this impact was projected to be significantly less than 1 percentage point. using what is known as the CAMELS rating system. CAMELS components consider the institution’s size and sophistication, the nature and complexity of its activities, and its risk profile. A bank is rated for each of the components and given a composite rating, which generally bears a close relationship to the component ratings. The component rating and the composite ratings are scored on a scale of 1 (best) to 5 (worst) Regulatory actions CAMELS composite ratings of 4 or 5, a 300 percent or greater concentration in overall CRE in the 75th percentile or greater for the banks in our sample, and a loss ratio of 75 or greater. typically correspond to the composite CAMELS ratings, with the actions generally increasing in severity as the ratings become worse. Table 2 describes the definitions of the composite scores under the Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System. In examinations, examiners review a sample of banks’ internal ratings of loans to determine the adequacy of credit risk administration and identify loans that show undue risk and may be uncollectible. As part of this review, Examiners determine which loans are considered “pass,” with no concerns noted, as well as those that are special mentioned or “classified” for community banks to work through the downturn. Bank officials we interviewed also stated that their experience with increased supervisory scrutiny was being reflected in CAMELS ratings and additional capital requirements. For example, many bank officials thought the management component rating was more critically assessed now, and heavily driven by asset quality and other component ratings. Some bank officials added that they were being rated on deterioration in their portfolios that was due to the broader economic downturn and problems in their geographic market that were out of their control. lessons learned, regulatory officials stated that they have been following up more often on matters requiring attention (MRA) and refocusing their supervisory efforts. OCC’s Midsize and Community Banks Division issued an MRA Reference Guide that provides examiners with OCC policy guidance on how to report, follow up on, and keep records related to MRAs. FDIC in June 2009 implemented its “Forward Looking Supervision” program that re-emphasizes reviewing all aspects of a bank’S risks during the examination process. our sample. OCC- supervised banks represent the greatest number of banks in our sample. A number of the examinations for the Federal Reserve and FDIC were led by the state regulator and were out of the scope of our review. The resulting sample from this process is outlined below, broken down by regulator (table 5), state (table 6), and CAMELS ratings (table 7). To avoid overweighting the sample with OCC supervised banks, we randomly removed some OCC-led bank examinations for which we had a sufficient number of cases. As of December 31, 2010, there were 6,364 community banks (commercial banks with total assets of $1 billion or less) This represents about 92 percent of all commercial banks, although only about 10 percent of commercial bank assets nationwide. Banks in the U.S. are supervised by one of the following three federal regulators: FDIC, Federal Reserve or OCC. The Federal Reserve supervises commercial banks that are state-chartered and members of the Federal Reserve System. OCC supervises federally chartered national banks. Regulators have been incorporating into their regulatory processes a number of lessons learned from the financial crisis. A few bank officials stated that the regulators should focus on the community banks that caused the problems, rather than subjecting all community banks to such strict scrutiny. As noted in a December 2010 report by the FDIC IG that summarizes certain MLR findings, FDIC determined based on the MLRs that earlier supervisory action could have been taken against the failing banks. The report was based on findings from the IGs of the banking regulators in 2009 and 2010. information on the study cited by FDIC. We are sending copies of this report to FDIC, the Federal Reserve, OCC, and other interested parties. The report also is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact A. Nicole Clowers at (202) 512-8678 or clowersa@gao-gov. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix VI. trends in the CRE market, we interviewed regulatory and bank officials and reviewed reports of examination (ROE) from a sample of banks. We selected banks with elevated CRE and ADC concentrations and those that had a recent bank examination. From that subset, we placed banks into four “pools” with the goal of speaking with officials from, and reviewing ROEs for, a breadth of community banks. From the bank examination information we received from the regulators, we selected banks from California that had an examination conducted after October 2009. of 1 or 2 and a CRE concentration above 300 percent of CRE loans (including owner-occupied) to total capital. Pool 2 consisted of banks that generally were in good condition but also had ADC concentrations. Pool 3 consisted ofbanks that were generally in good shape but had high concentration of ADC loans to capital. The criteria were a CAMELS composite rating of 2 and both a 300 percent or greater concentration in overall CRE and a 100 percent or more concentration in ADC loans in Pool 2. The pool was designed to include the largest possible pool of banks. banks were intended to represent banks that were struggling and that had a higher number of loans classified as loss at the most recent examination. These had a CAMELS composite rating of 3, an overall CRE concentration of 300 percent or greater, and a proportion of loansclassified loss to total assets in the 75th percentile and above. This “loss ratio” was calculated by taking the total assets classified loss for the most recently examination and dividing them by total assets. Pool 4 was the most distressed pool of banks and consisted of banks with banks with CRE concentrations of over 300 percent. issue of CRE, were identified to us through bank associations, or had learned of our work and wanted to talk to us. When we summarize statements from our interviews with bank officials throughout this report, we use the term “a few” to refer to 3–10 of 43 banks making the statement. We do not provide specific numbers in the body of the report to avoid overstating the precision of the results from the nonprobability sample we used to select the banks. Georgia, Massachusetts, and Texas are the states with the highest share of CRE-related nonperforming loans. The banks in the first two states have had a relatively greater share of such loans. We analyzed the following data points for commercial banks with assets of less than or equal to $1 billion: loans and leases for construction and land development, multifamily, owner-occupied real estate, other property, and nonfarm nonresidential. We reviewed these commercial banks in each of the 50 states in relation to these measures. and development, nonfarm nonresidential, and multifamily residential real estate) divided by the reported amount of total risk-based capital. We conducted similar analyses for commercial banks with assets more than $1 billion. We assessed the reliability of the call report data by reviewing the controls in place to help ensure its accuracy and by relying on past GAO reviews of these data. We determined that they were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of determining trends in CRE loan concentrations and performance at community banks. We reviewed all 106 of the material loss reviews (MLR) issued by the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Federal Reserve), FDIC, and U.S. Department of the Treasury. We also interviewed officials at the Conference of State Bank Regulators on the findings of their independent review of the MLRs. The reports we reviewed were culled from research and literature reviews from academic journals, the Congressional Research Service, and the Congressional Oversight Panel, FDIC. increase in noncurrent CRE loans have put stress on banks’ capital and ALLL. Many bank failures are associated with high CRE and ADC concentrations. In 2009 and 2010, 102 of 106 of the MLRs issued by the IGs of the banking regulators cited high CRE concentrations. 92 of 106 specifically cited ADC loans in particular as a contributing factor in bank failures. In the 106 MLRs, 76 of the banks reviewed were community banks. For example, the MLR for one failed bank—which contains findings similar to those in this article. findings related to CRE loans, we interviewed bank and regulatory officials and analyzed ROEs. We spoke with community bank officials affiliated with 43 community banks in a number of states. Most of the bank officials with whom we spoke were located in California, Georgia, and Texas based on our nonprobability sample. We initiated contact with 62 banks drawn from this sample and interviewed all of the 21 bank officials who responded to us. We interviewed officials from 22 additional banks that either testified before Congress on the OCC or reviewed reports from all four of its districts. on bank lending. With assistance from a research librarian, we conducted searches of research databases and report sources. We also sought and reviewed studies cited by the American Bankers Association (ABA) and the Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA) All studies included published papers released between 1991 and 2010. Based on our selection criteria, we determined that six studies were sufficient for our purposes. We analyzed the methodologies underlying these studies and determined that they were sound. The study was published in the Journal of Economic Literature.

ROUGE-1: 74.35, ROUGE-2: 69.26, ROUGE-L: 20.85
BERTScore: 57.48

==============================================
==================== [8/100] ====================
Summary:
would impose a visa ban and an asset freeze on human rights abusers. A provision in the National Defense Authorization Act of 2012 ( P.L. 112-81 ), signed into law on December 31, 2011, that calls for a plan to provide defensive weaponry to Georgia. The Administration's foreign assistance budget for FY2013 submitted to Congress in February 2012 requests $52 million for Russia. Most of it aimed to continue support for democratization, and the Administration additionally has notified Congress of plans to create a $50 million fund to further support these efforts. has condemned such aid as interference in Russia's internal affairs. He may tighten restrictions on such aid for non-governmental organizations or even ban some aid activities. Ongoing congressional concerns about democratization, human rights, and trade will continue and may have been heightened by the Russian election outcome. Russia's legislature will give approval for Russia's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) The growth of U.S. trade and investment would be facilitated by further democratization and human rights reforms. tightening sanctions on Iran, viewing it as a further "regime change" attempt. Russia has used the same rationale in vetoing UNSC resolutions on Syria. Russia is a major arms supplier to Syria and has a Mediterranean naval docking facility at Tartus. Members of Congress have criticized Russia's veto of the Syria resolution; and S.Res. 370 condemns Russia for supplying arms to Syria. On February 24, the Putin-Medvedev "tandem" defended the veto, it faced Russian domestic as well as international criticism. of U.S. intentions." Challenges to Russia's democratic development have long been of concern to Congress. Recent legislation includes the Senate and House versions of the Magnitskiy Rule of Law bills. Many Members have condemned Russia's invasion of Georgia in 2008, the death of lawyer Sergey Magnitkiy after being detained and tortured in a Russian prison in 2009, and the re-sentencing of businessman/oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovskiy in 2010 to several more years in prison. "clear victory," and praised the significant level of civic engagement in the election. At the same time, she urged Russian authorities to address shortcomings mentioned in the OSCE report. She stated that the "EU looks forward to working with the incoming Russian President" to implement pledges of economic and political reforms. The Administration has pointed to successes of the U.S.-Russia "reset" of relations as including approval by Russia in 2009 for the land and air transit of military supplies to support NATO forces in Afghanistan. On other U.S.-Russia foreign policy issues, differences have remained or emerged in recent months. The United States, for example, continues to call for Russia to withdraw its troops from occupied areas of Georgia. In early 2011, Russia abstained on a UNSC resolution calling for a "no-fly zone" to protect civilians in Libya. Almost immediately, Russia denounced NATO actions in Libya as aimed at "regime change" and proclaimed that it would not support another UNSCresolution. some opposition politicians with whom he had met. However, he has reported that he has had fruitful meetings with Russian officials since this criticism. One positive sign is that various meetings of the U.S.-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission have continued in recent weeks. Russian officials have stated that cooperation on the transit of supplies to support U.s. and NATO operations in Afghanistan will not be linked to other issues. Russia continues to support this transit because it helps stanch terrorist threats aimed at Russia emanating from Afghanistan. Putin rejected an argument that U.S.-Russia relations were "cooling off" Putin: "I don't think we are seeing a cooling.... We have a constant dialogue" Putin said he had warm relations with President Obama, whom he viewed as desiring. He praised the START Treaty and WTO accession, as "useful" and "welcome" to Russia-U.S. relations. "In general we have built a partnership over the key issues on the international agenda," he said. missile defense made it unlikely that a NATO-Russia Council meeting would be held in Chicago, and speculated that Putin may not attend the NATO Summit. Clapper suggested that there would be "more continuity than change" in Russian domestic and foreign policy over the next year under a Putin presidency. He projected that Putin would not reverse the course of U.S.-Russian relations, but they might be more "challenging" since Putin has an "instinctive distrust" of the United States. The anti-Americanism exhibited by Putin during the campaign could put a strain on future cooperation under the U.S.-Russia "reset" It is possible that the opposition protests continue in Russia into the summer and are met by a government crackdown. Soon after he arrived in Moscow in December 2011, new U.K. Ambassador Michael McFaul was accused on state-owned television of providing orders and money to the opposition. The U.N. Security Council passed a resolution this week condemning the Russian government's use of force against protesters. President-elect Putin is expected to attend the Group of 8 (G-8) industrialized nations meeting at Camp David, Maryland, on May 19-20. The Administration has suggested that Obama and Putin may hold a summit on the sidelines of the G-8 meeting. Some observers have warned that if European missile defense issues remain contentious at the time of this NATO Summit, Putin may deliver a harsh anti-U.S. speech. On February 24, 2012, one Russian official appeared to urge Putin to indicate readiness before the Camp David and Chicago meetings for "serious talks" Challenges to Russia's democratic development have long been of concern to Congress. The Obama Administration has been critical of the apparently flawed Russian presidential election. Some in Congress also have criticized the conduct of the election, but have endorsed continued engagement, while others have called for stepping back and reevaluating the Administration's engagement policy. Congress may consider the implications of another Putin presidency, lagging lagging behind the U.S. in some areas of economic growth, such as the energy sector and the economy. large number of Russian citizens who turned out to monitor the election. President Obama telephoned President-elect Putin to congratulate him on his electoral victory. The European Union's High Representative Catherine Ashton on March 5 "took note" of Putin's election victory. Other Western governments appeared to take similar viewpoints, including the UK, France, Germany, and the U.S., which all congratulated Putin on his election victory on March 9, 2012, and looked forward to meeting him in May 2012. Putin stressed that he was running for president on the platform that Medvedev would be nominated as prime minister. Some observers suggest that a Prime Minister Medvede would have substantial authority as a former president. According to this view, Putin would be unlikely to fire Prime MinisterMedvedev, at least in the short term. However, prime ministers have been replaced by Putin (and former President Yeltsin) when the economy has declined. The current prime minister has announced several democratization initiatives in his state of the nation address. Former Russian President Vladimir Putin served two elected terms from 2000 to 2008. He was required to step down due to a constitutional limit to two successive terms. He endorsed his then-First Deputy Prime Minister Dmitriy Medvedev as his choice to be the next president. Putin was elected by a wide margin in March 2008, and upon taking office nominated Putin to be his prime minister. In September 2011, Prime Minister Putin and President Medvede were sworn in as the new leaders of Russia. whether a Putin presidency can implement substantial economic and democratic reforms. Some critics have argued that Putin is not attuned to making such reforms, and that he will face rising civil discontent during his third term in office. Some observers have speculated that Putin may not follow through on his announced plans to nominate Medvedev as his successor. Most observers discount such a scenario, but argue that Russian political and economic institutions and civil society will face substantial strains to adapt to the long-term demands of a modern global economy. suggested that former Russian Finance Minister Alexey Kudrin might make a good choice as prime minister. He stated that the United States wanted a "strong, vibrant, and growing Russia," and good U.S.-Russia relations. The former Russian finance minister is now the head of Russia's state-owned bank, Vnesheconombank (Vneshconombank). Vneshomenkov is also a former Russian deputy prime minister, and served as the country's finance minister in the 1990s. to participate in televised debates with the other candidates, but appeared extensively on television in the guise of carrying out his duties as prime minister. Also, from mid-January through late February, he published seven long articles in major newspapers. These "election manifesto" articles covered such policy issues as ethnicity, the economy, democracy, socioeconomic problems, national security, and foreign policy. In the first overview article, Putin boasted that during his rule, he helped "deliver Russia from the blind alley of civil war" Putin also called for greater efforts to combat corruption, which he claimed had strengthened when young greedy people had moved into the civil service. In general, the articles appeared to be a reiteration of existing policies and sentiments, rather than a forum for launching new initiatives, according to many observers. Besides these efforts, Putin boosted or promised large increases in military and government pay, pensions, and student stipends. These benefits may have made many voters very receptive to his argument that they should elect him in order to preserve their benefits. a decade distinguished by one of the world's fastest economic growth rates. In the democracy article, he argued that there was no democracy in Russia in the 1990s, only "anarchy and oligarchy" He defined this democracy in terms of the rights of Russians to employment, free healthcare, and education. However, he warned against creating a contentious electoral environment of "buffoons" rather than one where "responsible" people are elected. He called for retaining a strong federal government and a strong Russian state. announced that they would exchange places so that Putin could re-assume the presidency. The two leaders claimed that they had agreed to consider this switch before Medvedev had been elected in 2008. This announcement created a great deal of resentment among many Russians who felt that a backroom deal had been foisted on them. The resentment was mostly low-key at first, but signs included polls showing growing dissatisfaction with Putin and Medvedeva. The trigger for wider open discontent was a December 2011 election to Russia's legislature, the Duma, that was widely viewed by many Russians as not free and fair. Putin and other observers have pointed to this growing middle class as major participants in the protests that began after the Duma election. Putin reportedly garnered a relatively low 47% of the vote. To some small degree, Putin and Medvedev have become cognizant that this rising middle class increasingly will demand reforms and have already offered some accommodative gestures. A major question is whether Putin will be able to deliver on his promises to reform the economy and the economy in a way that will benefit the middle class. 72 higher-level territorial electoral commissions. Putin (and outgoing President Medvedev) face rising dissatisfaction by many Russians with what are viewed as tainted elections, corruption, and other political and human rights problems. According to some Russian sociologists, about one-quarter of the Russian population belongs to the middle class and this portion could grow to one-third by the end of the decade. These individuals, including many business owners and private-sector employees, want a government that is not corrupt and follows the rule of law. It remains to be seen whether the impetus to create and strengthen civil society organizations will be sustained, particularly if a new Putin administration cracks down on such efforts. The State Department issued a statement that the United States "looks forward to working with the President-elect after ... he is sworn in" The statement pointed to the results of the preliminary report of the OSCE in stating that the "election had a clear winner with an absolute majority," but also urged the Russian government to address shortcomings mentioned in the report. stated that the United States was not seeking to dictate to Russia. He endorsed an idea that Putin not run again after his third term in office. Dreier also praised Medvedev's request for an examination of the sentence against Khodorkovskiy and Khodorovskii. He said the U.S. "could provide a little bit of advice to a country that is just now beginning to enter its third decade of democracy and obviously has had more than a few challenges" Medvedev made proposals in aederation speech on December 22 that he stated were partly spurred by the protests. One proposal was to restore gubernatorial elections, which Putin had abolished in 2004. Putin voiced qualms about this initiative, requesting that he retain control over who may run in such elections, and the draft bill reportedly contains such a provision. Another vague proposal by Medvedev was to increase the openness of legislative elections. Some observers had hoped that this would include the restoration of gubernatorial elections. Putin has asserted that the protests had no bearing on these initiatives. Congress may consider whether to grant Permanent Normal Trade Relations (PNTR) to Russia. Russia's human rights and democratization record may well be part of the debate. On March 5, 2012, Representative David Dreier, chairman of the House Democracy Partnership, congratulated Putin on his election victory, but objected to Putin's election night victory speech which appeared to characterize the U.S. as interfering in Russia's domestic affairs. The ratification of WTO accession by mid-2012 could lead to PNTR. Vladimir Churov proclaimed just after the polls closed that only a tiny percentage would prove valid. Zhirinovskiy and Mironov immediately congratulated Putin for what they termed an honest win. Zyuganov and Prokhorov alleged that electoral irregularities meant that the election was not free and fair. According to the final report of the CEC, Putin won 63.6% of 71.8 million votes cast, CEC says. All but Zyug anov met with Putin on March 5, where a discussion of each candidate's platform proposals took place. somewhat less than the 71.3% he had received in his last presidential election in 2004. Some of Mironov's expected supporters instead may have voted for Prokhorov, reducing his result below that gained by his A Just Russia Party in the Duma election. Moscow was the only major city where Putin failed to get over 50% of the vote, even though there may have been a concerted effort to inflate Putin's vote count in the city. Chechnya continued its tradition of reporting a high turnout (99.6%) and vote for Putin. businesses that were gathered up and checked by supervisors to make sure that the employees had voted for Putin. Golos concluded in its preliminary report on the election that although there appeared to be somewhat fewer irregularities than during the Duma election, the presidential election was not free and fair. At a press conference, Golos also stated that its ballot count had given Putin just over 50% of the vote, giving him a win in the first round. Russian physicist Sergey Shpilkin estimated that Putin may actually have received about 58% of the vote. Many voters may well have voted for Putin as the "lesser evil," according to some observers. Over one-quarter of those polled stated that they would never vote for an "oligarch" like Prokhorov (he is said to be the third-richest man in Russia) These negative views greatly hampered the effectiveness of these candidates' campaign efforts, and may have contributed to Medvedev-Putin government's success in wooing wavering voters. The Russian government is allowing protests "for free elections" and holding opposition presidential candidate meetings. Putin and Medvedev hosted a large pre-planned outdoor victory rally and concert in Moscow. Putin proclaimed that the voters had rebuffed attempts to "break up the state and usurp power" The pro-Putin crowds had gathered well before the last polling places in Russia had closed, which ostensibly is illegal. Even before receiving or reviewing most reports of electoral violations, CEC head said there had been no violations of the law. The CEC chief said there were no reports of any electoral violations. The anti-American theme also was prominent in a number of supposedly non-partisan talk shows and "documentaries" aired on state-owned or controlled television. Several major Russian polling organizations are owned by the government or receive government contracts, so their objectivity was of concern. Some critics have argued that VTsIOM's polls were an announcement of.betray their motherland, but to stay with us, to work for [Russia's] benefit and its people. And love it the way we do. Critics point to Putin's award of the Order for Services to the Fatherland to VTsIOM after the 2007-2008 election cycle as evidence of this collusion. On February 27, the last permitted day to release polling results, VT'sIOM estimated that Putin would garner nearly 59% of the vote, so that a second round of voting would not be necessary. The government pointed to the polls as evidence that the results were valid and not due to ballot-box stuffing, according to these critics.  262 monitors led by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) concluded that the election was well organized but that there were several problems. Some of the monitors at a press conference stated that they had not viewed it as free and fair. According to the report, Prime Minister Putin received an advantage in media coverage, and authorities mobilized local authorities.ballot box stuffing, by inflating the voter turnout and allocating these votes to Putin, and by other means, the monitors said. The OSCE reported that the government did not hinder demonstrators calling for fair elections. The report also raised concerns that precinct polling place chairpersons generally appeared to belong to the ruling United Russia Party or were state employees. On election day, the OSCE monitors assessed voting positively overall in the over 1,000 polling places they visited. But witnessed irregularities in vote-counting in nearly one-third of the 98 polling stations visited and in about 15% of the polling places. The OSCE also reported that many monitors at polling places, and installed webcams in most polling place. independent Russian activists, including video of individuals allegedly admitting that they had been paid to vote repeatedly. "hundreds" of buses parked in Moscow that allegedly had carried Putin's supporters into the city to inflate the voting results there for Putin. The performance of the webcams was uneven. Many were not focused on the ballot boxes or views were blocked, or they malfunctioned. The independent Golos (Voice) monitoring group reported the heavy use of "carousel voting," in which buses carried groups that voted at several polling places. owned REN TV showed a program warning that if Putin was not elected, Russia would descend into civil war and destruction within a few months at the hands of the opposition. In an attempt to convince the public that the election would be free and fair, Prime Minister Putin announced in mid-December 2011 that two webcams would be placed in each of about 94,500 polling places. Most of these were installed. Individuals who pre-registered were permitted to view the voting and vote-counting on-line (the latter after a delay until all polls were closed). Analysts have viewed these and many other requirements imposed on prospective minor party and independent candidates as too restrictive and as limiting political participation. Of the 17 individuals who initially announced they would run for the presidency, some dropped out and many were disqualified on technical grounds. Only three managed to submit signatures. Two out of the three were disqualified by the CEC on the grounds that over 5% of their signatures were invalid. The signatures of the third prospective candidate, businessman Mikhail Prokhorov, were also disqualified. were deemed valid and he was placed on the ballot. According to some critics, Mezentsev was a "technical candidate," who was nominated only to ensure that if all other candidates withdrew, Putin would still have an opponent. Yavlinskiy was deemed ineligible on the grounds that some signatures gathered electronically were not handwritten in ink and therefore were invalid. Many observers argued that he was eliminated because he would have been the only candidate left on the election ballot, and so was no longer needed. Five candidates were able to register for the March 4, 2012, presidential election. Four of the five candidates were nominated by parties with seats in the Duma. Other prospective candidates from minor parties were required to gather 2 million signatures of support, with no more that 50,000 in each of at least 40 regions nationwide, within about one month. Many of the candidates were self-nominated or had not been nominated by a political party but by a person or organization. The election was held on March 4. of constituency races and the possibility of self-nominated candidates (Putin had abolished these in 2005). The bill submitted to the Duma called for altering electoral procedures so that voters in 225 new districts would select a party list with identifiable local candidates. Golos researchers have termed these two bills disappointing "propaganda" exercises. Another bill may prove more reformist, however, by greatly reducing the registration requirements for new parties, which may permit many currently unrepresented interests in society to participate in political life. only bona fide opposition candidate on the ballot. Of the registered candidates, all but Prokhorov had run in previous presidential elections and lost badly. Zyuganov and Zhirinovskiy had run several times. Mironov ran in the 2004 presidential election, where he praised Putin's policies. He announced his candidacy just two days after a large opposition demonstration on December 10, 2011, raising speculation that he was urged to run by the government as a candidate who might attract the votes of some of the liberal protesters. revitalized opposition political parties. Udaltsov, who represents the "left wing" nationalists among the protesters, has disagreed. Business interests appeared to welcome Prokhorov's third-place showing and his indication that he would continue a role in politics by forming a party. The proposal also was endorsed by Putin on March 5, and has been endorsed by Mironov and other opposition leaders. It would allow A Just Russia Party to join with the Communist Party to form a new social democratic coalition. Small protest rallies reportedly numbering up to several hundred people occurred in several other cities of Russia. Putin victory rallies reportedly attended by 1,000-7,000 people also were held in several cities across Russia on March 5. The Communist Party has planned to hold protests against the election in coming weeks. Some advocates of "right wing" democratization among the protesters, such as Yavlinskiy, have called for shifting the focus from rallies to organizing new or new protests.. Some observers have discerned a lessening turnout at the protests. 30 other prisoners who had been highlighted by opposition politician Boris Nemtsov as "political prisoners" He also ordered the Prosecutor General to examine the mid-2011 denial of party registration to the Party of People's Freedom. The initial protests after Putin's election by those who view the electoral process as tainted appeared smaller in size and number than after the Duma election. Authorities approved a protest rally in Pushkin Square in central Moscow on March 5, along with Putin victory rallies elsewhere in the city. Demonstrations against the election began even before the polls closed. Over the next few weeks, several protests of up to 100,000 or more people were held in Moscow and many other cities. These protesters demanded that a new Duma election be held, but also called for a scheduled March 4, 2012, presidential election to be free and fair. At first, these protests appeared to shock the Putin government, leading to some arrests, but the government soon decided to permit the protest rallies as a means. The government claimed that over 130,000 supporters attended the rally, although the stadium's capacity is about 84,000. Some individuals reportedly had arrived by bus or train after trips lasting more than 24 hours. In addition to these pro-Putin events, a wave of television shows was launched extolling Putin's rule and condemning alleged U.S. and opposition "subversion" against Russia. Authorities moved to harass and suppress independent vote monitoring groups, the Internet, and certain "old media" newspapers and broadcasters. if not disgruntled voters, including by offering opposition figures jobs and by making some changes in government postings. Russia's ambassador to NATO, the nationalist Dmitriy Rogozin, was elevated to deputy prime minister in a seeming effort to attract the nationalist vote. Also, the Putin campaign orchestrated large-scale rallies, the most prominent of which was a pro-Putin demonstration on February 4 in Moscow aimed at rivaling the attendance at a "for free elections" rally, and a campaign rally in the Luzhniki stadium in Moscow. the shift in tactics by the Putin campaign involved blaming the United States and the West for the protests. This anti-Americanism aimed to define the election as a patriotic vote for Putin. After Secretary Clinton voiced criticism of the Duma election in early December 2011, Putin accused her of "giving orders" for the launch of protests. Rogozin even asserted that Secretary Clinton and former Secretary Madeleine Albright wanted to destroy Russia in order to take over Siberia's mineral resources. At the campaign rally at the Luzhniki stadium on February 23, Putin urged voters "not to look abroad ... and not" Putin government and campaign made several accusations that opposition politicians and other enemies of Putin were involved in criminal conspiracies. The most sensational was an announcement in late February that Ukrainian police had uncovered a plot by Chechen terrorists to assassinate Putin after the election. Other sensational accusations included those by Putin that oppositionist politicians planned to kill one of their own in order to blame the death on him. Another accusation was that oppositionists planned to stuff ballots marked with Putin's name into ballot boxes to declare that the election was illegitimate.

ROUGE-1: 87.39, ROUGE-2: 80.79, ROUGE-L: 25.73
BERTScore: 59.42

==============================================
==================== [9/100] ====================
Summary:
they can have in relying on the estimates for determining stock abundance and hence for setting allowable harvests of the fish. With such wide variations, it is important to provide uncertainty ranges, otherwise management may make inappropriate decisions. While assessors told us that their stock assessments included some information about differences in estimated biomass when using the estimates, they said they did not provide such information to the public. The 2003 assessment of bocaccio biomass, however, estimated 6,506 metric tons in 2002—more than doubling the previous estimate. the ocean, but are fishing areas that they are allowed to fish and they believe have the most fish; fishing restrictions, such as a total allowable catch, can limit the amount of fish being caught; and catch data have often been inaccurate for a variety of reasons. For these reasons, we did not change the report. 40. NOAA commented that the doubling of estimated bocaccio biomass in 2003 was due to factors that would not be addressed in a standard statistical analysis. Although a standard Statistical analysis may uncertainty in assessments. In a review of the 2002 canary assessment, the stock assessment review panel recommended that standard estimates of uncertainty be included in future assessments. However, the bocaccio, canary, darkblotched, and yelloweye assessments did not present a measure of uncertainty associated with the biomass estimates. Without uncertainty ranges, it is difficult for regional councils and NMFS to know how much confidence they have in their biomass estimates, the report says. It is difficult to determine the reliability of the stock Assessment without them.  NMFS says it stands by its conclusions that the five stock assessments were questionable. NOAA provided additional comments to show the usefulness of the assessments, even if some of the input data used in the assessments contained errors, the report says. NMFS added language to the report to address NOAA’s concern. Specifically, we expanded upon the fact that NMFS used the best information available at the time the stock assessmentswere conducted. The report adds that four of the assessment reports did not present the uncertainties associated with the biomass estimates. recommendation to clearly present the uncertainties in the stock assessments. NOAA said it is desirable to have both a quantitative analysis of model uncertainty and an evaluation of the consequences of alternative model scenario. NOAA agreed with the report recommendation to develop a comprehensive plan that integrates the stock assessment plan. The methods used and the completeness of the uncertainty characterization varied from assessment to assessment, according to the report. The report was published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) on November 14, 2013. not fully address the doubling of an estimate, an assessment without an uncertainty range does not quantify and communicate any of the uncertainty. For this reason, we did not change the report. In addition to the person named above, Leo G. Acosta, Kristine N. Braaten, Allen T. Chan, David Dornisch, Alan Kasdan, Robert Marek, Cynthia C. Norris, Carol Herrnstadt Shulman, and Tama R. Weinberg made key contributions to this report. A 2002 National Research Council report found that the inclusion of NMFS survey data was the best option for a reliable estimate of abundance. Such surveys use an unbiased statistical design, control sampling locations, and provide for quality assurance. The non-NMFS data assessors use include commercial catch data and recreational catch data. Northwest Center officials said that to obtain reliable results, each stock assessment should include at least one source ofNMFS-collected data of sufficient scope and accuracy because such surveys are unbiased and scientifically designed. Lacking a standard process, some assessors reviewed the quality of the raw non-NMFS data. Assessors who reviewed for data quality found mistakes that they believed made some of the data unusable or that could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For example, the assessor for the 2002 yelloweye stock assessment found numerous errors in the recreational catch data, such as attributing the catch from an entire fishing vessel to a single fisherman, and thus did not use the data. Commercial catch data frequently have inconsistencies. California, Oregon, and Washington require fishermen to enter catch and location information into logbooks, but logbooks are often incomplete and inaccurate. While the stock assessment review panels evaluated the assessments, the panels did not evaluate the quality of the raw data used in the assessments.doing so could have resulted in overestimating the biomass. According to a Northwest Center official, several assessors have raised concerns about data quality and accessibility in feedback meetings. In response to these concerns, the Northwest Center has recently begun. previous stock assessments, gathers available data about the species being assessed, runs the data through computer-generated models, and estimates the species’ total biomass. Stock assessors use NMFS-collected data, such as stock surveys conducted on NOAA vessels or contracted commercial fishing vessels, as well as data collected by non-NMFS sources. Commercial and recreational fisheries data—the amount and composition of fish caught from a particular stock, whether caught intentionally or not. Stock abundance—surveys of how many fish constitute a stock’s total size or weight. such as commercial and recreational catch data. Catch data do not provide the species’ relative or absolute biomass, according to NMFS officials. For example, catch data alone is insufficient because fishermen are not randomly sampling the ocean but are fishing areas that they are allowed to fish and they believe have the most fish. fishing restrictions, such as a total allowable catch, can limit the amount of fish being caught. catch data have often been inaccurate for a variety of reasons, including imprecise accounting for dead fish tossed back into the ocean. and non-NMFS data, we were not implying that non- NMFS organizations could not conduct useful fishery-independent surveys. For these reasons, we did not change the report. 37. We believe the Pacific hake biomass estimates are questionable because the assessment used non-NHFS data that NMFS did not check or subject to standard standards. 38. NMFS generally refers to its data as fisheryindependent data and to non- NHFS data as Fishery-dependent data. four rockfish species we reviewed, although they were based on the best information available at the time the assessments were conducted. Four of the assessments did not have at least one NMFS-collected data source of sufficient scope and accuracy. According to stock assessors, relying solely on survey data from trawlable waters increases the uncertainty of stock assessments. We believe that certain internal control activities, such as a standard process for ensuring data reliability, surveys and ecosystem studies, and the greater the accuracy of the data, the more reliable the results. data sources, four of the five assessments did not use NMFS survey data or the NMFS data used covered only a portion of the species’ habitats. Bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched live in both the trawlable and untrawlable habitats. Yelloweye live almost exclusively in the rocky habitat that NMFS trawl surveys cannot cover. NMFS reported in 2003 that 77 percent of the survey area was trawlables and 23 percent was untrawlables. data reliability testing. Assessors who reviewed raw non-NMFS data for other stock assessments found mistakes that either made some of the data unusable or could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For this reason, we did not change the report. NOAA commented that bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched assessments all obtain adequate abundance trend information from the NMFS bottom trawl surveys. The National Research Council found that the inclusion of NMFS survey data was the best option for a reliable estimate of abundance.  stock assessors use a variety of data, including NMFS data and non-NMFS data, in developing their assessments. Two key pieces of NMFS survey data are the shelf and slope bottom trawl survey and the acoustic survey. Other data that assessors sometimes use include larval surveys (data for fish in their earliest stage) and recruitment data.plans to increase the scope and accuracy of its collected data, as additional funds become available; is implementing changes that will help ensure the reliability of non- NMFSData. different data sources (sensitivity analyses), the mathematical model that NMFS uses to estimate biomass does not calculate uncertainty ranges. NMFS is updating the model so that it can compute uncertainty ranges; NMFS expects to use the updated model for all 2005 stock assessments. The Pacific hake assessor used a mathematical model (AD Model Builder) that could compute uncertainty range and included these ranges in the Pacific haKE assessment report. NM FS has taken some steps recommended in the Marine Fisheries Stock Assessment Improvement Plan to improve the quantity, quality, and type of data. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through the Internet. The Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full- text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products. The site features a search engine to help you find the documents you are looking for at a faster and easier rate. GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. To have GAO e-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to e-mails alerts” under the “Order GAO Products” heading. The list contains links to the full-text document files, as well as key words and phrases to help you locate documents. NOAA agreed with the report recommendation to continue collecting more types of data for groundfish assessments where reliable data are now lacking. NOAA said that the reliability of stock assessments will be improved if NMFS survey efforts are expanded and additional NMFS fishery data are collected. NOAA also agreed that it is important to ensure that these interagency data committees continue to highlight the need for standardized quality control procedures for the collection of data. NMFS said, through its west coast fishery science centers, it participates on inter agency data committees, to develop quality assurance protocols and to assess quality of non-NMFS data. The Northwest Center plans to conduct a data quality workshop in July 2004 to formally establish the roles and responsibilities of the data stewards. Data stewards are responsible for helping assessors compile relevant data and for conducting quality assurance and quality control checks on the data. In 1998, the National Research Council recommended that NMFS include realistic measures of uncertainty in its stock assessments. NMFS’ 2001 stock assessment improvement plan also recognized the need to better quantify and communicate the data and its value to the community. The Northwest Center will conduct the workshop in June 2004. does not check or have a standard process to verify that these data have been reviewed for reliability. Some assessors chose to review the raw data, while others did not. Assessors who voluntarily reviewed raw non- NMFS data found mistakes that either made some of the data unusable or could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For these reason, we did not change the report. NOAA commented that it is more pertinent to focus on the degree of standardization of the survey data than the source. NOAA said that while much remains to be done, long-term planning efforts and coordination among field and headquarters are ongoing. NOAA also provided technical comments that we incorporated in this report as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution of the report until 7 days from the report date. At that time, we will be able to provide a more detailed response to your questions. The full report is available in the appendix II. The October 2001 stock assessment improvement plan identified three scenarios (tiers) to consider when analyzing the resources needed to improve stock assessments. The three tiers of assessment improvements are as follows: Tier 1—improve stock assessments using existing data without initiating new data collection programs. Tier 2—conduct baseline monitoring of species, which in most cases requires sampling the species at least every 1 to 3 years. Tier 3—implement “next generation” stock assessments by explicitly incorporating ecosystem considerations and environmental effects in assessments. improvement in the quantity of data collected for use in stocks assessments is a key component to achieving Tier 2 status. Northwest Center officials said that the quality of the data improves with more frequent surveys and more randomly selected survey locations. The assessments become more reliable because the data cover a longer period of time, producing better population trend information.interested in stock assessment science. Planning—develop integrated program initiatives by preparing a comprehensive plan that combines the improvement plan with its complementary plans. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The Northwest Center is continuing its efforts to calibrate survey vessel equipment. The improvement plan also recommended that NMFS provide additional training to ensure that qualified NMFS staff are available now and in the future. The plan recommended the development of a comprehensive training program and more professional developmental opportunities for NMFS’ scientific staff. A comprehensive plan would allow NMFS to combine the improvement plan with other complementary plans, such as the NOAA Fisheries Data Acquisition Plan and the NMFS Social Sciences Plan. The Northwest Center officials said they try to meet the training and professional development needs of theirscientific staff. a number of recommendations to improve stock assessments. Data collection: Pursue new initiatives to expand data collection efforts. Communication: Educate constituents about NMFS’ strategies for improving stock assessment. Training: augment existing programs that support graduate students NMFS to better integrate and coordinate program initiatives for improvingStockAssessment.com. Other: Develop partnerships and cooperative research programs with other entities, such as state agencies, commercial and recreational fishing organizations, and individuals to improve the quantity, quality, and type of data collected. Pacific hake, also called Pacific whiting, is generally found off the west coast of North America. It is one of many species of hake distributed in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Fishermen use mid-water trawls and generally fish over the ocean bottom at depths of 100 to 500 meters. Pacific hake was declared overfished in 2002 because the 2002 stock assessment estimated that the species was over-fished.darkblotched rockfish, and yelloweye rockfish. Pacific hake biomass at 700,000 metric tons. By 2004, the biomass was estimated at between 2.7 and 4.2 million metric tons, and Pacific hake is no longer considered overfished. Bocaccio rockfish generally inhabit waters off the coast of northern Baja, Mexico to Alaska. They are commercially fished using trawls, hook-and-line and gillnets. They commonly live over rocky areas or open areas of the ocean’s floor to about 320 meters. rockfish are found in the waters from Santa Catalina Island, California to the Bering Sea on soft bottom areas at about 29 to 549 meters deep. Commercial fishery concentrations are located off the coasts of California and Oregon. Darkblotched rockfish are caught primarily by commercial trawls and contribute to both commercial and recreational fishing. NMFS determined that darkblotches rockfish was overfished in 2000, when the last full stock assessment was conducted; it was updated in 2003. almost exclusively inhabit rocky areas from northern Baja, Mexico to the Aleutian Islands, Alaska. Yelloweye rockfish, found in depths ranging from 15 to 550 meters, are caught using both trawl nets and line gear. NMFS determined that the species was overfished in 2002. The reliability of NMFS’ stock assessments is questionable for the Pacific hake and Pacific tilapia, as well as yelloweye and Pacific bluegill. The 2002 stock assessment estimated the yelloweye biomass at 2,325 metric tons in 2001. Canary rockfish inhabit the northeastern Pacific Ocean, from northern Baja, Mexico to the western Gulf of Alaska. Adult canary rock fish are primarily found along the continental shelf, from 46 to 457 meters deep. Canary rockfish are harvested commercially using trawl nets and hook-and-line and are also considered an important species for recreational fishermen. NMFS declared canaryRockfish as overfished in 2000. The 2002 stock assessment estimated the canary Rockfish biomass at 6,197 metric tons. on the ocean ecosystem, such as water temperature or salinity, plankton composition, or ocean currents. Through 2003, 24 of the 82 species of Pacific groundfish have had a full quantitative stock assessment. Relying on these assessments, NMFS has declared that nine species ofPacific groundfish are overfished. The five species we reviewed in this report include Pacific hake, bocaccio rockfish, canary rockfish and four types of rockfish. We did not review the stock assessments of any of the other west coast Pacificgroundfish species. laws and agency reports and interviewed officials from NMFS. We interviewed an array of government officials and fisheries experts. We did not simulate NMFS’ stock assessment models nor evaluate the mathematical and statistical methodologies used in the models for Pacific hake, bocaccio, canary, darkblotched, and yelloweye. We revised the report to indicate that the Northwest Center is responsible for coordinating groundfish stock assessments and to clarify the shared responsibilities of the west coast science centers. GAO reviewed National Marine Fisheries Service stock assessments for five species of Pacific groundfish. NOAA generally agreed with the report’s accuracy and concurred with the reports recommendations. NOAA said it was concerned about the report's conclusion that the reliability of stock assessments is questionable for the five species reviewed. Report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please call me at (202) 512-3841 or Keith Oleson at (415) 904-2218. Northwest and Southwest Centers. We revised the report to include NOAA’s recommended definition of stock abundance. Bocaccio survey data for untrawlable habitats, as stated in comment 12, was unavailable. For this reason, we did not change the report. The report was updated to more explicitly distinguish the five species related to our report from other overfished Pacific groundfish. It was also revised to more clearly describe the distribution of Pacific hake. And it was revised to clarify the role of the review panel. by commercial and recreational fishermen or unintentionally caught and discarded. Data sources include fishing logbooks, dockside samples, and onboard observations, among others. Data on the abundance of juvenile and larval fish (fish at their earliest stage), which helps scientists forecast the size of a particular stock in the future. Synoptic oceanographic sampling—data data on the relationship between a fish stock and its physical environment, as well the relationship of a fishStock to other species. Data about the age and sex composition of the stock, age at first maturity, fertility, average lifespan and natural mortality. environment within which they exist provides a better understanding of the effects of the ecosystem on the groundfish fisheries. Although research is ongoing to develop ecosystem information, only a limited amount of the data is collected and used in stock assessments. For example, ecosystem data are collected during shelf and slope bottom trawl surveys as time and resources allow. However, this information is not widely incorporated into stock assessment. For the five species we reviewed, only the boccacio assessment used ecosystem data—information on the temperature of the ocean’s surface. Stock assessments form the scientific basis used by regional councils to determine biologically sustainable harvests and guide the monitoring and rebuilding of overfished and threatened stocks. They provide estimates of the species population, which NMFS uses to set harvest limits that allow for sustainability and/or recovery. While stock assessment results often change from assessment report to assessment report, the more types of information used in the assessments the more accurate they are. For each species, the assessor reviews designed to provide a comprehensive framework for Pacific groundfish. GAO: reliability of the five assessments we reviewed is questionable and could easily be misconstrued to mean all these assessments are an unreliable basis for management of the west coast groundfish fishery. NOAA: The five assessments GAO reviewed all passed scientific review and are serving as the basis for formal status determination and fishery management. Without a comprehensive, integrated improvement plan, funding requests and planned actions to improve the stock assessments may not be coordinated, jeopardizing successful and timely implementation of assessment improvements. The Pacific Fishery Management Council (Pacific Council) released its initial Fishery management plan for groundfish in 1982. The Pacific Council’s goal is to have long-range plans for managing groundfish fisheries that will promote a stable planning environment for the seafood industry and will maintain the health of the resource and environment. To help achieve these goals, stock management plans are being developed by the Pacific Council to help protect and restore the fishery's long-term health and stability. The council is also working to develop appropriate plans for conserving and managing fisheries under their jurisdiction. The Northwest Center requested $6.2 million to enhance the calibration of vessel equipment. The Northwest Center did not receive its full funding request, in part, because NMFS didn't receive all the funding it had requested. According to NMFS officials, it is unrealistic for a science center to request more funds than are available in its appropriation, even if it needs more. NMFS allocated $3.6 million (58 percent of funds the Northwest Centre requested) to the Northwest Center to implement marine stock assessment improvements. realistically obtain, rather than the amount the improvements would actually cost, according to NMFS officials. The Northwest Center’s budget requests for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 are preliminary requests submitted before the Northwest Center received its fiscal year 2003 funding. The Center will likely submit revised budget requests that account for both its unfunded needs from fiscal years 2001 through 2003 and items that were unexpectedly funded in fiscal year2003. The preliminary budget requests do not incorporate any unanticipated problems or data gaps that have been identified.  NMFS’ 2001 West Coast Groundfish Research Plan estimated that almost twice as much money would be needed to implement top-priority improvements to Pacific groundfish stock assessments. Using key findings from its December 2003 review of the groundfish program, the Northwest Center plans to update its groundfish research plan, last published in 2001. According to NMFS, the updated groundfishResearch plan should be completed in late 2004. Wildlife, the California Department of Fish and Game, the Pacific Fishery Management Council, and the Pacific States Marine Fisheries Commission are involved in the project. The Northwest Center needs at least $8.9 million to complete ongoing and planned improvements to the stock assessments for Pacific groundfish. The actual cost of implementing remaining improvements may be even higher because the Northwest Center’s budget requests primarily reflect the amount of money the Center believed it could realistically obtain. This shortfall occurred in part because NMFS’ need to balance the requests of its six science centers against its program priorities and the available funds. According to NMFS officials, their goal is to achieve parity among the science centers in terms of their capability to conduct scientific work. The Northwest Center has concentrated most of its efforts on implementing recommendations aimed at obtaining more data. Recommendations aimed at increasing the types of data and improving their quality have not yet been fully implemented for a variety of reasons. According to Northwest Center officials, ecosystem information and coastwide recruitment surveys are two of the most critical data sets needed to ensure continuous improvement of groundfish stock assessments. The Northwest Center conducts ecosystem research as part of its Science for Ecosystem-based Management Initiative. Understanding the complex ecological relationships between fish and the. assessments are conducted on groundfish species to estimate fish populations. Since 1995, the Northwest Center has had lead responsibility for conducting stock assessments on Pacific groundfish. The Northwest Center receives assistance from other NMFS science centers, such as the Southwest Center, which conducted the bocaccio assessment. It also participates in NMFS’ National Sea Grant program to augment a Northwest Center-supported graduate study program at the University of Washington that trains stock assessment scientists. The Sea grant program provides fellowships for students interested in marine research. The Magnuson-Stevens Fisheries Conservation and Management Act granted responsibility for managing marine resources to the Secretary of Commerce. NMFS is part of Commerce’s National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) The act also established eight regional fishery management councils, each responsible for making recommendations about managing fisheries in federal waters. The eight councils include the Caribbean Council, covering waters off the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. The councils are made up of fishing industry participants and state and federal fishery managers. of California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia; Pacific Islands Center, covering the central and western Pacific Ocean; Southwest Center, primarily covering waters off the coast of California and areas throughout the Pacific and Antarctic Oceans. Southeast Center, covers waters along the continental southeastern United States as well as Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. The Magnuson-Stevens Act, as amended by the Sustainable Fisheries Act, also established national standards for fishery conservation and management. These standards deal with preventing overfishing, using scientific information, using fishery resources efficiently and minimizing bycatch. Gulf of Mexico Council, covering waters off Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and the west coast of Florida. Mid-Atlantic Council covers waters off New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina. New England Council covering waters of Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. North Pacific Council covered waters off Alaska; Pacific Council covering California, Oregon, and Washington. Western Pacific Council covers Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands and uninhabited islands. U.S. territories in the Western Pacific. NMFS has six regional science centers, which are responsible for generating the scientific information necessary for the conservation, management, and use of each region's marine resources. Alaska Center, covering the coastal oceans off Alaska and parts of the west coast of the United States. Northeast Center covering waters along the Northeast Continental Shelf from the Gulf of Maine to Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. Northwest Center covering the northeast Pacific Ocean, primarily waters off the coasts. term, provide a better understanding of the variability inherent in the population distribution and abundance. A better sense of trends and variability allow for improved short-term predictions of the status of the species. The Northwest Center has concentrated most of its efforts on implementing improvements in data quantity, such as more frequent acoustic, and shelf and slope bottom trawl surveys. Increased the frequency of the Pacific hake acoustic survey from triennially to biennially. Beginning in 2003, the survey was restructured into a single, Recruitment surveys are limited because existing funds support only yearly surveys in selected areas. To achieve the best early predictions of stock status, these officials said, recruitment surveys should be coastwide and conducted twice a year. According to Northwest Center officials, 13 full-time staff are needed to expand these and other high-priority data collection efforts, such as surveys in untrawlable habitat and expanded acoustic surveys. The lack of funding for recruitment surveys has been cited as one of the reasons for their lack of effectiveness. integrated survey with Northwest Center and Canadian officials jointly planning all survey elements. Increased the frequency of the groundfish shelf and slope bottom trawl survey from triennially to annually. Working collaboratively with the fishing industry has afforded fishermen the opportunity to become stakeholders in the data collection process. Extended the geographic range of theGroundfish shelf. and slopeBottom trawl surveys from. triennial to annually, leveraging available resources by cooperatively working with the. fishing industry. Contract with private commercial fishing vessels to conduct the surveys. trawl survey. The surveys are now coastwide from Cape Flattery, Washington to the Mexican border, adding over 300 more miles along the southern California coast. Previous surveys ended at Morro Bay, California. Efforts continue to communicate the strategies needed to improve stock assessments and to augment existing programs aimed at developing future stock assessment scientists. For example, through the Pacific Fishery Management Council, Northwest Center staff meet with their constituents, such as representatives from state agencies and the fishing industry. In addition, the Northwest Center organized a series of public meetings to discuss new initiatives. Northwest Center officials say they are to receive a dedicated research vessel sometime during calendar years 2008 or 2009, at the earliest. The implementation of comprehensive ecosystem research and data collection programs is contingent upon the funding of adedicated research vessel for west coast surveys. Better recruitment information for Pacific groundfish is a priority for Northwest Center officials, who say they hope to have the vessel in place by the end of 2008 or early 2009. The research vessel will be used to conduct shelf and slope bottom trawl surveys on the west coast. that the frequency and range of recruitment surveys are limited. The statement does not address untrawlable habitat. We revised the report to clarify that NMFS “generally uses” NMFS’s staff or contracts with outside experts. We made similar changes, as appropriate, throughout the report. The report includes the year and scope of the task force review. It also includes the “bottom” trawl survey. It includes the number and type of trawl surveys carried out. change the report. We believe that our report has addressed this issue. By referring to the West Coast Groundfish Research Plan by its complete title, we adequately distinguish between the two reports. We changed “health’ to “stock abundance’ and the footnote placement is repositioned in report. The footnote placement and citation are in accordance with GAO guidelines. For this reason, we did not change the report and believe the report adequately addresses the issue of Pacific hake in mid-water. ecosystem research. annotations for projects that do not separate out groundfish funds occur only in items that are annotated as Southwest Center projects. For this reason, we did not change the report. We changed “survivability’ to “sustainability” and added fishery “resources” for clarification. NOAA commented on the changes to the table 2 notes “a’ and “b” in our report already adequately address this issue. revised the report to include assessment “improvements.” 28. As indicated in our report, we illustrate some of the actions that the Northwest Center took to improve data quantity. 29. The example we provided is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all ecosystem research conducted on the west coast. Instead, it illustrates the type of work the Northwest. Center is conducting and the opportunities for improving. 30. We added footnote 16 to clarify the actions taken by the Southwest Center.

ROUGE-1: 72.98, ROUGE-2: 67.58, ROUGE-L: 23.71
BERTScore: 48.22

==============================================
==================== [10/100] ====================
Summary:
length of the closeout process can vary with the extent of oversight performed by the agency during the period of performance and the contract type. CMS officials told us that during fiscal year 2008, OAGM closed 581 contracts and reduced the overdue backlog to 400 contracts (from 407 reported at the end of fiscal year 2007) Yet O AGM officials could not provide support for these closures or a list of the contracts overdue for closeout. As of July 29, 2009, the total backlog of contracts eligible forCloseout was 1,611, with 594 overdue based and overdue for Closeout. CMS did not timely perform contract closeout procedures resulting in a backlog of 1,300 contracts, of which 407 were overdue for closeout as of September 30, 2007. We recommended that CMS develop a plan to reduce the number of contracts in the backlog. CMS did not provide us a closeout plan for fiscal year 2008 and the fiscal year 2009 plan was insufficient. Specifically, the plan did not include a comprehensive strategy to reduction the backlog of 4,000 contracts. Further training on invoice review procedures will be necessary. Since September 30, 2007, the number of contracts eligible for closeout has increased by 24 percent. Contract file document checklist employed by CMS at the time of our review identified key documents that may be included in a contract file. This checklist is usually completed by either the contract specialist or the contract manager. The contract file checklist was used to identify key documents for inclusion in the contract file for the first time in 2007. The document checklist was last used in 2007 and was used again in 2009. For more information, visit www.cms.gov. contracts that are eligible and overdue for closeout nor did it contain a workload analysis. The FAR establishes time standards for closing out a contract after the work is physically completed. The closeout process is an important internal control, in part, because it is generally the last opportunity for the government to detect and recover any improper payments. This is a substantial increase over the balances at the end of fiscal year 2007. Also, the total contract value of contracts eligible for closeouts has increased from $3 billion to at least $3.8 billion. The contract life cycle includes many acquisition and administrative activities. Prior to award, an agency identifies a need; develops a requirements package; determines the method of contracting. After contract award, the agency performs contract administration and contract closeout. Contract administration involves monitoring the contractor’s performance as well as reviewing and approving (or disapproving) the contractors’ request to be awarded a contract. It also involves monitoring and approving the contractor's request to work on a project for the federal government. The contract closeout process involves verifying that the goods or services were provided and that administrative matters are completed. Other tasks may include audits or reviews of the contractor’s costs and compliance with CAS. Agencies may choose among different contract types to acquire goods and services. This choice is the principal means that agencies have for allocating risk between the government and the contractor. Contract types can be grouped into three broad categories: fixed price contracts, fixed-price contracts, and long-term contracts. CMS reported total obligations for CMS contracts in fiscal year 2008 were $3.6 billion. This amount includes obligations against contracts that process Medicare claims. As of September 1, 2009, 19 contracts have been awarded to Medicare Administrative Contractors, totaling about $1 billion in obligations to date. Obligations for other- than-claims processing activities, such as the year 2007, have decreased approximately 16 percent since 1998. CMS is required to complete Medicare contracting reform by 2011, and is responsible for developing policy and regulations. the FAR, to the FAR environment through the award of contracts to Medicare Administrative Contractors. CMS projected that the transition, referred to as Medicare contracting reform, would produce administrative cost savings due to the effects of competition and contract consolidation. The transition would subject millions of dollars of CMS acquisitions to the rules, standards, and requirements for the award, administration, and termination of government contracts in the FAR. Obligations to the new Medicare administrative Contractors were first made in fiscal year 2009-10. 1-800 help line, information technology and financial management initiatives, and program management and consulting services, have increased 466 percent. These trends may be explained in part by recent changes to the Medicare program. MMA required CMS to transition its Medicare claims processing contracts, which generally did not follow Medicare claims. These specialized contractors, such as beneficiary contact center contractors and enterprise data center contractors, are categorized below as other-than-claims processing contractors, as shown in figure 1. services such as data centers, and certain financial management activities, have moved from fiscal intermediaries and carriers to specialized contractors. Health and Human Services, Administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and interested congressional committees. Copies will also be available to others on request. Report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9095 or dalykl@gao,gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs are found on the last page of this report. of this magnitude. Audits and inquiries into the issues we identified in our report should be made as soon as possible. We acknowledge that the time frames for implementing the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 added schedule pressures for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) At the same time, the compressed time frames and resulting contracting practices added risk to the contracting process. Many of the findings in the November 2007 report were a result of the 2003 Act. and Phil McIntyre (Assistant Directors) Sharon Byrd, Richard Cambosos, Abe Dymond, Patrick Frey, Jason Kelly, John Lopez, Ron Schwenn, Omar Torres, Ruth Walk, and Danietta Williams are also on the board of directors. The board includes members of the New York City Council, the City Council of New York, and the New Jersey City Council. The Board of Directors is made up of seven members, including the mayor, the city council president, the mayor's wife, the deputy mayor and the vice mayor. a streamlined set of audits and reviews, thereby enabling them to receive and perform government contracts. Develop policies and procedures that clearly assign roles and responsibilities for the timely fulfillment of CFA duties, and that include the preparation of and periodic update of a list of contractors for which the department is the CFA. In written comments on a draft of this report (reprinted in their entirety in appendix III), CMS and HHS agreed with each of our 10 new recommendations and described steps planned to address them. CFA duties were not clear among HHS and its components, including CMS. NIH was assigned responsibility to establish indirect rates for the contractors under HHS’s cognizance. HHS officials said that they did not have a process to identify the contractors for which HHS would be the CFA. Without a list that is periodically updated, HHS does not know which contractors need CFA oversight, the report says. The report also says that HHS components and contracting officers are responsible for other CFA duties. when NIH can not perform the reviews within the needed time frames to make timely contract awards, CMS’s cost/price team establishes the rates. The confusion over roles and responsibilities increases the risk that CFA responsibilities are not being timely performed, if at all. Without effective coordination, contractors may not receive the necessary oversight and the government may not be positioned to protect itself from the risk of improper payments or waste. The risks of not performing CFA duties are exacerbated by the fact that other federal agencies that use the same contractors rely on the oversight. to meet the government’s needs within a ceiling price. A T&M contract may be used only if the contracting officer prepares a determination and findings that no other contract type is suitable. In addition, since these contracts provide no positive profit incentive for the contractor to control costs or use labor efficiently, the government must conduct appropriate surveillance of contractor performance to ensure efficient methods and effective cost controls are being used. The FAR defines cognizant federal agency (CFA) as the agency responsible for the pre-award contract activities that we identified as needing improvement, nor does it delineate the roles and responsibilities of the different staff involved in the contracting process. The deficiencies identified in this report, especially those associated with FAR requirements unique to specific contract types, further highlight the need for additional guidance for contracting officers. Roles and responsibilities for implementation of CFA responsibilities not clearly defined. The FAR requires that CFAs perform certain oversight and monitoring activities. The CFA concept provides an efficient way for contractors to receive contracts. of improper payments or waste before they occur. A key concept introduced in our standards is that control activities selected for implementation be cost beneficial. A control activity can be preventive, detective, or both based on when the control occurs in the contract life cycle. We found pervasive deficiencies in internal control over contracting and payments to contractors. The internal control deficiencies occurred throughout the contracting process, that is both pre- and post-award, and increase the risk of improper payments. These deficiencies were due in part to The high percentage of deficiencies indicates a serious failure of control procedures over FAR-based acquisitions. This creates a heightened risk of making improper payments or waste. We determined a control to be “key” based on our review of the standards for internal control as well as the FAR, HHSAR, and agency policies. We also took into consideration prior audit findings and the contract types CMS most frequently used. See appendix I for additional details on the controls we tested and the statistical sample results. one instance in which a key control was not adequately implemented. Many contract actions had more than one deficiency. At least 37.2 percent of FAR-based contract actions made in fiscal year 2008 had three or more instances of not being implemented. The controls ranged from ensuring contractors had adequate accounting systems prior to the use of a cost reimbursement contract to certifying invoices for payment. The U.S. Air Force is one of the largest military contractors in the world, with more than 1,000 employees. a cost reimbursement contract to certifying invoices for payment. We selected controls to test based on our review of GAO’s standards for internal control, the Federal Acquisition Regulation requirements, and agency policies and procedures. The controls we tested are key to effective administration of the contract in that the lack of implementation would significantly increase the risk of improper payments or waste. To test internal control procedures over contract actions, we selected a stratified random sample of 102 contract actions totaling $140.7 million in fiscal year 2008. all the contract actions in the sample frame, including those that were not selected. Results from this statistical sample were projected to the population of contract actions made from October 1, 2007, through September 30, 2008. We also obtained information from agency officials regarding contract closeout, cognizant federal agency responsibilities, audit funding, and staff resources. See table 2 for specific details related to contract actions selected in the Sample. sample item. Table 3 provides further details on the control procedures we tested and the criteria or source for the procedure. of the contract action for the purpose of providing a basis for informed decisions at each step in the acquisition process, and providing information for reviews and investigations. Incomplete or inadequate contract files and documentation hinder the ability of the contracting officers to perform their oversight duties, especially those who assume responsibility for contracts that have changed hands. Clearly documenting the history of a contract action is an important tool that provides management with assurance that the agency has complied with applicable regulations and has made well-informed decisions for efficient contract management. of its FAR-based contracting operations, including the number of certain contract types awarded, the extent of competition achieved, and total contract value. Standards for internal control provide that for an agency to manage its operations, it must have relevant, reliable, and timely information relating to the extent and nature of its operations. Both operational and financial data should be recorded and communicated to management and others within the agency who need it and in a form and within a time frame that enables them to carry out their internal control and operational responsibilities. OFM does not review purchase card transactions for fraud or inappropriate use, but instead pays the purchase card invoice based on the authorizing official’s approval. Standards for internal control call for transactions and other significant events to be clearly documented, and the documentation should be readily available for examination. In addition, the FAR provides that the documentation in the contract files shall be sufficient to constitute a complete history. During the tests of control procedures, we observed that the contracts did not always contain all required documentation to support the contract actions we reviewed. internal controls that are and can be instituted by agencies to help safeguard assets, prevent and detect fraud and errors. As described in appendix I, we selected 11 controls that we determined to be “key” based on GAO’s standards for internal control, the FAR and HHSAR. CMS stated its belief that “virtually all” of the errors we identified related to “perceived documentation deficiencies.” “Virtually all,” is the key word. CMS stated it was encouraged that the errors we found did not involve more substantive departures from the FAR or HHSAR. A number of the findings we identified during the testing of a statistically valid sample of contract files involved the lack of documentation that the controls were performed. Lack of documentation reduces management’s ability to ascertain whether these important controls were appropriately implemented. The internal controls we tested are key to ensuring that contracting activities, both pre and post-award, mitigate risks to the federal government. OAGM management’s downplaying of the overall message of the report—that control deficiencies are pervasive—further illustrates the weak internal control environment. Setting an appropriate control environment, especially “tone at the top,” is key to ensuring that staff take all appropriate steps to mitigate risk and protect tax dollars from fraud, waste, and abuse. CMS also stated that a reasonable amount of time had not yet elapsed since the issuance of our November 2007 report to allow for corrective actions to have taken place. A significant number of our current report findings, including weaknesses in the system, are a serious internal control deficiency. of this report. The historical obligation amounts presented in the background section of the report come primarily from CMS’s PRISM database. We requested comments on a draft of this report from HHS and CMS. We received written comments on October 2, 2009, and have summarized those comments in the Agency Comments and Our Evaluation section ofthis report. Our response to certain specific CMS comments appears in the GAO Comments section of appendix III. We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, Government provide framework for establishing and maintaining internal control. Management should establish both a supportive overall control environment and specific control activities. A positive control environment provides discipline and structure as well as a climate supportive of quality internal control, and includes an assessment of the risks of fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement. It also includes an environment that sets a positive and supportive attitude towards control and conscientious management. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.  control activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and mechanisms that enforce management’s directives and help ensure that actions are taken to address risks. The standards provide that information should be recorded and communicated to management and oversight officials in a form and within a time frame that enables them to carry out their responsibilities. An entity should have internal control monitoring activities in place to assess the quality of performance over time and ensure that the findings of audits and other reviews are promptly resolved. Control activities include both external and internal sources. preventive and detective controls. Preventive controls are controls designed to prevent errors, improper payments, or waste. Detective controls are designed to identify errors or improper payments after the payment is made. A sound system of internal control contains a balance of both preventive and Detective controls that is appropriate for the agency’s operations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. sign a determination and finding that no other contract type is suitable for the acquisition. The justification is required to set forth enough facts and circumstances to clearly and convincingly justify the specific determination made. In cases when the justification memorandum was prepared, contracting officers merely quoted language from the FAR but did not set forth clear and convincing findings for why other contract types could not be used. We found that the determination andFinding was either not documented or insufficient in six T&M contract awards we reviewed. We also found that in some cases, the justification was not prepared at all. When the contracting officer does not clearly and convincingly document the findings that support using a T&M contract type, OAGM does not have assurance that the appropriate contract type was used. For three of the contract actions, the contract specialist told us that the actions the document listed to mitigate the risk were not performed. Because CMS did not carry out the stated mitigation strategies, it increased its exposure to the risk of improper payments or waste. We estimate that for at least at least two years, the risk will remain. that designated the extent to which the contract was competed, for example, full and open competition or not competed as a result of being a logical follow-on to a previous contract. We determined that the award type field in PRISM did not capture consistent information. For example, the field had prepopulated options associated with both award type (basic ordering agreement, delivery order, letter contract, etc.) and contract type (cost reimbursement, fixed price, and T&M). Combining these options into one data field prevents CMS from determining the total number of each award type and each contract type. obligations from a population of 2,441 contract actions totaling $2.5 billion in fiscal year 2008 obligations. We stratified the contract actions by type of action, namely contract awards and contract modifications, recorded in CMS’s PRISM database from October 1, 2007, through September 30, 2008. With this probability sample, each contract action in the sample frame had a non- zero probability of being included and that probability could be computed from any contract action. Each stratum was subsequently weighted in the analysis to account statistically for. The V&V plan lacks key elements and controls to ensure that the resolution of potential errors is properly documented and errors are corrected in a timely manner. OAGM officials could not determine if all errors identified during the file reviews were properly resolved and the appropriate adjustments to DCIS were made. While staff training was provided in January 2008, the DCIS data entry instructions were later modified with new information. In one instance, we noted that the data entered into DCIS was later modified to reflect a new set of information. that the DCIS preparer and the reviewer were using different versions of the instructions resulting in confusion over what would be the appropriate DCIS entry. OAGM officials provided us with the results for the V&V plan for 2008, which showed that 23 of the total 2,031 contract actions entered into DCIS in 2008 were reviewed for accuracy. As of July 22, 2009, CMS management had not taken substantial actions to address our prior recommendations to improve internal control in the contracting process. Only two of GAO's nine 2007 recommendations had been fully addressed. the Departmental Contracts Information System (DCIS) do not include procedures that would ensure that the resolution of potential errors are properly documented and errors are corrected in a timely manner. We further found that OAGM was not fully implementing its policy because it reviewed every 88th action, rather than every 50th as provided for in the plan. However, we are encouraged by the recent initiatives described in CMS’s comments, such as the scorecard, and O AGM’S commitment to review current policies and procedures. CMS did not have quality assurance activities, such as formal data entry reviews or database training, over the data contained in the DCIS database. In December 2007, OAGM established a Verification and Validation Plan for DCIS Accuracy. For example, CMS entered codes for “potato farming” and “tortilla manufacturing” in the industry code field for two contract actions. The data analysis on the population of fiscal year 2008 contract actions identified that certain required fields such as contract type and competition were not in DCIS. to accurately determine CMS’s contracting trends. OAGM officials told us that the data entered into PRISM are not subjected to a secondary review. We estimate that for at least 54.2 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, DCIS contained at least one error in the selected critical fields we reviewed.DCIS contained errors in current contract value and ultimate contract value fields, as well as the extent of competition, contract type, and award type fields. Further, 11 sample items, or approximately 10 percent of the sample, contained errors. basis for our evaluation of CMS’s contract management control environment. We determined that only basic contract information maintained in the PRISM database, such as vendor name and obligation amount, was reliable for purposes of this study. We used a statistically random sample selected to test the application of controls to also test the accuracy of the data in the systems. We assessed the reliability of the databases by performing electronic testing of required data elements and interviewing both CMS and HHS officials on quality assurance activities performed on the databases. are due in part to a lack of sufficient quality assurance activities over the data entered into the acquisition databases. Without accurate data, CMS program managers do not have adequate information to identify and monitor areas that pose a high risk of improper payments or waste. inaccurate or incomplete data hinder CMS’s ability to mitigate through additional policies or enhanced oversight any high-risk areas, such as the frequent use of cost reimbursement contracts, that would be identified based on reports or analysis of the databases. The errors in DCIS, including the unrecorded actions, also impact governmentwide reporting. HHS submits DCIS data to the FDPS-NG, which feeds into OMB’s publicly available database at www.usaspending.gov. We estimate that for at least 34.9 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, PRISM contained at least one error in the selected critical fields we reviewed. In particular, we found that PRISM. contained 16 errors in a field we reviewed, including one in which the error occurred in the procurement field of “procurement.” The PRISM database contains basic information such as contract number, vendor name, and amount obligated. The Enhanced Departmental Contracts Information System (DCIS) is used for department-level acquisition management. DCIS collects and forwards information to the Federal Procurement Data System Next Generation (FPDS-NG), which is a publicly available database of governmentwide acquisition information. Likewise, FPDS- NG feeds into www.usaspending.gov, a Web site created by the Department of Homeland Security. did not perform required audits and reviews of CMS purchase cards to identify fraud or waste. As of July 15, 2009, OAGM’s purchase card program had issued 123 cards with 20 percent having monthly spending limits of at least $50,000. Eight card holders had monthly spending limit of $100,000, the highest spending limit authorized by CMS. Without sufficient oversight, CMS does not have assurance that only allowable transactions are procured through purchase cards and that the purchase cards are not being used to circumvent FAR competition requirements. or guidance were developed, because in CMS’s view, policies and criteria are already established in the FAR and HHSAR. While the FAR provides requirements for federal acquisitions, it is up to the agencies to develop and provide their contracting workforce with specific policies and day-to-day procedures that guide them in implementing those requirements. Agency-specific policy may include guidance on applicable approval levels, time frames, agency forms, and routing processes. Also, while the HHSAR provides additional guidance and policies specific to HHS, the HHS AR does not specifically address all of these issues. implemented the Acquisition Career Management Information System (ACMIS) ACMIS is a centralized tracking mechanism that maintains training records for the personnel assigned to contract activities. HHS’s implementation of the centralized system to track training addressed our recommendation. Actions insufficient. HHS reported that CMS developed a plan to reduce the backlog of contracts overdue awaiting closeout and that CMS reduced this backlog by the end of fiscal year 2007 from 581 to 407 contracts. CMS provided its fiscal year 2009 contract closeout plan; however, the plan did not include a comprehensive strategy for reducing the backlog. for acquisitions awarded through other than full and open competition, was implemented in April 2008. We applied these approval levels only to the awards and modifications in our sample that were made after the policy was implemented. CMS disagreed with our determination that their actions to address five of the seven prior recommendations were not sufficient. These prior recommendationswere aimed at improving preventive controls. Preventive controls, such as policies and criteria for pre-award activities and a sound invoice, are important to CMS’s control environment. increased risk together with inadequate compensating controls to mitigate risk. The Virtual Acquisition Office can be a useful tool for contracting officers, specialists, and the Office of Acquisition and Grants Management. But it does not represent the agency- specific policies and criteria we recommended that CMS implement for pre-award activities. Agency-specific policies provide guidance on how CMS staff are expected to perform their day-to-day duties. As such, CMS’s actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) implemented effective internal control procedures over contract actions. We focused on contracts that were generally subjected to the Federal Acquisition Regulation. We interviewed senior management of CMS’s Office of Acquisition and Grants Management (OAGM), contracting officers and specialists, and cost/price team members. We selected 11 internal controls over contracting and payments to contractors to test for this report, ranging from ensuring contractors had adequate accounting systems prior to the use of them. reviewed and changes would be made as appropriate, and (c) certain pre-award activities, such as the need for adequate accounting systems for cost reimbursement contracts, would be reviewed with staff at internal training sessions. While the Office of Acquisition and Grants Management (OAGM) did conduct internal training, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Service’s (CMS) actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. OAGM still has not developed policies and criteria that provide clear procedures for staff to follow. We conducted our audit work in Washington, D.C. and Baltimore, Maryland from July 2008 through September 2009. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) reported that the policy and criteria for pre-award contracting activities are already established in the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and the Health & Human Services Acquisition Regulation. There was no action taken on this issue. identify and fix deficiencies in the contract administration process and to improve internal controls may be missed. In addition to the deficiencies in contract-level control procedures, CMS’s FAR-based contract management was impaired by a weak control environment. CMS officials told us that incurred cost audits are not performed annually primarily due to insufficient resources. A shortage of financial and human resources creates an environment that introduces vulnerabilities to the contracting process, hinders management’S ability to sustain an effective overall control environment, and ultimately increases risk. a lack of agency-specific policies and procedures to ensure that FAR requirements and other control objectives were met. CMS also did not take appropriate steps to. ensure that existing policies were properly implemented nor maintain. adequate documentation in its contract files. The Contract Review Board was not effective in ensuring proper contract award actions. These internal control deficiencies are a manifestation of CMS’s weak overall control environment, which is discussed later. As a result of our work, we estimate that at least 84.3 percent of FAR- based contract actions made by CMS in fiscal year 2008 contained at least. at least one of these deficiencies. The seven substantially unresolved recommendations represent a lack of action on the part of CMS management to resolve key control deficiencies. CMS management has made limited progress in substantively addressing most of the broad-based recommendations from our 2007 report. We found that many of our findings in this review could be, at least in part, attributed to CMS management’s lack of attention given to resolving the control deficiencies, we found. We are reiterating our previous recommendations to develop policies for pre-award contracting activities, to help ensure CFA responsibilities are performed. will continue to pose significant risk of improper payments, waste, and mismanagement. Further, the deficiencies we identified are likely to be exacerbated by the rise in obligations for non-claims processing contract awards. It is imperative that CMS take immediate action to address its serious contract-level control deficiencies and take action on our previous recommendations to improve contract- level and overall environment controls. We make the following nine recommendations to help CMS address these deficiencies. The recommendations include the following: The agency must improve its contract controls to prevent fraud, waste or mismanagement of taxpayer dollars. for its contracting function. CMS also expressed concerns about the scope and timing of our work with respect to our November 2007 recommendations. We address the concerns CMS raised in its comment letter below and include additional information at the end of appendix III. In its comments, CMS stated its belief that the 11 internal controls we reviewed did not provide a complete picture of its internal controls over contract management activities. We acknowledge that there are many internal controls that need to be improved, and we are working on them. be signed by the contract negotiator. However, negotiation memorandums were not always prepared for actions in which they were clearly required, according to HHSAR. While many negotiation Memorandums we reviewed had signature blocks for both the contract specialist and the contracting officer (generally the preparer and reviewer, respectively), the memorandum was not always signed. CMS’s OAGM established the Contract Review Board (CRB) reviews as a key control procedure to help ensure contract award actions are in conformance with law. Specify what constitutes timely performance of (or request for) audits of contractors’ statements of incurred cost for cost reimbursement and T&M contracts. Specify circumstances under which negotiation memorandums should be used and the content of such, in light of HHSAR requirements and current OAGM practice.Specify Contract Review Board review documentation to include, at a minimum, documentation of the number of contracts reviewed each year, the issues identified by the CRB reviewer(s), and resolution of issues identified during CRB review. policies and procedures, and sound business practices. Our review of the CRB process found that the process had not been properly or fully implemented. For example, of the 22 contracts selected to be reviewed by theCRB in 2008, only 7 were actually reviewed. For fiscal year 2009, 22 contracts were selected but only 2 have been reviewed as of the end of the third quarter. Also, the contracting officer for the contract action being reviewed is neither required to reach consensus on the resolution of issues identified nor to document the resolution. managing and overseeing the growing value of contracting activities. A positive control environment sets the tone for the overall quality of an entity’s internal control. OAGM management has not analyzed its contract management workforce and related funding needs through a comprehensive, strategic acquisition workforce plan. Such a plan is critical to help manage the increasing acquisition workload and meet its contracting oversight needs. We reported in November 2007 that the agency had not developed a plan to manage and oversee the growing number of contracts it was taking on. the CRB reviews. Require Division Directors to periodically assess, document, and report to senior management on the results of their review of whether the contract files contain documentation that invoices were properly reviewed by both the project officer and contracting officer or specialist. Develop and implement a comprehensive strategic acquisition workforce plan. The plan should include, at a minimum, elements such as performance goals, time frames, implementation actions, and resource requirements. It should address issues such as OAGM workload, full time equivalents needed, and a workforce skills analysis. OAGM’s policies require that all contracts above $10 million be subjected to the CRB. CMS confirmed that only contracts nominated by division directors are reviewed. CMS policies do not require issues to be resolved and documented and because CMS is not fully implementing theCRB, opportunities to resolve CRB issues may be missed. If used correctly, the CRb can be an effective tool for risk-based quality assurance and for reviewing the internal controls throughout the contract award and administration process. in the control environment, were based on observations and interviews with OAGM officials and reviews of related documentation such as policies and strategic plans. Our current review was completed in September 2009, nearly 2 years after the issuance of our November 2007 report. While CMS also stated that the contract actions we reviewed took place in fiscal year 2008, it is important to note that we considered the timing of CMS’s corrective actions when evaluating the controls we tested. For example, CMS�s Acquisition Policy 02-03, which identifies level of approvals required by agency officials based on the estimated dollar value. and evaluation findings strengthens the control environment in part because it can help assure management that the agency’s objectives are being met. It can also help management determine whether the entity is complying with applicable acquisition laws and regulations. Contract audits and evaluations can add significant value to an organization's oversight and accountability structure, but only if management ensures that the results of these audits are promptly investigated and resolved. During our review of the contract files, we noted that audits and. evaluations were requested of organizations such as CMS. as DCAA or performed by the CMS cost/price team identified questionable payments, accounting system deficiencies, and other significant weaknesses or deficiencies associated with certain CMS contractors. OAGM management confirmed that no action has been taken to investigate and recover the challenged costs. CMS has not established a formal procedure or system for tracking and pursuing the results of contract or contractor audits and evaluations. We found no evidence of any plans or procedures that would mitigate the identified risks. In another instance, the contracting officer deemed the contractor “risky” during the pre-award contract proposal evaluation process. The contracting officer awarded the cost reimbursement contract to this “ risky’ contractor. had not provided its contracting officers guidance or procedures for when to request the assistance of internal and external audit and evaluation services. OAGM did not provide direction on when (what stage(s) in the contract life cycle and under what circumstances) the contracting officer should utilize the service of the cost/price team or other contract auditors. By not timely acting on audit results or fully incorporating knowledge identified by cost/ price evaluations or other audits into award decisions, CMS is forgoing the potential benefits from those audits and evaluations. the government, specifically cost reimbursement contracts, as well as perform the activities required of a CFA. While officials told us they could use more audit funding, we found that OAGM management had yet to determine what an appropriate funding level should be. Without knowing for which contractors additional CFA oversight is needed, CMS does not know with certainty the number of audits and reviews that must be performed annually. Without this key information, CMS can not estimate an adequate level of audit funding that it needs. an estimate of the amount of resources OAGM needs to fulfill the audit and other FAR requirements for comprehensive oversight. Revise the Verification and Validation Plan for DCIS Accuracy and Improvements policy to require all relevant errors be corrected and their resolution documented. Develop and implement policies and procedures for tracking contract audit requests, monitoring the results of contract audits and evaluations, and resolving the audit findings, to include roles and responsibilities of the contracting officer, specialist, and members of the cost/price team. OAGM has limited insight into appropriate solutions, such as the use of contractor support staff. Using contractors for contract administrative functions may increase the risk of unauthorized personal services contracts. According to its staff and management, OAGM is challenged to meet the various audit requirements necessary to ensure adequate oversight of contracts that pose more risk to the government. The use of contractors has in recent years become commonplace in the federal government. It is prohibited by FAR to use contractors for inherently governmental functions, both of which are prohibited. staff resources allocated to contract oversight had not kept pace with the increase in CMS contract awards. A similar trend continued into 2008. While the obligated amount of contract awards has increased 71 percent since 1998, OAGM staffing resources have increased 26 percent. This trend presents a major challenge to contract award and administration personnel who must deal with a significantly increased workload without additional support and resources. The CMS has data on its workforce changes since January 2007 (attritions and additions), documentation requesting additional FTEs for a specific project, and, in its fiscal year. of contract files, we were told by OAGM senior management and contracting officers and specialists that the first set of activities that the contracting officers tend to neglect under resource constraints was post-award administration and contract closeout. CMS staff told us they take shortcuts due to resource constraints. For example, one contract specialist told us she prepared the Independent Government Cost Estimate based on the winning contractor’s proposed costs instead of conducting her own independent research to do her own research to make a better estimate. 2010 budget, a request to hire contract support staff to help meet contract and grant administration needs. CMS has not yet determined the amount of total FTEs needed for the fiscal year and beyond. Documents did not contain information on CMS’s current FTE level, skill mix, or analysis of any skill. For example, the documentation did not. contain an analysis of the workload anticipated for the year, such as the total number of new awards, the number of active. contracts by contract type, or the number and type of audits needed. All but one of the key roles described below are managed centrally in OAGM. The last, project officers, are assigned from CMS program offices. Contracting officers are responsible for ensuring performance of all necessary actions for effective contracting. They are also responsible for overseeing contractor compliance with the terms of the contract, and safeguarding the interests of the government in its contractual relationships. The contracting officer is responsible for negotiating, award, administration, and termination of contracts. The contract officer is the person in charge of negotiating, awarding, and terminating contracts. training certificate for the project officer were not in the file. Also, a chronological list of contracting officers and their dates of responsibility was consistently absent. CMS’s use of negotiation memorandums was inconsistent, the report said. The HHSAR provides that the negotiation memorandum is a complete record of all actions leading to the award of a contract, according to the report. It should be in sufficient detail to explain and support the rationale, judgments, and authorities upon which all actions were predicated, it said. contract. CMS contract files did not always contain documentation necessary to support the action. In numerous instances, we determined that the letter delegating duties to the project officer and the project manager was not properly written. In addition, two contract files. did not maintain any information regarding the General Services Administration schedule contract. that was valid at the time of the award of the task order. We found a contract file was missing a statement of work and another file wasMissing a copy of the actual contract. FAR states that provisional indirect cost rates shall be used in reimbursing indirect costs such as fringe benefits or overhead costs under cost reimbursement contracts. These rates are generally established by the CFA, contracting officer, or auditor on the basis of reliable data or previous rate audits and should be set as close as possible to the anticipated final indirect cost rate. Final indirect cost Rates are generally negotiated by the government’s negotiating team. The amounts a contractor billed using provisional indirect Cost Rates are adjusted annually for final indirect Cost rates. establishing forward pricing rates, final indirect cost rates (when not accomplished by a designated contract auditor), and administering cost accounting standards for all contracts in a business unit. The CFA is the agency with the largest dollar amount of negotiated contracts, including options, with the contractor. In addition, the CFA may be responsible for establishing provisional indirect cost Rates (also known as “billing rates”) based on recent reviews, previous rate audits, experience, or similar reliable data. the CFA following an audit of a statement of incurred costs submitted by the contractor. CMS officials told us that they generally adjust for final indirect cost rates during contract closeout at the end of the contract performance rather than annually due to the cost and effort the adjustment takes. When CMS is not the CFA, CMS must wait on the C FA to perform the necessary audit work required to establish the final indirect Cost Rates. Not annually adjusting for final direct cost rates increases the risk that CMS will not be able to meet its obligations. of direct costs promptly performed or requested. Similar to the audit of indirect costs, audits of direct costs allow the government to verify that the costs billed by the contractor were allowable, reasonable, and allocable to the contract. The audit ofdirect costs is the responsibility of the contracting officer. The contracting officer may request, for a fee, that the CFA for the contractor perform the audit work. The FAR does not provide time frames or other requirements for when the audit should be performed except that such an audit may be necessary for closing out a contract. The FAR states that a cost reimbursement contract may be used only when the contractor’s accounting system is adequate for determining costs applicable to the contract. Of the contract awards in our sample, we found 9 cases in which cost reimbursement contracts were used without first ensuring that the contractor had an adequate accounting system. In the case of the letter contract, the contract file did not contain the authorization for use of theletter contract, which is required by HHSAR. In one instance, the contracting officer was aware that a contractors had an inadequate accounting system resulting from numerous instances of noncompliance with CAS. cost reimbursement contracts, and time and materials (T&M) contracts. These contract types may be used to provide the flexibility needed by the government to acquire the large variety and volume of supplies and services it needs. For fixed price contracts, the government agrees to pay a set price for goods or services regardless of the is billing costs in accordance with the contract terms and applicable government regulations. For T&M contracts,. the government agree to pay fixed per-hour labor rates and to reimburse other costs directly related to the contract, such as materials, equipment, or travel, based on cost. A fixed price contract is ordinarily in the government’s interest when the risk involved is minimal or can be predicted with an acceptable degree of certainty. Under cost reimbursement contracts, the government agrees to pay those costs of the contractor that are allowable, reasonable, and allocable to the extent prescribed by the contract. The government assumes most of the cost risk because the contractor is only required to provide its best effort to meet contract objectives within the estimated cost to the contractor.actual cost of the project. Cost reimbursement contracts may be used only when the contractor’s accounting system is adequate for determining costs applicable to the contract. If this cannot be done, the government can provide additional funds to complete the effort, decide not to provide extra funds, or terminate the contract, the federal government says. In order to determine if the contractor has efficient methods and effective cost controls, contracting officers and other contracting oversight personnel may perform a comprehensive review of contractor invoices. The government says appropriate government surveillance during performance will provide reasonable assurance that efficient methods are used. reviewing cost proposals, consultations about the allowability of costs billed on invoices, and assistance during contract closeout. According to OAGM invoice review policy, project officers review certain invoice elements, such as labor and direct costs. Based on his or her review, the project officer is then to approve the invoice for payment by signing a Payments and Progress Certification Form or disapprove by issuing a suspension notice. CMS utilizes two different databases of review each contractor invoice and recommend payment approval or disapproval to the contracting officer. officer is authorized to enter into, modify, and terminate contracts. Contract specialists represent and assist the contracting officers with the contract, but are generally not authorized to commit or bind the government. The cost/price team serves as an in-house consultant to others involved in the contracting process at CMS. By request, the team, which consists of four contract auditors, provides support for contract administration including contract administration, procurement and other areas of the government’s business. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. contractor billed, and CMS paid, this cost. Another contractor submitted invoices under its fixed price contract that were contrary to the payment schedule stipulated in the contract terms. CMS increases its risk of making improper payments when it does not properly review and approve invoiced prior to payment. OAGM also OAGm also found that the contractor submitted one invoice for the entire amount of the contract. The invoice was dated prior to the start date of the 1-year performance period of performance. value of the contract through January 2009 was about $64 million. After the project officer’s review, the contracting officer or specialist is also required to review invoices for critical elements. Based on a cursory review of the fiscal year 2008 invoiced submitted for payment, we found instances in which the contracting officers did not identify items that were inconsistent with the terms of thecontract. For example, facilities capital cost of money is generally disallowed by HHSAR. But we found two instances where the. billed were compliant with the terms of the contract or otherwise allowable and allocable to that contract. In one instance, invoices reported labor costs based on labor categories, but did not show hours worked by employees or their respective labor rates. In another example, a contractor submitted an invoice in 2008 for services that were provided in 2003. Neither the invoice paid in 2008, nor the related file included evidence that the charge was investigated or further evaluated by either the project officer or contracting specialist. 40.4 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, CMS did not have sufficient support for provisional indirect cost rates. For 17 contract actions that utilized indirect cost Rates, CMS didn't have documentation supporting what would be the appropriate rates for the contractor. For an additional 19 contract actions the provisional rates either did not match the indirect rates billed on the invoices or could not be matched because the invoice did not provide sufficient detail. When the agency does not maintain adequate support for Provisional indirect rates, it increases its risk of making improper payments. revised our testing procedures to consider and accept provisional indirect cost rates that were not maintained in the individual contract file but were maintained by the cost/price team in its central files. 7. The steps CMS described that it plans to take will be important for ensuring that contract office staff have the information needed readily available to manage contracts throughout the contract life cycle. As stated in the report, CMS’s current procedures regarding the accuracy of data entered into contracts are not sufficient to ensure their accuracy. We estimate that at least 46.0 percent of fiscal year 2008 CMS contract actions did not meet the FAR requirements applicable to the specific contract type awarded. Sixteen contract actions we tested had deficiencies, of which 1 related to a letter contract, 9 related to cost reimbursement contracts, and 6 related government’s ability to perform the various contract oversight activities required by the FAR. In addition to the 9 cases above, during our review of modifications we observed another 6 cases in which cost reimburse contracts were used even though CMS was not involved. the results of our statistical sample conservatively by reporting the lower bound of our two-sided, 95 percent confidence interval. The control deficiencies we found were primarily caused by a lack of agency-specific policies and procedures that would help ensure that applicable FAR requirements, agency policies, and other control objectives were met. CMS did not always meet FAR requirements for specific contract types that were awarded, nor maintain adequate support for approved provisional indirect cost rates. The agency did not timely perform or request audits of incurred direct costs. to the Administrator of CMS to develop and implement policies and procedures to ensure that FAR requirements and other control objectives are met. Document compliance with FAR requirements for different contract types. Document in the contract file provisional indirect cost rates used as a basis for reviewing the reasonableness of the indirect costs billed on the contractor invoices. Document authorizations for letter contracts, adequacy of the contractors accounting systems, and determination and findings for time and materials contracts, when applicable. At a minimum, enhance current documentation, such as the contract checklist. contracting officer. We are encouraged that CMS is taking additional actions to implement the checklists developed by the Department of Health and Human Services to be used in fiscal year 2010. While such a checklist is useful for ensuring that certain documents are contained in a contract file, it did not reflect certain requirements in which we found CMS to be deficient, such as ensuring contractors had adequate accounting systems prior to the use of a cost reimbursement contract. During our review and as a result of multiple conversations with OAGM staff including the team of contract auditors, we found that CMS was deficient. safeguards funds as well as having mechanisms in place to recoup those funds when improper payments are identified. CMS relies on incurred cost audits that are conducted at the end of contract performance when the contract is closed to validate the overall propriety of payments. HHS reported that CMS will review the questionable payments identified in GAO-08-54 to determine whether CMS should seek reimbursement from the contractors. It further stated that the questionable costs will be identified in the course of incurredCostAudits. and processes the final invoice with an adjustment for any over- or underpayments. The failure to perform contract closeouts in a timely manner puts CMS at increased risk of improper payments or waste, and may make identification and recovery of any such improper payments more difficult due to the passage of time. CMS has not taken sufficient actions to investigate and recover questionable payments. CMS described several actions it has taken to investigate payments made to 3 of the 12 contractors for which we identified questionable payments, but they are insufficient to fully resolve the problem. CMS is paying for costs that are not allowable or allocable to the contract. Putting off the control activity until the end of contract performance increases the risk of overpaying for indirect costs during contract performance. We estimate that for at least 54.9 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, CMS did not promptly perform or request an audit of direct costs. We found that 25 contract actions for which this control applied did not have an audit. It may make identification or recovery of any unallowable costs duringcontract closeout more difficult due to the passage of time. issues identified and more remains to be done to recover funds that may have been inappropriately paid to contractors. The $67 million we questioned related to costs incurred in fiscal years 2004, 2005, and 2006 and therefore would not be covered or investigated in an audit of fiscal year 2008 incurred costs. CMS’s resolution of questionable payments of the magnitude we identified ($88.8 million) in the prior report should be performed expeditiously. As a steward of taxpayer dollars, CMS is accountable for how it spends. are needed to investigate and recover the questionable payments we identified. No other changes were made to the report as a result of agency comments. See appendix III for a discussion of the remaining two prior recommendations (points 2, 3, and 4) for which CMS disagreed with our assessment of its progress. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies to the Secretary of for the use of negative certification, (5) provide training on revised invoice review policies, (6) develop a plan to reduce the backlog of contracts eligible for closeout, and (7) review the questionable payments identified in the prior report to determine if payments are recoverable. The continuing weaknesses in contracting activities and limited progress in addressing known deficiencies raise questions concerning whether CMS management has established an appropriate “tone at the top” regarding contracting activities. Until CMS management addresses our previous recommendations in this area, it was acceptable for CMS to use negative certification. CMS uses negative certification to ensure invoices are paid in a timely fashion. CMS has not set criteria for the use of negative certification. HHS reported that CMS revised its invoice review policy. CMS’s actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. The revised policy still contains the use Of negative certification as a default. The policy does not provide criteria to consider potential risk factors for theUse of negative certified in the review of contractor’S invoiced. It also did not describe under what circumstances or in what situations it not specify the documentation the contractors would be required to submit. CMS had not prepared guidelines or revised its invoice review policy to specify or provide examples of sufficient detail that would be needed to support contractor invoices to facilitate an adequate review. In fact, most of the invoiced we reviewed were not sufficiently supported. CMS policies did not provide guidance on what constitutes sufficient detail to support amounts billed on contractor Invoices. We identified invoICES missing payroll detail, travel receipts, and subcontractor invoice, all of which are necessary to provide the reviewers adequate information to confirm if the amounts are accurate. policies and procedures developed. Neither HHS nor CMS has developed policies that clearly define key areas of authority and duties for the CFA responsibilities. HHS reported that CMS revised its invoice review policy to better define roles and responsibilities. CMS’s actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. The revised policy does not contain clear role and responsibilities for CFA. No action taken. The policy does contain clear roles and. responsibilities. The new invoice payment procedures contain clear. roles and responsibility. Noaction taken. contracting officers, specialists, and project officers to review the invoice prior to payment. Reviewing invoices prior topayment is a preventive control which may result in the identification of unallowable billings. OAGM’s invoice review policy was not revised to address this recommendation. Training on invoice review procedures still needed. HHS reported that they have completed the training but the actions taken do not achieve the intent of the recommendation, the report says. The report recommends that CMS establish criteria for when to use negative certification, based on considerations of potential risk factors. CMS had policies for invoice certification and purchase card oversight. The failure to follow established agency policy increases CMS’s risk of improperly paying contractor invoices or purchase card transactions. Not annually auditing direct costs increases the risk that CMS is paying for costs that are not allowable or allocable to the contract. We estimate that for at least 59.0 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, the project officer did not always certify the invoiced. The project officer should have audited direct costs at the end of contract performance. review process prior to payment, are the first line of defense in reducing the risk of improper payments or waste. We continue to believe that the limited actions OAGM management has taken, and in some cases, management’s inaction, fall short of expectations. CMS asserted that its Acquisition Policy 16-01 entitled “Invoicing Payment Procedures” satisfies two of the prior recommendations. The intent of these two recommendations was to ensure that contractors provided adequate support to facilitate an appropriate detailed review of the invoiced costs.

ROUGE-1: 82.25, ROUGE-2: 76.91, ROUGE-L: 23.61
BERTScore: 58.18

==============================================
==================== [11/100] ====================
Summary:
Despite association of IRA ownership to individuals with higher incomes, data show that lower- and middle-income individuals also own IRAs. A study by the Congressional Budget Office found that in 2003, 4 percent of workers earning $20,000 to $40,000 contributed to traditional IRAs and 3 percent of these workers contributed to Roth IRas. More households with Roth IRAs or employer-sponsored IRAs contribute to their accounts than households with traditional IRas, according to the Investment Company Institute. traditional and Roth IRAs is associated with higher education and income levels. In 2004, 59 percent of IRA households were headed by an individual with a college degree. Over one- third of these IRA households earned $100,000 or more; about 2 percent earned less than $10,000. Research shows that higher levels of education and household income correlate with a greater propensity to save. It is not surprising that IRA ownership increases as education and incomes rise. The average IRA owner has $1.2 million in assets. from direct contributions, but from transfers, or rollovers, of retirement assets from other retirement plans, including 401(k) plans. These rollovers allow individuals to preserve their retirement savings when they change jobs or retire. From 1998 to 2004, more than 80 percent of funds flowing into IRAs came from rollovers. IRAs play a significantly smaller role in building retirement savings than in preserving them. For example the median amount in a traditional IRA with rollover assets in 2007 was $61,000. while the median amount in a traditional IRA without rollover assets was $30,000. Since 1998, IRA assets have comprised the largest portion of the retirement market. IRA assets in 2004 totaled about $3.5 trillion compared to DC assets of $2.6 trillion and DB Assets of $1.9 trillion. More households own traditional IRAs, which were the first IRAs established, than Roth IRAs or employer-sponsored IRAs. In 2007, nearly 33 percent of all households owned traditional IRas, and about 15 percent owned Roth IRas. Simplified Employee Pension IRA (SAR-SEP IRA) contributed to their accounts in 2004, but less than one- third of households with traditional IRAs did so. This, again, may be partly attributed to the emerging role of traditional IR as a means to preserve rollover assets rather than build retirement savings. The median household contribution to traditional IRas was $2,300 compared to the median contribution to Roth IRAs of $3,000. The study noted that this difference may be related to higher contribution limits for employer-sponsored IRAs. Experts offer several proposals to encourage workers to participate in IRAs. They include expanding existing tax credits for moderate- and low-income workers. Automatic enrollment in payroll-deduction IRAs could also increase employee participation. But small business groups and IRA providers said that mandatory automatic enrollment could be burdensome to small employers. The proposals are part of CNN.com’s series, “The Next Generation,” which airs on Sundays at 10 p.m. ET on CNN. Since the early 1980s, roughly half of the private-sector work force has participated in either a defined benefit (DB) retirement plan, commonly known as a pension. Congress created IRAs, in part, to help those individuals not covered by a DB or DC plan save for retirement. Almost half of all U.S. private sector workers in 2006 were employed by firms with fewer than 100 employees, and only 1 in 4 of these workers worked for an employer sponsoring a retirement plan. Many employers with fewer than 100 employees do not offer an employer-sponsored retirement plan for their employees. Labor’s guidance on payroll-deduction IRAs and several experts we interviewed, individuals are more likely to save in IRAs through payroll deductions than they are without these automatic deposits. Payroll deductions allow workers to contribute to retirement savings automatically before wages are spent, relieving them of making ongoing decisions to save. Some workers overcome a common tendency to procrastinate or not take action to save based on the choices associated with investing or selecting a retirement savings vehicle. participation in 401(k) plans is much higher than in IRAs, which do not typically use payroll deduction. The Congressional Budget Office reported that 29 percent of all workers contributed to a DC plan in 2003. Saving for retirement in the workplace through payroll deductions helps workers save by providing a “commitment device” to make automatic contributions to retirement savings before wages are spent. Such a commitment device helps employees save for retirement before they earn any wages at all, the authors say. Few employers appear to offer their employees the opportunity to contribute to IRAs through payroll deductions. Through payroll-deduction IRA programs, employees may contribute to traditional or Roth IRAs by having their employer withhold an amount determined by the employee and forwarded directly to the employee’s IRA. Small firms may be discouraged from offering these plans because of the requirement that employers must set up a SEP IRA for all employees performing service for the company in 3 of the past 5 years and with more than $500 in compensation for 2007. According to experts and available government data, worker access to employer-sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs appears limited. To address the issue of low retirement plan sponsorship among small employers, Congress created SIMPLE and SEP employer- sponsored IRAs with less burdensome reporting requirements than 401(k) plans. Labor issued a regulation under which an employer could maintain a payroll- Deduction program for employees to contribute to traditional and Roth IRAs without being considered a pension plan under ERISA. SIMPLE IRAs allow eligible employees to direct a portion of their salary, within limits, to a SIMPLE IRA. SEP IRas allow employers to make tax-deductible contributions to their own and each eligible employee’s traditional IRA at higher contribution limits than other IRAs. For example, in 2007, individuals under age 50 were able to contribute up to $10,500 to SIMPLE IRas—more than twice the amount allowed in 2007 for payroll-deduction IRas. Experts report that payroll-deduction IRAs represent costs to employers. Labor: Costs are influenced by the number of employees participating in the program. Some experts reported that such costs were significant, while others reported that they were minimal. But Labor may be unable to readily determine if employers are receiving excessive compensation for the cost of operating such programs, the authors say. programs fall outside the safe harbor and may be considered to have become. employer costs may be significant, particularly for employers without electronic payrolls, they say. Small business revenues are inconsistent and may fluctuate greatly from year to year, making required contributions difficult for some firms. Employers offering SIMPLE IRAs must determine before the beginning of the calendar year whether they will match employee contributions or make nonelective contributions to all employees’ accounts. According to IRA providers, this requirement may discourage some small employers from offering these IRAs. If employers had the flexibility to make additional contributions, some small firms may be unable to commit to these IRas. Small business member organizations and IRA providers said contribution limits for payroll-deduction IRAs do not offer adequate savings incentives to justify the effort in offering these IRAs. Because the contribution limits are significantly lower than those that apply to SIMPLE and SEP IRAs, employers seeking to provide a retirement plan to their employees would be more likely to choose other options. Those options also allow business owners to contribute significantly more to their own retirement account than they would with a payroll-based retirement account. Small business groups say many small employers are unaware that payroll-deduction IRAs are available or that employer contributions are not required. Administration costs associated with setting up and managing IRAs may be a barrier for small employers, particularly those without electronic payroll processing. IRA providers told us employers need greater flexibility in Labor’s guidance. Several bills have been introduced in Congress to expand worker access to payroll- Deductible IRAs, retirement and savings experts say. The goal is to encourage employers to offer IRAs to encourage employees to save for retirement. All workers under age 70½ who lack an employer-sponsored retirement plan could be eligible to contribute to a traditional IRA through payroll deduction, should their employer offer such a program. Experts told us payroll-deduction IRAs are the easiest way for small employers to offer their employees a retirement savings vehicle. Payroll- deduction IRAs have fewer tax consequences than traditional IRAs. The IRS allows employers to deduct up to $10,000 from a worker's salary for IRA contributions, but not more than $5,000. to any questions the subcommittee may have at this time. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony include Tamara Cross (Assistant Director), Matt Barranca, Susan Pachikara, Raun Lazier, Joseph Applebaum, Susan Aschoff, Doreen Feldman, Edward Nannenhorn, MaryLynn Sergent, Roger Thomas, Walter Vance, and Jennifer Wong. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Barbara D. Bovbjerg, Director, Education, Workforce, and Income Security Issues at (202) 512-7215. subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. IRS enforces Title II of ERISA for all types of IRAs. ERISA provides tax benefits for retirement plan sponsors and participants. Labor generally has interpretive jurisdiction over prohibited transactions. IRS has responsibility for imposing an excise tax on parties that engage in a prohibited transaction. Most assets flowing into IRAs come not from IRAs, but from other investments, such as stocks, bonds, and real estate, which are subject to ERISA Title I requirements. The Internal Revenue Code contains various statutory exemptions from prohibited transaction rules. Data on the number of employers offering employees employer-sponsored IRAs and payroll-deduction IRAs is limited. Based on available data, employee access to SIMPLE and SEP IRAs appears limited. Under ERISA Title I, there is no reporting requirement for SIMPLE IRAs, and there is an alternative method available for reporting of employer- sponsored SEp IRAs. Payroll-deductions are not subject to ERISA requirements for employer-sponsored retirement plans and have no reporting requirements. IRS and Labor share oversight responsibilities for IRAs. Payroll-deduction IRAs are not under Labor’s jurisdiction. IRS has responsibility over tax rules for establishing and maintaining traditional and Roth IRAs that may be funded through employee contributions. Congress may wish to consider whether payroll- deduction IRAs should have some direct oversight. I.annual employer contributions are not mandatory. I.E.S.A. also oversees the fiduciary standards for employer-sponsored IRAs and seeks to ensure that fiduciaries, such as employers, operate their plans in the best interest of participants. Currently, IRAs play a major role in preserving retirement assets but a very small role in creating them. Millions of U.S. workers have no retirement savings plan through their employer. Employer-sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs afford an easier way for workers, particularly those who work for their employers. ERISA Title I programs can help you save for retirement on your own or with an employer-sponsored IRA. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Currently, Labor has no process in place to monitor employer- sponsored IRAs. IRS does not have oversight over employer management of these programs. Without direct oversight, employees may lack confidence that payroll-deduction IRAs will provide them with adequate protections to participate in such programs, the authors say. The authors suggest that Congress consider whether payroll- Deduction IRas should have some direct oversight.. If current oversight vulnerabilities are not addressed, future problems could emerge as more employers and workers participate in employer-sponsored IRAs, they say. A minimum level of oversight is important to ensure that employers are acting in accordance with the law and within Labor’s guidance on payroll-deduction IRAs. Labor officials said that they do not have a process for actively seeking out and determining whether employer- sponsored IRAs are engaging in prohibited transactions or not abiding by their fiduciary responsibilities. Instead, Labor primarily relies on participant complaints as sources of investigative leads to detect employers that are not making timely and complete IRA contributions.consistent reporting of these data could give policymakers and others a more comprehensive view of the IRA landscape. current focus in Congress on expanding payroll-deduction IRAs. We are continuing our work on IRAs, and are beginning to examine the fees that are charged IRA participants. Mr. Chairman and Members of the subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement and I would be happy to respond to your questions about the issue. I am pleased that the Committee on Ways and Means and this subcommittee are interested in retirement savings, particularly IRAs and look forward to continuingOur work with you. We will continue to work together on this issue. IRS does publish some of the information it receives on IRAs through its Statistics of Income program. IRS officials told us that they are currently facing several challenges that affect their ability to publish IRA information more regularly. More consistent reporting of IRA information could help them ensure that their analyses reflect current and accurate information about retirement assets, such as the fair market value of IRAs. Since IRS is the only agency that has data on all IRA participants, it can be useful to assess the extent to which IRAs are being utilized. not due until the following year after the filing of the tax return. IRS officials said that these returns have numerous errors, making it difficult and time-consuming for IRS to edit them for statistical analysis. They also said that the IRA rules, and changes to those rules, are difficult for some taxpayers, employers, and trustees to understand, which contributes to filing errors. Also, in the past, one particular IRS employee, who has recently retired, took the lead in developing a statistical analysis on IRAs. Since IRS does not have a process in place to train another employee to take over, this could happen again. IRS has published IRA data for tax years 2000, 2001, 2002 and 2004, but none for tax year 2003. Labor officials and retirement and savings experts told us that without consistent reporting of IRA data, a knowledge gap was created. IRS officials told us they recognize this problem and are in the early stages of determining ways to correct it. In addition, IRS officials said they had problems with the IRAData for taxyear 2003, which prevented them from issuing a report for that year.. that low- income workers may opt out of automatic enrollment programs or be more inclined to make early withdrawals. Experts also said increasing public awareness of the importance of saving for retirement and educating individuals about how to do so could increase IRA participation. Earlier this month, we reported that changes at IRS and Labor could encourage employers to offer IRAs and improve IRA information and oversight. We found that regulators lack information about employer- sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs that could help determine whether these vehicles help workers without employer-sponsored pension plans build retirement savings. Congress and regulators should ensure that there is adequate information on employer-sponsored IRAs and payroll-deduction IRAs. Providing complete and consistent data on IRAs would help ensure that regulators have the information they need to make informed decisions about how to increase coverage and facilitate retirement savings. The limited reporting requirements were meant to encourage small employers to offer retirement savings vehicles to employees. There is also a need for agencies that are responsible for overseeing retirement Savings vehicles to have the info necessary to do so. IRS cannot share the information it receives on employer-sponsored IRAs with Labor because it is confidential tax information. Labor also does not receive relevant information from employers, such as annual financial reports, as it does from private pension plan sponsors. Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics National Compensation Survey surveys employee benefit plans in private establishments, receiving information on access, participation, and take- up rates for DB and DC plans. Without such information, experts said they are unable to determine how many employers and employees participate in payroll-deduction IRAs. who offer these IRAs is limited and we were unable to determine how many employers actually do so. An IRS evaluation of employer-filed W-2 forms estimated that 190,000 employers sponsored SIMPLE IRAs in 2005. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that 8 percent of private sector workers in firms with fewer than 100 employees participated in a SIMPLE IRA in 2005, and 2 percent of these workers participate in a SEP IRA. The IRS estimated that190,000 Employers sponsored SIMPL IRas in 2005; 8 percent participated in SEP IRAs. The reporting requirements for employer-sponsored IRAs are limited. IRS does collect some information on these IRAs through several ‘information’ forms provided by financial institutions and employers. These forms provide information on salary-reduction contributions to employer- sponsored IRAs, as well as information on IRA contributions, fair market value, and distributions. For example, information on retirement plans are reported annually by employers and others to IRS on its Form W-2. The forms contain details on the type of plan offered by the employer.

ROUGE-1: 62.93, ROUGE-2: 57.85, ROUGE-L: 28.77
BERTScore: 59.81

==============================================
==================== [12/100] ====================
Summary:
2005 action modified the rate structure that was set in 1984. A second further notice of proposed rulemaking, issued on March 17, 2003, imposing additional requirements on third-party verification services became effective on July 21, 2003. The effectiveness of the new rules and their implementation is receiving continuing attention from Members of Congress, regulators, providers, and consumers. Since the development of competition in the provision of long distance telecommunications services, consumers have been able to select the carrier of their choice from among approximately 500 companies. Concern has been voiced by some that the consumer protections that were proposed were too extensive and may be overly burdensome and costly for smaller carriers. Mandatory third party verification is cited as an example of a proposal that would be costly for small carriers to implement. Proposals to require switchless resellers to post a "surety bond" with the FCC to pay for possible fines or penalties also came under criticism. The Telecommunications Resellers Association claims that such a provision not only discriminates against small businesses, but small businesses. the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico, have chosen to take on this responsibility. Verification procedures used to confirm carrier switches are strengthened and extended to include a number of circumstances. These verification methods are applied to both inbound calls (that are usually a customer initiated call to a toll-free number) and those that are made via an Internet-based LOA (see " Additional Issues " below). The most common method of verification is a consumer signature on an authorization paper form (i.e., a Letter of Agency) The FCC has also applied verification procedures to the practice of implementing carrier freeze requests. The rules require that solicitations for such freezes be clear and that the consumer be informed as to how such a freeze may be lifted. Verification rules are also applied to changes in local as well as long distance carriers, but wireless carriers are exempt. The FCC also noted that these verification procedures do not preempt state law. These verification methods are to be used as a state minimum, the FCC said in a statement. contained in the E-Sign Act ( P.L. 106-229 ), thereby allowing carrier changes to be made by consumers via the Internet. retaining the three-way call as a verification method but requiring the carrier's sales representative to drop off the call once the connection has been established between the subscriber and the third party verifier. New complaint reporting requirements for carriers which require carriers to submit semiannual reports to the FCC's Enforcement Bureau containing, among other information, the number of slamming complaints they have received. S. 58 was referred to the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee where no further action was taken. S. 1084 required the FCC, the Federal Trade Commission, and telecommunications carrier representatives to develop a code of practices to protect consumers from slamming. The code was required to contain, at a minimum, provisions that required companies to verify changes in a subscriber's service, restricted the use of "negative option marketing," and protected consumer's rights to use the PIC freeze option. (See section on " PIC Freeze Programs and Charges ", below.) the name of the person who authorized the switch, to the subscriber within 15 days. The use of negative option marketing, whereby a consumer must take some action to prevent a switch from occurring, was banned. The bill also strengthened the complaint procedure by requiring a company charged with slamming to resolve the complaint within 120 days. Any company that ignored a consumer's complaint was to be fined up to $1,000 and face up to three years in jail. The law also required the company to give the consumer a copy of the retained verification, information about how to pursue the complaint with the FCC, and all other available remedies. The FCC was required to establish a voluntary code of "Subscriber Protection Practices" within 180 days of enactment. Failure to comply with or withdrawal from the voluntary code would result in a carrier being subject to FCC regulation. H.R. 3888 also detailed specific, more stringent, minimum requirements to be incorporated into FCC-developed regulations for carriers not operating under the voluntaryCode. The bill was signed into law by President Barack Obama on June 14. The FCC was expected to review the code every two years to ensure that its requirements "adequately protect consumers" FCC rules currently require a long distance company to obtain a subscriber's authorization before a switch can occur. Authorization can be obtained in writing or can be confirmed orally. If a subscriber has been a victim of an unauthorized change, he/she is absolved of payment for up to 30 days; refunds of up to $1,000 are available. FCC rules protect consumers from paying potentially exorbitant rates.adopted its rules in response to the numerous complaints it received from state regulatory bodies, telecommunications carriers, and individual consumers. for the first 30-day period after an unauthorized switch. In cases where payment was made by the consumer, the unauthorized carrier must refund 150% of the charges to the authorized carrier. The authorized carrier is allowed to keep an amount equal to 100 percent of the consumer's bill with the remaining 50% returned to the consumer. Primary enforcement responsibility has been given to the states with the FCC assuming responsibility in those states unwilling or unable to undertake this role or if a complainant expressly indicates it wishes the FCC to resolve the matter. According to the FCC, 37 states, The court found that the requirement that the telecommunications carrier verify that the actual subscriber, and not just the person answering the line and claiming to have authority to authorize a carrier switch, authorize the switch exceeded the FCC's statutory authority. The court stated that the statue does not require actual authorization but only requires that the carrier get verification. Furthermore the court said that the FCC gives carriers "a virtually impossible task: guaranteeing that the person who answers the telephone is in fact authorized to make changes to that phone line" S. 1618 also applied to the unauthorized initiation of long distance service as well as unauthorized switching. The local telephone company was prohibited from changing a consumer's long distance provider unless the change is accompanied by a verbal, written, or electronic verification from the subscriber. The long distance company or reseller was required to send a written confirmation of the switch that includes the name of the new carrier, the date the switch was authorized, and the date of the change. Furthermore, the bill required that the verification be retained. The Competitive Telecommunications Association felt that the $5 PIC change charge safe harbor, that was established in 1984, exceeded the actual cost and hampers competition. The FCC concluded that "significant industry and market changes have occurred since the implementation of the $ 5.00 safe harbor in 1984" The FCC adopted a new fee structure that local exchange carriers may charge for interstate PIC changes in 2005. Under the new rules PICchange charges, which are borne by the customer, are lower. The FCC established safe harbors of $1.25 for electronically-processed PIC changes and $5.50 for manually processed PIC change. Local exchange carriers can charge more if they can document higher costs and less than the safe harbor rate if they choose. The FCC has no authority over charges set for intrastate carrier changes which fall under state jurisdiction; however, if a consumer switches intrastates long distance providers and interstate providers, they will be subject to a new safe harbor. The PIC charge for changing the interstate carrier is decreased by half, to 63 cents, for electronically processed changes. The possible misuse of the PIC freeze through the implementation of an illegal or unauthorized PIC Freeze by the customer's local exchange carrier has also been raised. In an October 14, 2005 action the FCC extended, for a second time, the effective date for the filing of revised P IC charge tariffs to be effective no later than January 1, 2006. The extension of thePIC freeze option, beyond the designation of the long PIC term, has been raised by the FCC. A PIC freeze is the freezing of a customer's primary interexchange (long distance) carrier, or PIC. It prohibits the switch of the customer's designated long distance carrier without his/her express approval. While most see the PIC Freeze as a viable option to prevent slamming in the long distance market, some concerns have been expressed over the potential for misuse of this option. Some see the potential to misuse this option as a way to make it easier for customers to switch carriers. Local exchange carriers defend the use of the PIC freeze, arguing that it is an appropriate method to protect consumers against the growing problem of slamming. They assert that there have been no widespread complaints about the manner in which the P IC freeze is implemented. They favor the establishment of an independent third party to administer and execute such changes. The FCC has encouraged carriers to take steps to help prevent slamming, they say. They also state that the manner of the program is implemented varies, and note that the way in which it is implemented is not uniform. distance carrier, to cover the designation of local exchange and intrastate long distance (toll call) carriers. Some feel that the PIC freeze is being misused to protect the local exchange carriers market share in the face of growing competition. Some support the elimination of local. exchange carriers and support the introduction of a national long-distance carrier. Some see the expanded use of the P IC freeze option as unnecessary and feel that it is being used to protect local exchange carrier market share. and, if needed, initiate a rulemaking, within 120 days after the completion of its report, to prohibit undesirable practices. The "Telecommunications Competition and Consumer Protection Act of 1998" ( H.R. 3888 ), passed the House by voice vote, with amendment, on October 12, 1998. The House-passed measure contained a different approach from its Senate counterpart to combat slamming. The bill called for the establishment of a voluntary code of conduct as an alternative to FCC rules. H.R. 3888 was passed by the House Commerce Committee and ultimately the full House. It gives state attorneys general enforcement authority under the federal legislation. The bill also gives subscribers credit for charges incurred when using the slamming carrier's service. It directs the Commerce Department's National Telecommunications and Information Administration to report to Congress on "the feasibility and desirability" of establishing a neutral third party to administer a system to prevent slamming. It was significantly different from the subcommittee-passed version of the bill. The "Consumer Anti-Slamming Act of 1998" ( S. 1618 ), passed the Senate (99-0) with amendment, on May 12, 1998. This measure sought to combat the increase in slamming by strengthening safeguards to prevent slamming from occurring in the first place. Negotiations between the House and Senate to reconcile differences between the two measures continued through the waning days of the session. Despite such efforts, however, H.R. 3888 was not brought to the Senate floor. The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced 11 bills to address this issue. Despite intense negotiations to resolve differences between the bills, the Congress adjourned before passing legislation. S. 1618 , the "Consumer Anti-Slamming Act," passed the Senate(99-0) with amendment, on May 12, 1998. H.R. 3888 passed the House, as amended, by voice vote, on October 12,1998. The House of Representatives passed the bill, but the Senate did not vote on it. Section 258 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 expands jurisdiction over, and creates a new penalty for, any telecommunications carrier. Section 258(a) prohibited telecommunications carriers from changing a subscriber's selection of both telephone exchange (local) and toll (long distance) service, unless the change complies with verification procedures prescribed by the FCC. The section expanded the FCC's authority over such activity to include local as well as long distance service. It was part of a major rewrite of the 1934 Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 151 et.seq). a company's revenue the more consumers it can slam without appearing to be a major offender. LCI recommends that the FCC calculate its slamming rate ratio by dividing the number of slamming complaints by theNumber of new long distance customers. H.R. 2112 (Franks) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to increase the forfeiture penalty for telephone service slamming and to require providers of such service to report slamming incidents, and for other purposes. Introduced July 8, 1997; referred to Committee on Commerce. H.R. 4176 (Markey) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to protect consumers against 'spamming', 'slamming', and 'cramming' and for other purposes. S. 1051 (Campbell) To enhance protections against unauthorized changes of telephone service subscribers from one telecommunications carrier to another. S 1740 (Collins) To improve protections against the unauthorized change of subscribers from. one telecommunications carriers to another, and forOther purposes. H. R. 105-801 passed House by voice vote, with amendment, October 12, 1998. A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to strengthen and expand the procedures for preventing the slamming of interstate telephone service subscribers. H.R. 3050 (Dingell) A measure to establish procedures and remedies for the prevention of fraudulent and deceptive practices in the solicitation of telephone service subscriber. S. 1618 (McCain) A bill to improve protections against telephone service "slamming" and provide protections against phone billing "cramming" S. 58 (Collins) A. bill to provide the Federal Trade Commission jurisdiction over unfair and deceptive trade practices of telecommunications carriers. H.R. 3888 (Tauzin) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve the protection of consumers against slamming by telecommunications carriers, and for other purposes. Introduced April 29, 1998; referred to Committee on Commerce. Passed Telecommunications Subcommittee, as amended, by voice vote, August 6, 1998. Reported out of committee October 1, 1998, and passed the House of Representatives on September 24,1998, and the Senate on September 26, 1998,. and the House passed the bill on September 27, 1998., and the Senate passed it on September 28, 1998. The Government Accountability Office (GAO), (known at that time as the General Accounting Office), undertook an investigation into the general issue of slamming. This report, Telephone Slamming and Its Harmful Effects , was released in conjunction with testimony given at Subcommittee hearings. The Fletcher Companies, a long distance provider that has come under regulatory scrutiny, and has since had its license revoked, for slamming complaints. By changing their names, the companies were able to avoid scrutiny. The GAO report was released at the request of Senator Collins, then Chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. FCC Chairman Kennard was called to testify at the hearing. Kennard defended the FCC's actions stating that the tariff filing procedure was not developed as a deterrent to slamming. He also pointed to the severe punishment taken against Fletcher Companies to defend FCC actions. At the request of Senator Collins, the GAO undertook a second study examining the scope of and state and federal actions taken by the FCC. The GAO concluded that the FCC had taken the appropriate steps to combat slamming and that it was investigating the matter further. telephone line." On March 17, 2003, the FCC issued a second further notice of proposed rulemaking (CC Docket 94-129; FCC 03-42) strengthening requirements on third-party verification procedures. These rules became effective July 21, 2003. New initiatives are established to ease the filing of consumer complaints and speed their resolution. These include the establishment of a website to allow consumers to file complaints electronically and obtain on-line consumer protection information. The FCC also established a toll-free number at the FCC to enable consumers tofile complaints over the telephone. The FCC has also adopted rules that establish truth-in-billing and billing format principles. These rules establish requirements that are "intended to protect consumers against inaccurate and unfair billing practices" A number of issues not addressed in the April 13, 2000 reconsideration order were addressed in a subsequent FCC order adopted on July 21, 2000. These include permitting the use of Internet LOAs in compliance with provisions of the FCC rules. The rules went into effect on April 2, 2001, and are intended to improve the resolution of complaints. The FCC continues to take actions to enforce and further strengthen its slamming rules. The last of these new rules went into effect on November 28, 2000. Under these revised rules, states have the option of processing slamming complaints, and numerous states have opted to do so.been introduced in the 109 th Congress, to date. On March 14, 2002, the FCC initiated a notice of proposed rulemaking to examine primary interexchange (long distance) carrier (PIC) change charges. The industry is attempting to self-regulate and has put forth proposals to stop this activity. The FCC currently has policies and rules to protect consumers from the unauthorized switching of their long distance carriers, and it enforces them through the investigation of individual complaints. State regulatory bodies and legislatures, and law enforcement officials, are also taking actions to stop the practice. However, a review of state-level activities regarding slamming is beyond the scope of this report. It is not known if the proposal will be introduced in the 109th Congress. Long distance service. State utility commissions are also permitted to enforce the procedures with respect to services within their state boundaries. Section 258(b) created a new penalty, in addition to already existing penalties contained in law. Any telecommunications carrier that violates those procedures and collects charges for such service is required to pay the subscriber's properly designated carrier all the charges collected from that subscriber since the change occurred. The requirement prevents violators from receiving financial rewards for the illegal switch. The FCC, in a December 17, 1998 action (CC Docket No. 94-129), adopted new regulations in compliance with the 1996 Act. These rules, with the exception of the liability provisions, went into effect in April 1999. The liability provisions were stayed by the D.C. Court of Appeals. On May 3, 2000 the FCC issued revised slamming liability rules which met court approval and the stay was lifted on June 27, 2000. These revised liability rules have since been implemented, taking effect on November 28,2000. The rules absolve slammed consumers of liability for charges incurred by statute, versus FCC developed policies. The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced many bills to address this issue, but adjourned without passing legislation. Two measures to further strengthen slamming regulations, S. 58 , and S. 1084 , were introduced in the 106 th Congress, but neither was enacted. The FCC has revised its rules with an eye to strengthening its regulations and increasing penalties for violators. No legislation addressing slamming was introduced in either the 107 th or 108 th Congress and none has local telecommunications services becomes more widespread. Industry initiatives, such as the ones discussed above, to support that position. Others support vigorous enforcement of current FCC regulations and continued consumer education to combat the increase in slamming complaints. The enactment of additional legislative measures prescribing new regulations is seen, by some, as an action that is unnecessary and that should be taken only as a last resort if the slamming problem continues. The extent and growth of the existing slamming problem is not yet known, but it is expected to grow over the next few years. problem, coupled with the potential for further abuse, make it necessary, supporters claim, to enact legislation to curb slamming. The release of a GAO report critical of current FCC efforts to reduce the occurrence of slamming gave supporters of legislation additional impetus in the 105 th and 106 th Congresses. It is up to the Congress, they state, to establish through law stronger measures and increased penalties to protect both consumers and suppliers of telecommunications services from slamming. Those in favor of enactment of legislation also state that FCC regulations directly supported slamming. Two measures, S. 58 and S. 1084, were introduced in the 106 th Congress relating to the slamming issue. Senator Susan Collins introduced the "Telephone Services Fraud Prevention and Enforcement Act of 1999" on January 19, 1999. While Senator Collins acknowledged recent FCC actions to strengthen slamming rules, to date no legislation has been introduced in either the 107 th or 108 th Congress nor in the 109 th Congress to date. The FCC's strengthened slamming rules and subsequent enforcement actions will be a sufficient deterrent to stop the practice of slamming. its regulations to deter slamming as "... a step in the right direction" she felt that "... we need to do more to protect consumers..." against slamming. Senator McCain introduced the "Telecommunications Competition and Consumer Protection Act of 1999" ( S. 1084 ) on May 19, 1999, one day after the court stay of FCC slamming liability rules. The issue of cramming, that is the practice of placing unauthorized, misleading, or deceptive charges on consumer's telephone bills goes beyond the scope of this report. th Congress to pass slamming legislation, court action to stay FCC liability rules (which has since been lifted), and his objection to the industry-proposed third party administrator. S. 58 attempted to further deter the practice of slamming by increasing consumer protections and strengthening enforcement at both the federal and state level. Included among the provisions to deter slamming contained in this measure were those that required extensive and written notification and verification requirements when a subscriber switches long distance carriers; specified that federal law does not preempt more restrictive state laws. providing services in 1997, during the FCC's investigation. This action was taken, according to the FCC, to ensure that none of these companies can resume operation and "engage in slamming or other conduct ... harmful to consumers" Provisions contained in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (see discussion below) expand the scope of FCC's authority to address the problem of unauthorized switches. The FCC, in a December 17, 1998 order and subsequent reconsiderations, expanded upon and adopted more stringent rules to combat slamming. laws or regulations relating to slamming; authorized stiff penalties for those convicted of slamming. First time "willful violators" would have faced up to a year in prison for a first offense with repeat offenders up to five years. The bill extended FCC authority over violators beyond telecommunications carriers to include others such as billing agents; required local telephone companies to submit to the FCC, on a quarterly basis, a list of the number of slamming complaints received by service provider; be subject to a penalty for slamming. charges are set at 150 percent, split between the authorized carrier (100%) and the subscriber (50%) Carriers proven to be in violation of FCC rules are subject to fines and penalties. From April 1994 to the end of 1999, the FCC imposed final forfeitures against 8 companies for $10.3 million, entered into consent decrees with 12 carriers with combined payments of $2.7 million and proposed $7.6 million in proposed notices of apparent liability against 5 companies. The FCC continues to take enforcement actions against violators. AT&T v. FCC found that the FCC exceeded its statutory authority in enforcing certain of its slamming rules relating to customer verification. While not remanding the FCC's rules the court did vacate fines totaling $80,000 imposed on AT&T. But additional verification procedures may be adopted for intrastate carrier changes. The FCC had imposed a fine on AT & T for slamming when an unauthorized person, without the knowledge of the line subscriber, authorized to slam the phone. But the court found that this was not the case and vacated the fine. actions totaling nearly $30 million. FCC action in 2004 by the Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau, on behalf of individual consumers, resolved about 3500 slamming complaints involving more than 300 carriers. In an April 21, 1998 action, the FCC levied its most severe penalty for slamming to date. For the first time, it revoked the operating authority of a telecommunications provider. In its first joint federal/state effort, the FEC filed on June 20, 2002, a $1.2 million fine against WebNet Communications Inc. of McLean, Va. Fletcher Companies, a group of long distance telephone companies, are barred from providing interstate telecommunications services without the prior consent of the FCC. The FCC assessed forfeitures totaling $5.7 million but has never been able to collect. According to the FCC, it received more than 1,400 complaints against the Fletcher Companies, the majority of them filed from mid-1996 through 1997. Although these companies stopped using slamming, the FCC has not been successful in collecting the forfeitures it was owed. subscribers could recover damages up to $500 from slammers. Those convicted of intentional slamming ("willful" slammers) would have been subject to criminal penalties. Switchless resellers were required to post a bond with the FCC before they were able to offer long distance services. The FCC was given the authority to prosecute those who refuse to pay their fines. The move was intended to ensure some degree of financial capability and that proceeds are used to pay for services that are needed by subscribers. would also cause an "anticompetitive effect" in the marketplace by decreasing consumer choice. Proposals to require slammers to pay fines to consumers they harm could result in the creation of the "wrong incentive structure..." according to AT&T. Provisions that give full reimbursement to consumers if they are slammed, instead of solely reimbursement of the overcharge, have generated concerns that it might possibly lead to consumers fraudulently claiming they have been slammed, to avoid paying any charges for long distance calls. Some have expressed concerns that fines and punishments not be levied against the long distance carrier in all cases. On the other hand, local exchange carriers have expressed some concerns that they should not be held liable for solely executing a change since short of confirming each switch, they cannot insure that each change is authorized by the consumer. One practice currently used to reward people who have been slammed instead of trying to discipline those who do the slamming, is to reward the person who slammed you instead of punishing you. "Slamming" is when a consumer's telephone service provider is changed without their knowledge or consent. This unauthorized change can occur for several reasons, ranging from computer or human error to unscrupulous or illegal marketing practices. Consumers often do not realize they have been slammed until they find unfamiliar names or charges on their telephone bills. For some who do not examine their bills, such changes can go undetected for months or even longer. According to data released by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), slamming continues to be a problem. The Competitive Telecommunications Association (CompTel) issued a statement that called for "zero tolerance" of intentional slamming. CompTel urged carriers to agree to investigate all slamming allegations, repay consumers who have been the victims of slamming, and terminate any employees or agents who "knowingly and willfully engaged in such practices" The statement also advocated uniformity in state and federal slamming requirements, to lessen consumer confusion, and called for the levying of fines, but solely in cases where it has been proven necessary. proven that the carrier "has engaged in willful and intentional slamming...." Although virtually no one supports the practice of intentional slamming, some concerns have been expressed over the approaches being taken to curb this practice. One concern has focused on the necessity for, or concern over specific provisions contained in, legislative proposals. Two other concerns addressed in legislation have also generated controversy: the implementation of primary interexchange carrier (PIC) freeze programs; and the methodology used by the FCC to develop slamming statistics. from carrier to carrier and that many of the potential and perceived abuses, such as high charges or difficultly in switching, do not apply to most programs. Many local exchange carriers claim that they do not actively market the PIC freeze option but only offer it in response to customers who complain about slamming or who specifically inquire about it. The methodology used by the FCC to develop slamming statistics has also been brought under question. The GAO criticized the methodology used to determine the list of top slamming offenders. GAO: FCC, states, and telecommunications industry have been effective in protecting the consumer from telephone slamming. GAO: Information provided by all long distance carriers in compliance with FCC-required tariff filing procedures, is not reviewed and is no deterrent to a slammer. The most effective action that consumers can take to eliminate the chance of intentional slamming is to have their local exchange carrier freeze their choice of long distance providers. The conclusions reached in the GAO report regarding FCC efforts to deter slamming were discussed during hearings held, on April 23, 1998, by the Senate Permanent Investigations Subcommittee. Slamming is the practice of placing unauthorized charges for services and products on a consumer's telephone bill. Cramming continues to be a significant problem for consumers, according to a 1999 report. State and federal regulations taken to protect consumers from such abuses, as well as industry initiatives taken to curb these abuses, are included in the report. The report was issued in July 1999 and focused on two abuses, slamming and cramming, and was based on data from 1996 through 1998. It also contains information on the number of complaints filed, state and federal actions taken to prevent such abuses. notification of any changes in service, and forbade the use of unfair and deceptive practices. Carriers were required to give subscribers who are victims of slamming credits for unauthorized charges and damages of $500. S. 1084 was referred to the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee and received no further action. The bill required the FCC to compile and publish a report, every six months, listing slamming violations by carrier. Adherence to the code would have been voluntary, but those carriers that chose not to follow it would have to follow regulations prescribed by the FCC. "patterns and practices" of slamming. The FCC was required to submit a report to Congress, by October 31, 1998, identifying the "top ten" carriers that were the subject of the most slamming complaints. The bill also required the FCC to issue a report, within 180 days of the bill's enactment, on telemarketing practices used to solicit service provider changes by subscribers, and to identify the top ten carriers that had the highest number of slamming complaints in the previous year. The report was to be based on a ratio of the number of subscriber complaints to the total number of subscribers served. The FCC was also required to compile and publish a report, on a semiannual basis, ranking carriers by the percentage of verified complaints, excluding those generated by the carrier's unaffiliated resellers. Carriers listed among the five worst performers for three consecutive times were to be subject to FCC investigation. Carrier found in violation of the voluntary code or found willfully and repeatedly slamming were subject to a fine of up to $1 million. The FCC has not commented on the new rules, which are expected to be implemented in the coming months. The FCC compares slamming offenders by citing the ratio of the number of complaints per million dollars of company revenue. That methodology, according to the GAO, is flawed because it can lead to a severe understatement of the revenue-to-complaint ratio for the smaller companies, or resellers. This occurs because resellers are not required to, and generally do not, report their revenue to the FCC unless the revenue exceeds $109 million. To enable the FCC to make comparisons, to list the top slamming offenders, the FCC assumes that those resellers that have not provided revenue data, had revenues of $109 million. LCI International Inc., a long distance carrier in the United States, has also expressed concern over the manner in which the FCC calculates yearly slamming rates. Unlike the GAO, LCI claims that the FCC's current practice of dividing the number of slamming complaints by a company's annual telecommunications revenue favors larger carriers. This occurs,LCI states, because the larger the company, the more complaints it receives. The FCC's slamming team in 2004 resolved approximately 3,500 slamming complaints involving over 300 telephone carriers, resulting in consumer refunds totaling $800,000. The potential for slamming is expected to increase as competition in the provision of intrastate long distance and long-distance phone services increases. Over 50 million carrier selection changes are recorded each year, and it is assumed that filed complaints represent a subset of the actual problem. The number of slamming complaints rose to 36,220 inquiries and 1,932 complaints filed in 2005.

ROUGE-1: 82.58, ROUGE-2: 76.02, ROUGE-L: 26.99
BERTScore: 63.06

==============================================
==================== [13/100] ====================
Summary:
The IG Act created independent IG offices at 30 major departments and agencies. In 1988, the IG Act was amended to establish additional IG offices in 33 DFEs. The DFE IGs have the same authorities and responsibilities as those IGs originally established. But they are appointed and may be removed by their agency heads rather than by the President and are not subject to Senate confirmation. the IGs established under other statutes. Although not in the scope of our review, there are 10 IGs establish by other statutes with provisions similar to those in the IG act. IGs established by the IG Act of 1978, as amended, with appointment by the President and Senate confirmation. The Department of State IG provides oversight of the Broadcasting Board of Governors, which is a designed federal entity. The IG is a member of the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board. In addition to the contact named above, Jackson W. Hufnagle, Assistant Director; Jacquelyn Hamilton; Werner F. Miranda Hernandez; Rebecca Shea; and Clarence A. Whitt made key contributions to this report. Act intended to enhance IG independence. IGs reported pay that was at specified levels required by the Reform Act for IGs appointed by the President. Reform Act also requires that each IG established by the IG Act have his or her own legal counsel or obtain necessary legal counsel from another IG office or from the IG Council. In a March 1995 report, we reported that the IG community expressed concerns that IGs with attorneys located organizationally in their agencies’ offices of general counsel would not always receive independent legal advice. All 32 DFE IGs who responded to our survey indicated that they obtain independent legal counsel, with 26 employing their own counsel, 5 using the legal counsels of other IGs’ offices, and 1. For the 30 IGs appointed by the President, 29 employ their own legal counsel while 1 IG uses the legal services of another IG. The results from our survey show that all the IGs established by the IG Act reported having access to a legal counsel that is organizationally independent. No IGs rely on the general counsel offices of their agencies. fiscal year 2011, and the IGs’ semiannual reports to the Congress. We asked all of the 62 IGs about the implementation of Reform Act provisions intended to keep IG pay and salaries at a specified level for IGs appointed by the President. We also received and incorporated as appropriate technical comments from several IG offices. We believe that the information and data obtained, and analysis conducted, provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions. We requested comments on a draft of this report from the IG Council. The IG Reform Act of 2008 (Reform Act) amended the IG Act by adding requirements related to IG independence and effectiveness. Among other provisions, the Reform Act requires the rate of basic pay of the IGs appointed by the President to be at a specified level. The Reform Act also requires an IG to obtain legal advice from his or her own counsel ability in accounting, auditing, financial analysis, law, management analysis, public administration, or investigation. The fields in which an IG can have experience are intended to be sufficiently diverse so that many qualified people could be considered. IGs’ survey information provided on the background of each IG, including professional experience, academic degrees, and professional certifications obtained prior to being appointed to an IG position. We compared this information to the areas of demonstrated ability specified by the IG Act and summarized the number of IGs in each area. We conducted our work from November 2010 to September 2011 in accordance with all sections of GAO’s Quality Assurance Framework that are relevant to our objectives. The framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives. contained recommendations for corrective actions. For example, the Farm Credit Administration IG assessed the agency’s readiness to take enforcement actions related to its mission. The 62 federal IGs responding to our survey reported information on their expertise and qualifications. The IGs’ information showed a wide range of backgrounds, skills, and professional certifications relevant to their work consistent with the areas of demonstrated experience specified by the IG Act. The Postal Service IG provided recommendations to improve the efficiency of postal operations related to performance management in sorting the mail. systems auditors, and 7 with other certifications such as a certified government auditing professional. We received comments from the IG Council (reprinted in app. V), on September 13, 2011. The council commented that the draft provided useful information on the independence, activities, and accomplishments of the federal inspectors general. We also received, and incorporated as appropriate, technical comments from several IG staff members, including a certified information officer and a certified inspector general. (See fig. 5.) appointed by the President have their pay adjusted from Executive Schedule IV to Executive Schedule III plus 3 percent. The Reform Act requires that the grade, level, or rank designation for the DFE IGs be set at or above that of a majority of the senior-level executives of the agency. Of the 32 D FE IGs who responded to our survey, 29 reported that their pay and salaries were consistent with those of theSenior-level Executives of their agencies. of the remaining 3 IGs, 1 was newly established in fiscal year 2011 and had not yet determined an amount of pay consistent with senior- level executives. Figure 3 summarizes the background experiences of the 62 IGs who responded to our survey. Most of the IGs reported having degrees in areas that are relevant to performing in an IG position. Additional degrees were reported by both presidential and DFE IGs in areas of criminal justice, investigations, law enforcement; management analysis; and public administration. Other academic degrees reported by presidential and IGs included mathematics, science, sociology, education, psychology, and English. With respect to academic degrees, we also obtained information on the academic degrees obtained by the62 IGs. professional certifications, 6 IGs appointed by the President reported having professional certifications. 28 DFE IGs reported they possessed at least one professional certification related to their IG responsibilities. For the presidential IGs, 2 were certified fraud examiners, 1 reported being a certified internal auditor. 6 reported they are certified public accountants and 6 reported that they were certified internal auditors. Additional certifications reported by the D FE IGs include 6 certified government financial managers, 4 fraud examiner, 3 certified information managers and 2 had certifications in additional separate areas. The IG Act requires the agency head to transmit the IG report to the appropriate committees or subcommittees of the Congress within 7 calendar days. We asked whether any of the 62 IGs we surveyed had used the 7-day letter at any time during fiscal years 2008, 2009, and 2010. Only one, a presidentially appointed IG, had used it during this time frame. Provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act amending the IG Act are intended to provide an additional degree of independence to IGs. The Dodd-Frank Act requires the written concurrence of a two-thirds majority of the board or commission to remove an IG. Prior to this protection, most DFE IGs reported to, and were subject to removal by, the individual serving as head of the DFE. The Reform Act also independence to those IGs in DFEs with boards or commissions. Of these 26 IGs, 14 reported that the act’s provision was a factor in their decision to resign. The Dodd-Frank Act amended the IG Act with provisions to enhance the independence of IGs in DFEs with boards or commissions. The IG Act also provides protections to the independent of the IGs while keeping both their agency heads and the Congress fully and currently informed about particularly flagrant problems and deficiencies within their agencies. Just over half of these IGs responded that the change of agency head to the full board or commission increased their independence. Most responded that requirements for a two- thirds concurrence among the board orCommissions increased independence. designating the boards and commissions as the DFE heads enhances their independence, and 20 responded that their independence is enhanced by requiring a two-thirds majority for their removal. A smaller number of affected IGs stated that these provisions had no effect on their independence. One DFE IG affected by the provisions did not respond to these survey questions. Also, a former D FE IG stated that reporting to his commission would reduce his independence, according to the survey. The survey was carried out by the European Commission. The fiscal year 2011 budget included amounts for 28 of the 30 presidentially appointed IGs. Of the 28 presidential IGs with budget amounts separately disclosed in the President's budget, 1 included comments indicating that the IG’s fiscal year2011 budget would substantially inhibit the IG from performing the duties of the office. There were four newly established DFE IGs that were not part of the full fiscalyear 2011 budget process. The President’S budget had specific budget amounts for only 7 of the 33 DFEIGs. same provisions for both the DFE IGs and the IGs appointed by the President. The IGs’ effectiveness was reflected in a range of reported accomplishments, such as potential dollars to be saved by the government through the results of federal IG audits, investigations, and other reports. We notified the IG Council that most of the D FE IGs did not have separate budget amounts included in the President’s budget submission to the Congress. The IG Council has responded that it will review and assess this matter and, if necessary, work with congressional and administration officials. their IGs have correspondingly smaller budgets and fewer staff. The presidentially appointed IGs and the DFE IGs reported to us total budget authority for fiscal year 2010 of about $2.2 billion with approximately 13,652 authorized full-time equivalent staff. They had about 86 percent (11,564) of the total staff on board. The budgets of the D FE IGs made up about 16 percent (about $352 million) for IGs, the report said. fiscal year 2009, these IGs identified $43.3 billion in potential savings from audits and investigations. Over 5,900 criminal actions, 1,100 civil actions, 4,460 suspensions or debarments, and over 6,100 indictments resulted from their work. Based on this information, the potential dollar savings reported by these IGS represent a return on investment of approximately $18 for every IG dollar spent. In addition to measurable accomplishments, IGs also reported actions taken to prevent problems within their agencies. concurrence of a two-thirds majority of the board or commission for removal of an IG. We obtained information on the accomplishments of the IGs as reported to the IG Council for fiscal year 2009. We also obtained information reported by the Recovery Board on its members prior to an IG’s removal. In addition, based on our review of the President's fiscal year 2011 budget submission to the Congress, the IGS’ budget amounts were not always separately identified as required by the Reform Act. because the commission has both federal and state members. The current IG who took office during our review stated that the primary concern is how nonfederal members would exercise their authority over a federal IG. The Reform Act amended the IG Act to require that IG budget requests include certain information and be separately identified in the President’s budget submission to the Congress. In addition, along with the separately identified IG budgets, the IGs may include comments with respect to the budget if the amount of the IG budget submitted by the agency or the President would substantially inhibit. We will send copies of this report to members of the IG Council. We will also send copies to the Chairman and the Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on Finance. If you have any questions or would like to discuss this report, please contact me at (202) 512-8486 or raglands@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of the report. The full report can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/congress/gfo-survey. mission and accomplishments in providing oversight of Recovery Act funds. In their annual report to the President, the IGs identified billions of dollars in savings and cost recoveries. The IGs’ effectiveness was demonstrated by their reporting on oversight of management challenges identified at their agencies. For example, IGs in agencies receiving Recovery Act. funds have reported providing oversight in the areas of establishing and maintaining controls to help. ensure the funds are used properly. The IG Act was passed in 2000 to help prevent fraud, waste, and abuse. included a provision intended to provide additional IG independence through the transparent reporting of their budgets. The Reform Act requires the President’s budget submission to the Congress to have the IGs’ requested budget amounts identified separately. The Recovery Act provided for IG oversight of the funds. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Recovery Act) is one of the federal government”s key efforts to stimulate the economy in response to the most serious economic crisis since the Great Depression. by creating the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board (Recovery Board), which has an IG Chairman and 12 additional IG board members. Altogether, there are 30 IGs involved with the oversight of Recovery Act funds. The Recovery Act requires IG reviews of concerns raised by the public about investments of stimulus funds and provides IGs the authority to examine records and interview Recovery Act fund contractors and grantees. Each IG appointment is to be without regard to political affiliation and solely on the basis of integrity and expertise. The Recovery Board is charged under the act with establishing and maintaining a user friendly website to foster greater accountability and transparency in the use of Recovery Act funds. To help prevent fraud and other potential wrongdoing, the IGs offered training to federal, state, and local employees, as well as contractors, private entities, and award recipients. The IGs’ training was intended to improve awareness of the legal and administrative requirements of the Recovery Act programs. The management challenges reported annually by federal agencies in their performance and accountability reports are key to focusing on effective IG oversight. management challenges by the IGs began in 1997. Congressional leaders asked IGs to identify the 10 most serious management problems in their respective agencies. This request began a yearly process that continues as a result of the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000. Most of the 203 management challenges they reported for fiscal year 2010 focused on issues specific to their agencies’ missions and performance management. For example, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s IG reported that major changes to the direction of the agency were needed. was often identified as a management challenge. The performance management issues the DFE IGs identified as management challenges included timely implementation of IG recommendations by the Peace Corps. Concerns over internal controls, improper payments, and the security of federal property were also included in the “other’s” category. In addition, the D FE IGs issued reports that addressed almost 90 percent of the management challenges identified and addressed. The report was released on Tuesday. It was compiled by the Federal Maritime Commission, the National Labor Relations Board and the National Archives and Records Administration. Department of Health and Human Services IG cited the management challenges associated with delivery of the nation’s health care. The other management challenges addressed by the IGs relate to information technology, procurement, financial management, and human resources. In addition to providing oversight coverage of management challenges, the presidential IGs issued reports that addressed about 93 percent of themanagement challenges identified. These reports contained recommendations for improving the weaknesses specified by theManagement challenges. For example, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation IG recommended strengthening specific controls over managing the space program. closing process for failed financial institutions which is a key aspect of FDIC’s mission regarding insured depository institutions. Also, the Social Security Administration IG identified transparency and accountability issues as an agency management challenge. The DFE IGs reported 124 management challenges for fiscal year 2010, with a focus on their agencies’ missions, information technology, and performance management. For example, the Farm Credit Administration's IG reported management challenges related to the safety, soundness, and mission accomplishment of the Farm credit System.

ROUGE-1: 70.33, ROUGE-2: 66.45, ROUGE-L: 35.67
BERTScore: 67.98

==============================================
==================== [14/100] ====================
Summary:
UNSG Report, a total of 87 humanitarian workers have been killed in Syria in the conflict. This includes 17 staff members of the UN, 53 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, 8 volunteers and staff of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society. Administrative procedures put in place by the Syrian government have delayed or limited the delivery of humanitarian assistance, according to UNSG reports. These reports detail multiple instances of unanswered requests for approvals of convoys, denial or removal of medical supplies from convoys. staff, and restrictions on international and national NGOs’ ability to operate. One organization told us that the Syrian government has effectively prohibited it from undertaking more permanent activities for displaced persons inside Syria. In early 2016 State reported that since the beginning of 2015, the Syriangovernment had received 113 requests from the UN to deliver humanitarian aid. of the UN had been asked to deliver aid, of which 113 requests had been made since the start of 2015. Of the 113 requests made, of the 113, of them were for humanitarian aid to be delivered in Syria. Humanitarian assistance is routinely prevented or delayed from reaching its intended target due to shifting conflict lines, attacks on aid facilities and workers. The years of conflict have led to shifting areas of control as armed groups claim and lose territory. In late May 2015, for example, after ISIS took over the city of Palmyra, it was reported that aid workers had not been able to reach the city. The UN has released a report on the situation inside Syria, as well as interviews with officials providing assistance to Syria. Secretary General (UNSG) reports on the humanitarian situation in Syria from March 2014, when the reports began, through December 2015. The reports, which are submitted to the Security Council pursuant to Resolution 2139 (2014), provide information on the Humanitarian Situation in Syria. The extent to which the parties to the conflict are allowing humanitarian relief organizations to access people in need inside the country is also part of the reports. We also conducted interviews with officials from State (Population, Refugees, and Migration), and USAID (the The UN reported that in 2015, only 10 percent of all requests for UN inter-agency convoys to hard-to-reach and besieged areas were approved and delivered. Even when these convoys were approved, the officials participating in delivering the assistance were sometimes subjected to hours-long delays, stretching into the middle of the night. State's and USAID’s implementing partners also told us that they rarely operate inside ISIS controlled areas because they cannot ensure that they will be able to operate. within the humanitarian principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality, and operational independence. The UN reports contain multiple instances of ISIS blocking humanitarian and commercial access into and through areas under its control. For example, in November 2015, the UN reported that ISIS controlled and blocked humanitarian access to a stretch of highway leading to the western parts of Aleppo city. As a result, theUN was unable to deliver assistance to over 220,000 people. Due to restrictions, USAID and State staff manage the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria remotely from neighboring countries. forces and indiscriminate shelling by armed opposition groups. Implementing partner officials based in Damascus, Syria, told us that they are constantly reaching out to contacts to determine the safety of planned delivery routes. Humanitarian workers inside Syria must work within the insecure operating environment, affecting their ability to carry out their mission and placing their lives at risk. In addition, aid facilities are often indirectly impacted or directly targeted, leading to widespread damage. According to the UN reports, there are frequent instances of gunfire, car bombs, barrel bombs, rocket strikes, and mortar attacks near aid facilities. include the Syrian government, non-state opposition groups, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), and the al-Nusrah Front. In February 2016, the United States and Russia brokered a cessation of hostilities. According to the UN, the reduction in violence allowed for increased humanitarian assistance deliveries to hard-to-reach and besieged locations in Syria during the months of March and April. Other countries, including Russia, Saudi Arabia, and Iran, have strategic interests in Syria and have been directly or indirectly involved in the conflict. The ongoing conflict in Syria has created a serious humanitarian challenge. Syrians, as well as Palestinian and Iraqi refugees residing in Syria, have become increasingly vulnerable due to high levels of violence and insecurity. As of May 2016, the UN reported that more than 4.8 million Syrians had fled the country and registered as refugees, 6.5 million people were internally displaced, and 13.5million people inside Syria were in need of humanitarian assistance. In addition, millions of people remain trapped in besieged and other hard-to-reach areas of the country where delivery of aid is difficult. As of May 2016, the UN reported that 4.6 million people inside Syria are located in hard-to-reach areas. More than 500,000 of those remain besieged by ISIS, the government of Syria, or non-State armed opposition groups. Parties to the conflict heavily restrict or deny humanitarian access to besieged areas, and people risk infectious disease, malnutrition, poor sanitation, and lack of medical care. The UN estimated that the lives of roughly 42,000 people remained besieged by government forces in the towns of Madaya and Buqayn. reportedly seized the Syrian Arab Red Crescent warehouse, which contained food assistance for 35,000 people and hygiene kits for 15,000. This represented the largest loss USAID has experienced delivering aid inside Syria. According to one NGO based in Amman and operating in Syria, conflict lines in southern Syria that had been stable for a number of years began shifting rapidly in February 2016 due to Russian air strikes. All UNSG reports from 2014 and 2015 include descriptions of indiscriminate aerial bombardment by government forces. facilities and personnel; missing or detained humanitarian workers; and injury or death of humanitarian workers. In one instance, an air strike hit the Syrian Arab Red Crescent offices in Idlib, destroying ambulances and vehicles. The UN reported that, as a result, the capacity of the Red Crescent to provide first aid services in the city was curtailed. Medical facilities have also been attacked (see figure 7). Physicians for Human Rights reported that as of November 2015, there had been 336 attacks on 240 separate medical facilities and 697 medical personnel killed inside Syria. According to the UN, the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance inside Syria has risen steadily since 2012. U.S. funding obligated for humanitarian assistance for people affected by the conflict in Syria began in fiscal year 2012 and totaled just over $5 billion, as of February 2016. Food, shelter, nonfood items, health and nutrition, and water, sanitation and hygiene are among the main types of assistance provided inside the country, reflecting the most acute needs. The United States and the international community provide funding for a range of humanitarian Assistance inside Syria. The increasingly violent and widespread Syrian conflict has hindered effective delivery of humanitarian assistance. Financial oversight in humanitarian assistance programs includes managing program funds to ensure they are spent in accordance with funding instruments. U.S. agency officials must manage programs from outside of Syria, creating challenges for financial oversight, such as increasing the opportunity for fraud and diversion. A dangerous operating environment, access issues, and remote management of programs can hinder the delivery of aid. Based on our research, we believe the best way to deliver aid to people inside Syria is through cross-line deliveries. Since 2013, the United States has consistently led global funding efforts. The United States provided more than a quarter of the total international funding for the 2015 Syria humanitarian response. The resumption of active conflict in several governorates has hindered the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance as well as people’s access to essential services. In general, implementing partners operating out of neighboring countries, mainly Jordan and Turkey, cross the border into Syria to deliver assistance into opposition controlled areas. In this report we examine humanitarian assistance provided by the Department of State, the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), and implementing partners to people inside Syria. In February 2012, the U.S. embassy in Syria suspended operations because of concerns over staff safety due to escalating violence. Since then, the government has coordinated Syria-related activities from locations in Jordan and Turkey through two interagency teams. The Southern Syria Assistance Platform and the Syria Transition Assistance Response Team manage humanitarian programs for Syria in partnership with UN agencies, international NGOs, and national organizations. Humanitarian assistance operations on the ground inside Syria are heavily influenced by the ongoing conflict, which began in March 2011. To determine the extent to which State, USAID, and their partners have assessed risks to the programs, we selected a nongeneralizable sample of 12 fiscal year 2015 State and USAID funding instruments from 9 different implementing partners. The funding instruments were awarded by State’s Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration. The implementing partner was based in Syria or a neighboring country from which cross-border operations into Syria were conducted. While the results of our review of funding instruments cannot be generalized to the entire list, they present a mix of instrument dollar values, implementing partners and their locations, and types. By 2015, USAID had awarded roughly $50 million to an international NGO to deliver emergency food items to beneficiaries in southern Syria. Officials randomly select parcels for inspection to verify the quantity and quality of the contents. USAID awarded about $16 million in fiscal year 2015 to deliver medical supplies and equipment to support health-related infrastructure, such as clinics, among other types of aid and services. In Jordan, we visited their warehouse and observed officials randomly select items for inspection. of the types of controls implemented. USAID OIG has noted that aid organizations providing life-saving assistance in Syria and the surrounding region face an extremely high-risk environment. The absence of adequate internal controls can jeopardize the integrity of these relief efforts and deny critical aid to those in need. State and USAID do not require implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments for humanitarian assistance delivered to people inside Syria. While most partners assessed safety and security risks associated with such programs, most did not assess financial risks, such as fraud and loss due to theft and diversion. Syria is funded through voluntary contributions to public international organizations. Neither the funding instruments for these contributions nor State’s Federal Assistance Policy Directive require the implementing partner to conduct comprehensive risk assessments specifically related to the assistance. While there is not a requirement, according to State, it has established framework agreements with its implementing partners emphasizing the commitment of the partner to internal controls, including risk management. However, the voluntary contribution agreements between State and these implementing partners do not reference the framework agreements or require comprehensive risk assessment. warehouse where supplies were received, checked for quality, affixed with quick response (QR) codes, and packaged, as shown in figure 8. State and USAID have taken steps to oversee partner programs delivering humanitarian assistance inside Syria. State officials in the region conduct quarterly meetings with partners and collect information on programmatic objectives and on partner programs. State also has enhanced monitoring plans in place with its implementing partners to augment quarterly reporting with information on risks of diversion of assistance. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. USAID officials screen proposals from prospective partners to identify those that have appropriate measures to mitigate risks. USAID officials in the region maintain regular contact with partners, attend monthly meetings with them, conduct random spot checks of aid packages at warehouse facilities. Officials receive quarterly reports from partners to monitor progress before submitting them to USAID headquarters for additional review. The U.S. State Department asks partners to notify them upon discovering incidents of diversion. For example, one implementing partner provided frequent updates on losses it sustained from its transporters until the issue was resolved. monitoring data on individual activities, and assessing the quality of monitoring data reported to USAID. In the absence of direct program monitoring, USAID and State officials noted that they utilize information provided by implementing partners to help ensure effective delivery of assistance and to help their financial oversight. USAID officials in the region explained to us that while partners provide data and information, their inability to consistently access project sites limited the extent to which partners could obtain and use the data. The report was based on interviews with officials from USAID, the State Department, and the United Nations. of implementing partners, we interviewed officials from State and USAID in Washington, D.C. and Amman, Jordan. We also reviewed USAID’s contract with the third party monitoring organization, and supporting documentation, such as the monitoring plan, site visit template, and a complete monitoring report for February 2016. We interviewed officials. from State, USAID, and implementing partner organizations in Geneva, Switzerland, and Ankara and Antakya, Turkey. We met with officials from USAID and. implementing partner Organizations in Amman,. Jordan; and conducted telephone interviews with officials. GAO recommendation, FFP updated its program guidance in March 2015 to state that partners applying to conduct cash transfer and voucher-based food assistance programs should include in their applications an assessment of the risk of fraud or diversion. According to USAID, this represents a requirement that cash transfer, voucher programs conduct a fraud risk assessment. It does not apply to all types of food assistance or to assistance provided through OFDA. In the absence of a requirement for all implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments, USAID noted that it works closely with partners to ensure. State and USAID also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. In its written comments on our report, State concurred with our recommendation. State noted risk assessment initiatives that it has in place with its implementing partners, and indicated that it would include provisions in future voluntary contribution agreements that refer to fraud. USAID noted it has developed checklists to address fraud mitigation and will soon update its guidance to require its implementing partner to submit fraud.that are reproduced in appendix II and appendix III. are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of State, the Administrator of USAID, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs should have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9601 or melitot@gao,gov. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix IV. USAID noted that its third party monitoring in Syria is not intended to serve an auditing function or investigate allegations of fraud. USAID could work with the third party monitor to ensure that its field monitors are trained in methods to identify fraud risks. We agree that the field monitors do not audit the program, but they provide a crucial on the ground presence in areas unavailable to U.S. government employees. Based on USAID’s comments, we clarified the language of this recommendation. USAID’s OFDA hired a third party monitoring organization to review its projects in Syria. USAID officials in the region explained that the USAID OIG has conducted fraud awareness training for officials. In the absence of such activities, fraudulent practices may go unnoticed or take longer to detect. The ongoing conflict in Syria has created a the partners in our sample did not assess fraud risks. In addition, State and USAID may not have visibility into areas of risk needed to effectively oversee programs. implementing partners may not have all of the information needed to design appropriate controls to mitigate fraud risks. The inability of some partners to consistently access areas in Syria and directly monitor programs has created challenges for oversight. U.S. agencies have taken some steps to oversee partner programs; nevertheless, opportunities to assess and mitigate the potential impact of fraud risks remain. For those partners that had conducted risk assessments, these controls generally responded to risks they had identified. For example, some implementing partners identified aerial targeting of humanitarian aid workers and beneficiaries as a major vulnerability. U.S. humanitarian assistance programs in Syria have experienced instances of fraud. Without formal assessments, implementing partners may not have all information needed to design appropriate controls to mitigate such risks. USAID drafts memoranda highlighting potential risks for material support to terrorist groups and identifies the mitigation strategies implementing partners will use to reduce those risks. State’s humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria is directly connected to the fraud risk assessments, and over time, managers may adjust the control activities if they determine that controls are not effectively designed. programs related to the crises in Syria and Iraq. According to officials at the USAID OIG, they have four ongoing investigations of allegations of fraud and mismanagement related to programs for delivering humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria. Two of the investigations involve allegations of procurement fraud, bribery, and product substitution in USAID funded humanitarian cross-border programs related to procurements of non-food items. Further, in May 2016, USAID reported the identification of bid-rigging and multiple bribery and kickback schemes related to contracts to deliver humanitarian aid in Syria. in 2012 due to security conditions and the safety of personnel, among other factors. According to State and USAID officials, the inability to access Syria limits the visibility that staff have over the provision of humanitarian assistance. USAID also acknowledged several gaps in their monitoring system due to remote management, such as verifying progress, obtaining comprehensive information. The U.S. State Department says it is working with the Syrian government to improve the security situation in the country and provide more access to humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people. verify progress. Staff from several USAID-funded implementing partners told us they were unable to access project sites in southern Syria. Past audit work has shown challenges to such an approach, including cases of partners not fully implementing monitoring practices, resulting in limited project accountability. USAID Office of Inspector General (OIG) has reported that assistance projects implemented in developing countries are at significant risk of fraud, waste, and abuse, and further noted that those risks are multiplied when projects unfold in Syria. implemented controls to mitigate this risk, such as distributing goods to beneficiaries on overcast days and making door to door deliveries of aid packages. Another partner with field sites in Damascus identified the risk of ambush as a vulnerability and provided its drivers with instructions on taking evasive actions and fleeing to safety. Four of the nine partners in our sample conducted cross-border delivery operations from neighboring countries such as Syria and Turkey. Partners in our Sample had also implemented controls to mitigating risks of fraud and loss within their operations. armed opposition groups at checkpoints. Partners also implemented controls to mitigate fraud risks during the distribution process. For example, partners developed criteria for identifying and selecting eligible beneficiaries. Examples of people meeting selection criteria included internally displaced people, people with disabilities, and female heads of household. In some cases, parcels were delivered to the intended destinations, but only if they were delivered by the intended recipient. The shift of liability to the transporter has limited the instances of diversion, although we did not confirm this. as Turkey or Jordan and, therefore, procured goods in the host country or the region and warehoused them prior to transport into Syria. Officials from two implementing partners we interviewed in Amman stated that they conducted spot checks of assistance packages in warehouses to confirm the quantity of the contents and ensure that the quality of the items complied with the terms of the contract. According to another implementing partner, officials from its organization visit the vendor warehouses before signing contracts to verify that U.S. government commodity safety and quality assurance guidelines are met. as packing slips and waybills to verify the contents of shipments. Staff used technology, such as geotagged photographs, to document the arrival and contents of the shipment. These partners stated that the lack of visibility over the assistance while in transit in Syria, and managing the projects remotely from Jordan, were risks to their operations. Furthermore, partners that relied on transporters to deliver assistance within Syria mitigated the risk of loss, including loss due to theft by the Syrian Army or.  partners mentioned working with local councils to develop beneficiary lists. Staff crosschecked the names of beneficiaries on the list with identification provided by the beneficiary, and then relayed that information to the partner’s field office in Jordan for verification. Officials added that this method for verifying beneficiaries was an ongoing process, as the lists sometimes changed due to the movement of people. Two implementing partners that we visited in Jordan, who delivered food and medical supplies, among other types of assistance in southern Syria, provide examples. Government provides the overall framework for establishing and maintaining internal control. The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission has issued an internal control framework. Internal control generally serves as a first line of defense in safeguarding assets, such as food and nonfood items. In implementing internal control standards, management is responsible for developing the detailed policies, says the Treadsway Commission. The framework is widely used around the world and includes the five components of internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and communication. To evaluate implementation of controls to mitigate risks and ensure appropriate financial oversight of assistance, we used a nongeneralizable sample of 12 fiscal year 2015 State and USAID funding instruments. We also conducted telephone interviews with officials in Antakya and Ankara, Turkey, to discuss their policies and practices regarding risk assessments. To determine the extent to which U.S. agencies are overseeing the activities, we analyzed relevant documents from each of the organizations related to control activities, including policies, procedures, and manuals. to discuss their policies and practices regarding control activities. We also conducted site visits to warehouses in Jordan maintained by two of the implementing partners. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We conducted this performance audit from July 2015 to July 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide areasonable basis for its findings and conclusion based on its audit objectives, the report says. and evaluation of fraud risk management activities with a focus on outcome measurement, and using the results to improve prevention, detection, and response. The monitoring plan associated with the contract contains guidelines for field monitors to document their assessment of the project at the completion of a site visit. However, it lacks specific guidelines to identify potential fraud risks during site visits. For example, the guidelines in the monitoring plan instruct field monitor to use color-coded indicators, one of which states that issues at a project site require immediate attention and action. Fraud is mentioned with the indicator, but it is presented as one of several examples of highly concerning findings to document. Field monitors are instructed to verify that water was delivered to a location, and that water quality tests had been conducted, when applicable. Additionally, the templates created by the third party monitoring organization to document site visits instruct monitors to verify the presence or absence of supplies, and the quality of them, among other instructions. For example, water and sanitation projects instructed field monitors to check that water had been delivered and tested. The monitoring plan contains a training curriculum for field monitors, which has several objectives designed to familiarize them with the protocols, procedures, and instruments used for data collection and reporting. However, the curriculum lacks specific courses for recognizing potential or actual instances of fraud that may occur on site. The template lacks specific indicators to alert field monitors to collect information on and identify potential fraud. Additionally, USAID officials say the plan does not include specific training categories for monitoring and verification vocabulary, sampling of records and other secondary data, and color coding issues of concern. The enhanced monitoring plans do not require implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments. All of the implementing partners in our sample have policies, procedures, or guidance related to conducting risk assessment for their programs to provide humanitarian assistance into Syria. Several maintain risk registers that assess a wide variety of risks. One partner based in Damascus has a risk register which, according to the partner, assesses 28 different risks. Most implementing partners have conducted risk assessments for staff safety risks (seven of nine) or security risks. Few implementing partners have conducted risk assessments for the risk of fraud, says GAO. Risk assessment is essential for ensuring that partners design appropriate and effective control activities. Control activities to mitigate therisk of fraud should be effective, the GAO says. The agency or program should consider the specific fraud risks it faces, and prioritize them, it says. It should also consider the potential likelihood and impact of fraud schemes, and prioritize fraud risks, it adds. The GAO’s A Framework for Managing Fraud Risks in Federal Programs is available at: http://www.gao.org/fraud/frivolity-risk-management. Director), Jennifer Young, Justine Lazaro, Cristina Norland, Kyerion Printup, Karen Deans, Kimberly McGatlin, Diane Morris, Justin Fisher, and Alex Welsh made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.

ROUGE-1: 73.40, ROUGE-2: 68.37, ROUGE-L: 30.43
BERTScore: 59.93

==============================================
==================== [15/100] ====================
Summary:
Medicare now covers a number of preventive services, including immunizations and cancer screenings. Not all beneficiaries avail themselves of covered preventive services. Some beneficiaries may simply choose not to use these services, but others may be unaware that the services are available or covered by Medicare. For some beneficiaries, certain services may not be warranted or may be of limited value, authors say. They say appropriate preventive care depends on an individual’s age and particular health risks, during those checkups. The authors: Despite how often Medicare beneficiaries visit physicians, relatively few beneficiaries receive the full range of recommended preventive services covered byMedicare. The task force recommends that all people age 65 or older receive an annual influenza vaccination and at least one pneumonia vaccination. About 30 percent of Medicare beneficiaries did not receive an influenza vaccination, the task force says. 37 percent had never had a pneumonia vaccination, according to the report. Many Medicare beneficiaries may not know that they are at risk for health conditions that preventive care could detect, the report says. The task force's 2003 report shows that many Medicare beneficiaries still do not receive certain recommended preventive services. HHS in 1984 established the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. The task force recommends certain screening, immunization, and counseling services for people age 65 or older. Medicare covers some, but not all, of these services (see table 1). Medicare’s fee-for-service program does not cover regular periodic examinations, where clinicians might assess an individual's health risk and provide needed preventive services. Beneficiaries could and still can, however, receive some of this services during office visits. Nationally representative survey data show that Medicare beneficiaries visit physicians often and that most report receiving “routine checkups.” Despite the frequency of visits, many Medicare beneficiaries do not receive the full range of recommended preventive services. Data also show that many beneficiaries may not know about their risk for health conditions that preventive care is meant to detect. We estimated that beneficiaries visited a physician at least six times that year, on average, mainly for illnesses or medical conditions. Only about 1 in 10 visits occurred when beneficiaries were well (see fig. 1). CDC data show that 32 percent of those with high blood pressure had not been told about it before. 21 million Medicare beneficiaries may have been at risk during the period when the survey was conducted. An estimated 20 million of them may not be receiving the full range of recommended preventive services, according to the CDC's NHANES study. The study was conducted between 1999 and 2000. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. 32 percent of those found to have a high cholesterol level reported that no one had told them that they had high cholesterol. Projected nationally, this percentage translates into 2.1 million Medicare beneficiaries who may have high cholesterol without knowing it. A one-time initial preventive care examination covered by Medicare may offer opportunity to deliver some preventive services but alone is not enough to ensure better health among beneficiaries, the study says. The study concludes that the Medicare program should be expanded to include more people with high cholesterol levels. CMS is exploring an alternative for Medicare preventive care that would provide systematic health risk assessments to fee-for-service beneficiaries. Such programs collect information from individuals; identify their risk factors; and refer the individuals to at least one intervention to promote health, sustain function, or prevent disease. The program will use a beneficiary-focused health risk assessment questionnaire to assess health risks, such as lifestyle behaviors, and use of clinical preventive and screening services. It will also refer beneficiaries to health-promoting community services including physical activity and social support groups. ensuring receipt of follow-up care will be important to improving beneficiaries’ health. A proposed CMS demonstration, currently in design, will explore another preventive care delivery option. It could be used to orient new beneficiaries to Medicare and encourage them to make informed choices about providers and services. The proposed demonstration could be a means to better ensure that health care providers have enough time to identify individual Medicare beneficiaries' health risks and provide preventive services appropriate for their risks. The proposal is still in the design stage. may not be aware that these services are available and covered by Medicare. Many people may have a health condition that preventive services can easily diagnose, and yet they may not know that they have this condition. A one-time preventive care examination will add a dedicated opportunity for delivering preventive care and could help reduce the gap in the preventive services that Medicare beneficiaries receive. At the same time, it is not a panacea. Ensuring that beneficiaries receive needed services is key to ensuring their well-being. researchers, the program will tailor preventive interventions to individual risks. It will track patient risks and health over time; and provide beneficiaries with self-management tools and information. The design phase had not been finalized as of last week and still required approval from HHS and the Office of Management and Budget. Although some beneficiaries may not choose to seek these services, others may, according to a CMS official, others will benefit from the program's services. The program is expected to be rolled out over the next few years. Primary care physicians typically cannot provide services such as mammography screenings for breast cancer or colonoscopies for colon cancer. It also is uncertain whether a one-time or periodic examination would be an effective way to improve beneficiaries’ health. For example, one previous CMS initiative that included preventive health care visits ended with mixed results, the agency says. The agency conducted a congressionally mandated demonstration to test varied health promotion and disease prevention services in the late 1980s and early 1990s. such as free preventive visits, health risk assessment, and behavior counseling, to see if they would increase use of preventive services. The agency’s final report, published in 1998, concluded that the demonstration services were marginally effective in raising the use of some simple disease-prevention measures. The report tempered these results by pointing out that the relatively brief period during which the services were provided (roughly 2 years) The report did not consistently improve beneficiary health or reduce theUse of hospital or skilled nursing services. In late 2003, MMA added coverage under Medicare for a one-time “initial preventive physician evaluation” if performed within 6 months after an individual’s enrollment under Part B of the program. Covered services under the examination include measurement of height, weight, and blood pressure; an electrocardiogram; and education, counseling, and referral services for screenings and other preventive services. The new coverage applies to services provided on or after.visits for other health issues.. MMA also added coverage for various screening tests to identify cardiovascular disease (and related abnormalities) in “elevated risk” beneficiaries. and follow-up care is likely to remain a challenge. I will be happy to answer any questions that you or Members of this Committee may have. For future contacts regarding this testimony, please call Janet Heinrich at (202) 512-7119. Katherine Iritani, Matt Byer, Ellen W. Chu, Lisa Lusk, and Behn Miller Kelly also made key contributions to this testimony. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material. permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army in the region of the country where you live on the continent of Africa.

ROUGE-1: 77.63, ROUGE-2: 68.62, ROUGE-L: 44.37
BERTScore: 78.16

==============================================
==================== [16/100] ====================
Summary:
Current non-tariff barriers on vehicles are equivalent to a 26% tariff on vehicle imports. U.S. vehicle and parts exports to the EU could raise by over 200% and EU by 71%. Safety, fuel efficiency, and emissions standards differ between the two regions due to historical differences in producer and consumer preferences as well as the role of government in industry practices. The United States and the EU have different standards even for an item as large as a car. It projects that elimination of tariffs and just 10% of non-Tariff barriers could raise U.K. vehicle exports by over 50%. region where they are produced because of local consumer preferences and vehicle standards. In 2012, imports constituted about 20% of U.S. sales, and about 17% of sales in the EU. In some cases, a vehicle that is entirely legal in one country may not be sold in another due to differing fuel efficiency, safety, and emissions standards. For example, Ford Motor Company's ECOnetic high-efficiency diesel engine, made in Great Britain, gets up to 71 miles per gallon (mpg) of fuel. This engine is not sold. same in 2012: 14.8 million vehicles sold in the United States and 14.3 million in the EU. Seventeen of the EU member states manufacture vehicles. Germany is by far the largest auto producer within the EU (see Figure 2 ). The five top countries—Germany, Spain, France, United Kingdom and Czech Republic—manufacture more than 76% of all vehicles produced in the European Union. In the U.S., vehicles are manufactured in 15 states. Unlike some consumer goods, such as computers and apparel, most vehicles are sold in. in North America because it does not comply with U.S. and Canadian emissions standards. Ford has determined that expanding its Mexican engine plant to make a redesigned version of the ECOnetic for North America would cost $350 million. Increasingly, auto manufacturers and their parts suppliers have sought to organize their production on a global basis. The German automaker BMW, as an example, produces sport utility vehicles for markets worldwide from a plant in South Carolina. Greater commonality in regulation would make it easier for automakers and parts makers to organize production. standards. Many countries, including the United States, have adopted new standards that will be costly for manufacturers to meet. Automakers have responded by creating partnerships to develop more powerful batteries, multispeed transmissions, techniques to improve engine efficiency. Along these lines, BMW and Toyota have agreed to jointly develop fuel cell technology. About half of all the passenger cars sold in Europe have diesel engines, which are more efficient than gasoline engines and emit a lower level of some greenhouse gases. Many automakers believe that offering diesels (as well as higher-performing higher-performance vehicles) is a good idea. coordinate production across major markets. Automakers are developing global vehicle platforms that will reduce the number of models sold around the world. For example, the new Jeep Cherokee and Dodge Dart are based on Fiat's Compact Wide platform. The Ford Focus was developed in Europe but is built with similar components in the United States, China, Germany, Russia, and Thailand and sold in 130 countries. Joining forces to meet tightening world emission standards is one of the key ways to reduce carbon emissions in the future. The formal TTIP negotiations began in July 2013. Motor vehicle safety and emissions standards are areas where the U.S. side side impact protection, child restraint systems, and some emissions standards as priorities for selective mutual recognition. A fourth option would be to forge an agreement on emerging regulations, such as those dealing with electric and fuel cell vehicles, rather than focusing on existing regulations. Under this approach, the United States and the EU would commit to jointly develop standards covering new issues or technologies. The pending free trade agreement between the EU and Canada may influence the direction of TTIP. could play an important role if a TTIP agreement contains significant provisions related to auto safety, emissions, and fuel economy regulations. Congress established the U.S. government agencies whose regulations are the focus of the negotiations on automobile standards. If the TTIP effort to obtain mutual recognition or harmonization affects agencies' authority or changes the ways in which automotive regulations are developed and implemented, Congress may well be asked to modify the underlying statutes that govern motor vehicle safety, emission, and Fuel Economy regulations. Canada will recognise a list of EU car standards and will examine the recognition of further standards. This will make it much easier to export cars to Canada. The agreement is also said to allow Canadian vehicles to be certified in Canada for the EU market. Convergence of vehicle standards has potential drawbacks. One aspect pertains to the lack of speed with which governmental agencies can address new technologies and vehicle innovations. The rule-making process is already lengthy, and the need for international coordination could make it even longer. that could reduce accidents may be delayed in reaching the market. The EU acknowledges that if vehicle standards become international, there could be less room for legislative scrutiny. U.S. consumer advocacy groups have raised similar concerns about TTIP. The United States and the EU must not limit the United States or the EU from adopting and enforcing standards that provide higher levels of consumer, worker, and environmental protection, the groups say in a July 2013 letter to the leaders of the U.K. and U. S. Congress. requirements." C omprehensive mutual recognition . This approach would permit automakers to sell vehicles in either market if they meet either a U.S. standard or a standard accepted in the EU. This approach is how the EU certification process works. S elective mutual recognition. This would identify certain major standards for which TTIP could provide mutual recognition, rather than providing mutual recognition of all standards. A car certified as compliant with US safety, emission, and fuel efficiency standards would be accepted as compliant in EU, and vice versa. Trade in vehicles and parts between the United States and the EU reached $57 billion in 2012. TTIP represents another effort to extend regional templates to encompass a greater share of trade and investment. The EU 27 produced more than the U.S. in 2012, compared to 10.3 million vehicles in each region. The Trans-Pacific Partnership, a separate negotiation, could have a similar effect, writes David Frum, a trade expert at the University of California, Los Angeles, and author of a book on the topic. Past auto agreements have been effective in leading to a more globalized auto industry. The 1965 motor vehicle agreement between the United States and Canada and the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) removed barriers to trade and cross-border trade in autos. Some of these differences may reflect past efforts to protect domestic vehicle industries against foreign competition. Others may result from different legal traditions or divergent views as to the best way to achieve goals such as cleaner air and reduced oil consumption.simple as a seat belt. In November 2011, President Obama and leaders of the European Union (EU) named a High Level Working Group on Jobs and Growth to recommend steps to broaden transatlantic economic ties. In its final report, issued in February 2013, the working group called for a new bilateral agreement to govern transatlantic trade and investment. Such an agreement, the group urged, should provide for "the promotion of more compatible approaches to current and future regulation and standard-setting" One month later, Obama notified Congress that the United States would enter into negotiations. Environmental matters were not included in the EU's founding Treaty of Rome. Prior to the mid-1980s, UNECE produced regulations relating to safety, environmental protection, and energy efficiency. The member states signed the Single European Act (SEA) in 1985 with a goal of unifying the European. It was a common practice for EU member countries to adopt standards and regulations similar to those issued byUNECE. Each country retained authority to adjust the UNECe standards as it saw fit. Under the SEA, auto emissions regulations were harmonized across Europe in 1987. Initially, the harmonized standards were less strict than US standards. Similar to the 1970 U.S. Clean Air Act proviso for California, the SEA allows member states to enact measures more stringent than those enacted by the EU. Directive 70/220/EEC covered CO, NO x , PM, and HC emissions from gasoline-fueled light-duty vehicles. In June 1991, the Council of Ministers of the European Council adopted the Consolidated Emissions Directive (commonly referred to as "Euro 1") WP.29 is a subsidiary body of the Inland Transport Committee of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) WP.29 administers a 1958 agreement on vehicle construction and two related agreements which were adopted by some European countries to promote EU-wide integration of vehicle design, construction and safety. UNECE standards deal with vehicle safety, environmental protection, fuel efficiency, and anti-theft performance. Signatories to the 1958 U.N. agreement commit to mutual recognition of each other. UNECE regulations do not cover the whole vehicle, only its parts. WP.29's voting members are limited to government representatives, but automakers, trade associations, and other nongovernmental organizations also participate in its meetings. The United States did not sign the 1958 UNECE agreement because it would require mutual recognition of standards generated outside the United States. After U.S. self-certification began in 1967, the UNecE approach was seen as incompatible with the U.s. process. Since 1970, the EU has used the Whole Vehicle Type Approval system. Some European automakers "preferred to limit the extension of standards to those that would create obstacles to the invasion of foreign vehicles into their national markets" Over time, the balance shifted to favor more similarity between U.S. and EU standards. The EU system applies to a complete vehicle, often taking into account the UNECE standards promulgated for specific auto parts. Nearly every EU country has either a government agency or designated privately-owned test houses that conduct testing. UNECE and its successor, the EU, have sought to promote a single European market in motor vehicles. Tariffs on cars traded between member states were eliminated in 1968. In 1970, the European Community enacted a framework that laid the basis for vehicle approval harmonization across all member states. Initially, European working groups on vehicle safety issues based their work on U.S. standards and practice because the United States had established a federal safety program earlier. It has been suggested that one reason for the slow development of European standards is the lack of a national safety program. Once an EU member state approves a new vehicle, it can be marketed throughout the EU. The EU agreed in 2007 that the UNECE regulations would be incorporated into the EU type-approval procedure. Legislative work at the EU level is led by European Commission's Directorate of Enterprise and Industry. Vehicle safety promotion is also pursued by the European Commission through initiatives such as DG Transport's EU road safety action program and DG Information and Society's E-safety and Intelligent Car initiatives. programs to address air pollution in the United States. About 10% of NHTSA and EPA standards are based on work SAE has already done. ISO has developed nearly 20,000 standards across a range of industries. For example, a 2010 ISO standard addressed automotive crankshaft bearings. International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) is a private organization founded in 1906 that develops and implements standards.or emissions. Standards are typically developed through negotiation in technical committees comprising representatives of many countries. The International Organization for Standardization ( ISO) was founded in 1947 and develops voluntary international standards. IEC standards related to motor vehicles concern charging system architecture, lithium batteries, and other aspects of electric vehicles. Various other private-sector advocacy groups are engaged in identifying and publicizing new vehicle standards. In the United States, these include the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, American National Standards Institute (ANSI), National Safety Council, the Center for Auto Safety, and Advocates for Highway and Auto Safety. in the EU, nonprofit groups such as the European Transport Safety are involved in the development of new standards. obtaining functional equivalency determinations from regulatory agencies might be difficult. An alternative approach was developed in the 1998 UN agreement on global technical regulations, which created a global registry of processes and common technical standards. This initiative, resulting in the creation of the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations, has resulted in agreement on only 13 technical regulations to date. Simultaneously, there has been a transatlantic dialogue on autos since the mid-1990s through the U.S.-EU High-Level Regulatory Cooperation Forum. The 1996 TransAtlantic Automotive Industry Conference on International Regulatory Harmonization produced a report on the auto sector. NHTSA sent a report to Congress in April 1997 discussing potential harmonization of U.S. and European side impact standards. A similar bilateral regulatory initiative has been under way since 2011 with Canada. An EU initiative, the Competitive Automotive Regulatory System for the 21s Century, or CARS 21, has also explored harmonization issues. A 2012 CARs 21 report recommended exploration of ways to bring about "stronger internationalisation of standards" The U.S. signed a 1998 UNECE agreement which establishes global technical regulations (GTRs) GTRs are issued in a UN Global Registry and contracting parties use their own regulatory process to implement them. Unlike the 1958 agreement, there is no requirement for type approval and mutual recognition of approvals. The World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations promulgates regulations affecting vehicle safety, environmental protection, energy efficiency, and anti-theft performance. It is a U.N. body with a global approach. In Europe, a system of governmental control over autos was more prevalent, first in each country and later through the EU. EU directives passed by the European Parliament have the force of regulations. In the early decades of the automobile, U.S. vehicles were lightly regulated by a combination of state and private sector standards. In 1952, the United Nations (U.N.) established the Working Party on the Construction of Automobiles (WPCAC) The European vehicle regulatory regime now includes both EU directives and standards promulgated through a United Nations organization. In 2006, CARS 21 called for gradually replacing some EU laws with UN regulations. More than 40 EU directives have been replaced with corresponding UN regulations since that time. Harmonization need not mean having identical rules in both regions. From the viewpoint of auto manufacturers, it means minimizing unnecessary differences in regulations so that a "single vehicle standard" can be built to satisfy all. The U.S. and the EU could address convergence of automotive regulations under TTIP. These include the following: H armonization of rules. European, U.S. and Japanese auto industry groups sought common regulatory ground in 1996. They proposed to harmonize regulation of five vehicle components, including windshield wipers, defoggers, and seat belt assemblies. The regulatory bodies did not agree to any changes, however, because the data-driven review process made it difficult to prove functional equivalency of even a standard component such as a seat belt. This experience suggested that the EU standard-setting process should be changed to make it more transparent. Europe were set in 1998-99 through voluntary agreements between the European Commission and the automotive industry. These agreements targeted fleet-average CO 2 emissions of 140 g/km by 2008-09. After 2004 the manufacturers failed to meet their targets through voluntary actions. In response, the Commission developed a mandatory CO 2 emission reduction program, and CO2 emission targets for new passenger cars were adopted in April 2009. The regulation established a fleet- average CO 2 target of 130 g/ km by 2015 and defined a long-term target of 95 g. not issue fuel economy standards similar to the U.S. CAFE standards. As shown in Table A-4 , EU fleet-average CO 2 emission targets as required by EU Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 are 130 g/km to be reached by 2015. A long-term target of 95 g/ km to be reach by 2020 is also required by the EU. For more information on the EU's CO 2 emissions targets, visit the European Commission's website. for more information about the EU CO2 emissions targets. The EU does not set fuel economy standards for vehicles directly. Instead, it sets standards for GHG emissions in terms of the mass of CO 2 , measured in grams, emitted from a vehicle's tailpipe per kilometer driven. These standards can be used to estimate fuel economy for vehicles sold in Europe. The first carbon dioxide emission targets for new passenger cars in fuel efficiency of each manufacturer's new-vehicle fleet through the CAFE standards, and separately imposes standards forGHG emissions from new mobile sources. The standards include incentives for vehicles with CO 2 emissions below 50 g/km and for those running on a mixture of 85% ethanol (E85) Certain flexibilities are available for manufacturers, including credits for technology innovations, pooling between manufacturers, and exemptions for low-volume manufacturers. Emission limits are set according to the mass of vehicle using a fleet-average limit value curve. As with the other EU regulated vehicle emissions, CO2 emissions are measured over the NEDC test cycle. CAFE and GHG emission certification is typically based on fuel economy and emission data provided by vehicle manufacturers. This procedure is sometimes referred to as the EPA 2-cycle test. CAFE values are generally higher than typical fuel efficiency in real-world operation or as published by the government or posted on new vehicles. This discrepancy reflects the fact that the EPA does not set fuel economy standards for new vehicles in the first place.program flexibilities include Air Conditioning Improvement Credits, Advanced Technology Credits, Off-Cycle Innovative Technology Credits and Early Credits. This measurement procedure allows heavier cars to have higher emissions than lighter cars while preserving the overall fleet average. Each manufacturer will have its own fleet-wide standard which reflects the vehicles it chooses to produce. The regulation also includes a system of averaging, banking, and trading (ABT) of credits, based on a manufacturer's fleet average CO 2 performance. Credit trading is allowed among all vehicles a manufacturer produces, both cars and light trucks, as well as between companies. For a summary of the 2012 CAFE and GHG vehicle standards, see Table A-3 of the Appendix. setting more complex, as NHTSA and EPA issue separate standards but act in concert. standards call for combined passenger car and light truck GHG emissions of no more than 163 grams per mile by 2025. This translates into a 54.5 mile-per-gallon equivalent. The GHG standards are based on CO 2 emissions-footprint curves, where each vehicle has a different CO 2 compliance target depending on its "footprint" value, related to the size of the vehicle. From 1975 to 1988, the average fuel economy of new automobiles increased 81%, from 15.8 to 28.6 mpg. In the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 (EPCA), Congress established Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards for new passenger vehicles starting with model year (MY) 1978. EPCA prohibited states from issuing their own fuel efficiency standards. NHTSA administering the congressionally established standards. The U.S. first issued vehicle fuel economy standards in response to the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries oil embargo of 1973. Before 2007, NHTSA had very little authority to modify passenger car standards without congressional direction. The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (EISA) raised the fuel economy standards of passenger vehicles, light trucks, and sport utility vehicles. In 2009, the Obama Administration, some state regulators, and the auto industry crafted a federal program to modify CAFE standards. The most significant recent change in fuel economy Standards took place outside of the previous channel of congressional action. The Obama Administration and some state regulatory agencies crafted a program to change CAFE Standards. The U.S. standard regulates all the GHG emissions from the vehicle in terms of CO 2 -equivalents; the EU regulates only carbon dioxide emissions. The EU sets fleet-average GHG standards in relationship to the mass of a vehicle, whereas the United States sets standards based on the vehicle "footprint" The EU and United States use varying definitions of vehicle categories and weight classes, with proposed targets based on projected sales of vehicles in different size and/or weight classes within each each country. EU GHG standards return a greater sales-based and fleet-wide emission reduction than those in the United States. Figure 4 represents an estimate of historical and projected fuel economy targets, adjusted for the factors outlined above. In the U.S. and the EU, NGOs play a role in the setting of vehicle standards, including these entities: Society of Automotive Engineers ( SAE ) remains involved in developing recommended standards for industry and has issued or updated about 2,000 motor vehicle standards in the past five years. gasoline, electric, and hybrid vehicles) will be necessary to meet higher U.S. fuel efficiency and greenhouse gas emissions standards. Having similar standards for diesel engines in the two regions could reduce design and manufacturing costs. In the United States, private standards and state regulation prevailed until the 1960s and 1970s, when federal legislation was passed. Since then, Congress has delegated vehicle regulation to federal agencies, occasionally providing specific direction through legislation. The processes by which the US and EU establish vehicle safety, fuel efficiency, and emission standards have evolved in different ways. originally used by UNECE and by the difficulty of obtaining agreement among so many individual countries. With the recent shift to decision procedures requiring less-than-unanimous agreement within the European Commission, it has been possible for the Commission to adopt more stringent emission standards. A comparison of current emissions standards for selected pollutants is shown in Figure 3. For a more detailed survey of the standards in each region, see the Appendix. In the United States, establishing fuel economy standards is a function of direct statutory authority. This agreement grew out of the fuel efficiency standards passed by Congress in 2007. The agreement enabled automakers to manufacture vehicles that are in compliance with both federal and state requirements under the Clean Air Act. The combined CAFE/GHG standards have made standard. The CAFE-GHG agreement has been signed into law by the White House on October 1, 2013. It is expected to be implemented by the end of the year. It will apply to light duty vehicle fuel efficiency and greenhouse gas emission standards. "Tier 2" standards have been in place since 2004. Anyone wishing to sell an engine or vehicle within the U.S. must demonstrate compliance with the CAA and all applicable EPA regulations. This approval process differs from the self-certification used by NHTSA and is closer to the EU type approval system for safety and emissions regulations. Once EPA sets emission standards for a particular engine and/or vehicle category, than vehicles with smaller engines are required to meet the standards for that category. Current EPA emissions standards for vehicles regulate CO, NO x , PM, and HC emissions. Subsequently, EPA promulgated "Tier 2" standards on February 10, 2000. The Tier 2 regulations introduced more stringent numerical emission limits and a number of additional changes that tightened the standards for larger vehicles. Since light-duty emission standards are expressed in grams of pollutants per mile, vehicles with large engines (such light trucks or SUVs) were required to use more advanced emission control technologies. New regulations are first published as proposed rules, and following a period of public discussion may be withdrawn or amended. The Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA) of 1990 ( P.L. 101-549 ) established standards to limit tailpipe emissions from new motor vehicles. These Tier 1 standards applied to all new light-duty vehicles. Separate sets of standards were defined for each vehicle category, with more relaxed limits for heavier vehicles. The CAAA also required EPA to study the need for new tailpipe standards for heavy vehicles, such as SUVs, minivans, and pick-up trucks. manufacturers must produce engines that meet those standards by a specified date. Conformity is determined under test procedures specified by EPA. The most common testing procedure used by EPA is the Federal Test Procedure, as mandated by the Energy Tax Act of 1978. Tests are based on the Urban Dynamometer Driving Schedule to reflect typical driving patterns. Currently, EPA uses a three-tiered compliance strategy for light-duty vehicles: (1) pre-production evaluation to certify vehicles prior to sale; (2) a production evaluation on the assembly line for early evaluation of production vehicles. In the EU, emission standards only apply when the vehicle is produced (conformity of production) Once the vehicle leaves the factory and enters service, the manufacturer has no liability for its continued compliance with emission limits. Surveillance testing, mandatory emissions system warranties, recall campaigns, and other features of U.S. emissions regulation are not incorporated in the European regulatory structure. A key difference between the EU and the United States is the test procedure, in particular the drive cycle that a car has to go through on a roller bench. ushered in the current regulatory regime for vehicle emission standards in Europe. Current standards (referred to as "Euro 5") cover CO, NO x , PM, and HC emissions, and differentiate between gasoline and diesel vehicles. Euro 6 standards are scheduled to be implemented in September 2014 (strengthening NO x standards for diesel vehicles) The evolution of EU exhaust emission standards for light-duty, gasoline- and diesel-fueled vehicles is traced in Table A-2 of the Appendix. 2000 with the Euro 3 standard, the test procedure was modified to eliminate the engine warm-up period before the beginning of emission sampling. Further, the Euro 5/6 implementing legislation introduced a new PM mass emission measurement method. Vehicle emissions standards established by the EU and the United States are not directly comparable because of the differences in the testing procedures and approval processes. Both the European and the U.S. systems of compliance are based on the Approval Process. The Euro 5-6 system of compliance is based on. The EU uses the New European Drive Cycle (NEDC) and the United States uses the Federal Test Procedure (FTP) Differences between the two include distance, duration, and vehicle speed, as well as factors such as whether the vehicle must begin at a cold start or whether there is a warm-up period. Some observers have noted that the European emission standards have historically lagged behind the U.S. standards. This lag may be attributed to the complex, consensus-based approach to standard setting. A critical aspect of the air quality problem in urban areas has been ground-level ozone production. Emissions of hydrocarbons and NO x from motor vehicles are responsible for contributing to the formation of ozone. Motor vehicles represent the largest domestic source of air toxics, or pollutants known or suspected to cause cancer or other serious health or environmental effects. Vehicles have been determined to contribute approximately one quarter of domestic GHG emissions, which trap heat in the earth's atmosphere, contributing to global climate change. The federal Motor Vehicle Air Pollution Control Act of 1965 adopted both the California crankcase and tailpipe emissions standards for 1968 model-year vehicles. Congress strengthened federal authority in 1967 by explicitly preempting states from adopting or enforcing new motor vehicle emission standards in the Air Quality Act of 1967. This preemption provision (with California as the sole exemption) remains in effect today as Section 209(a) of the Clean Air Act (CAA) At present, the federal government manages vehicle emissions controls, although the state of California remains a major force in shaping national legislation. California is the only state vested by the CAA with the authority to develop its own emission regulations if EPA grants the state a waiver. California emission standards are administered by the California Air Resources Board, a regulatory body within the California Environmental Protection Agency. The CAA allows other states a choice between implementing federal emission standards or adopting the California requirements. The evolution of U.S. emission standards for light-duty, gasoline-fueled vehicles is traced to the 1970s and '80s. In 1959, California became the first state to address pollution from cars. In 1960, Congress directed the Surgeon General to study the "various substances discharged from the exhausts of motor vehicles" This regulatory pattern continued throughout the 1960s, as California authorities established control requirements and the U.S. government followed suit. For example, California required the control of crankcase emissions in 1961and set the first HC and CO emissions in 1964. In 1965, California set a limit on the amount of CO emissions a car can emit. substantial improvement in the safety characteristics of vehicles. Since it was established, NHTSA has issued dozens of safety standards, and it maintains an extensive database on vehicle crashes. The law puts the onus for enforcement of federal standards on automakers themselves. It provides that "a manufacturer or distributor of a motor vehicle or motor vehicle equipment shall certify to the distributor or dealer at delivery that the vehicle or equipment complies with applicable motor vehicle safety standards prescribed" The agency neither approves motor vehicles or parts as complying with its standards nor collects information from manufacturers. NHTSA buys vehicles from dealers and tests them at its own facilities. If NHTSA determines there is noncompliance, it can encourage the manufacturer to recall the model to correct the problem or can order a recall. The law also makes manufacturers responsible for testing of vehicles and liable for recalls and penalties if they are later found not to meet NHTsa's standards.under this chapter.... Certification of a vehicle must be shown by a label or tag permanently fixed to the vehicle. in this chapter. In Senator Warren Magnuson, chairman of the Commerce Committee, argued that Congress was implementing a limited type of regulation. The committee also recognizes that the broad powers conferred upon the Secretary, while essential to achieve improved traffic safety, could be abused in such a manner as to have serious adverse effects on the automotive manufacturing industry. The Committee expects that the Secretary will act responsibly and inSuch a way as to achieve a better traffic safety. The U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) was established in 1970. Vehicle Code; 13 had implemented portions and only six had taken no action. With the start of the Interstate Highway system in the 1950s, greater automobile travel, and rising highway deaths, the interest in vehicle safety grew. Between 1962 and 1964, Congress passed three safety bills into law, including a seat belt regulation. These laws set the stage for more ambitious legislation a few years later. For example, the legislation establishing safety requirements for federal fleet vehicles led to the promulgation of 17 standards by 1966. Most significant change in U.S. vehicle safety regulation came with the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966. Senator Abraham Ribicoff, one of the advocates of the new legislation, said "this problem is so vast that the Federal Government must have a role" As passed unanimously by both houses of Congress and signed by President Johnson, the legislation was a major impetus. Curtailing auto-related highway deaths was a other major impetus for the legislation. The legislation was signed into law by President Lyndon Johnson in 1966. The Highway Safety Act of 1966 mandated that each state put in place a highway safety program in accordance with federal standards. The National Traffic Safety Agency was established to carry out the provisions. In 1967, the agency was renamed the National Highway Traffic Safety Safety Agency. The agency was later changed to the Secretary of Transportation when that agency was established in 1967. The act was signed into law on January 1, 1967. It was one of the first federal highway safety laws in the history of the U.S. integrity these new, little-understood machines. Regulating either driver conduct or vehicle design at the national level did not conform to existing political ideas about the appropriate federal division of responsibilities. The only useful and politically acceptable action Congress might take was to help the states and localities construct more and better roads. The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), a professional association founded in 1905, became the primary source of vehicle safety and emission rules for many decades. It is no longer in existence. State governments often used SAE recommendations to enact requirements for vehicle equipment, such as dual brakes, headlamps, and windshield wipers. Other SAE standards were adopted directly by manufacturers. The first step toward a nationwide system of vehicle regulation came in 1926, when a voluntary Uniform Vehicle Code was drafted to replace the many different state rules. By 1946, 30 of the then 48 states (plus the District of Columbia) had adopted the Uniform Vehicle code. The code specified the types of lighting, reflectors, brakes, mirrors, and tires that cars should have.

ROUGE-1: 83.07, ROUGE-2: 76.98, ROUGE-L: 26.73
BERTScore: 63.87

==============================================
==================== [17/100] ====================
Summary:
in the House based on the 2010 Census apportionment population. Table 1 also shows the impact on the distribution of seats in the House if the District of Columbia were to be treated as if it were a state. The House would have 437 seats for both a House size of 435 seats and a House of 437. The shift of 12 seats among 18 states for the 113 th Congress is due to population changes between the 2000 Census and 2010 Census. In addition, the House would be reduced by 12 seats if the D.C. were treated as a state for apportioning purposes. Table 2 shows the end of the priority list that was used to allocate Representatives based on the 2010 Census, including the District of Columbia. The law only provides for 435 seats in the House, but the table illustrates not only the last seats assigned by the apportionment formula (ending at 435), but the states that would just miss getting additional representation. Table 3 is similar to Table 2 , but the last seat is 437 instead of 435. The priority values and the population needed to gain or lose are shown in Table 3. These are the actual seats to be allocated based on the results of the 2010 Census. Arizona, Georgia, Nevada, South Carolina, Utah, and Washington will each gain one seat; Florida will gain two seats; and Texas will gain four seats. Second, if the District of Columbia were to be given a vote in the House of Representatives and treated as if it were a state in the reapportionment of congressional seats following the 2010 census, it would gain a seat or two. The House would then be reduced to 100 members. receive one Representative and North Carolina would be entitled to fourteen Representatives. Minnesota would retain its eighth seat and no other state would be affected by the change. Another way to see the impact is to examine the allocation of the last seats assigned to the states when the District of Columbia is allocated a seat (presumably the 51 st seat) The actual apportionment is done through a "priority list" calculated using the equal proportions formula provided in 2 U.S.C. §2a.(a). the 2010 census, and the House size remained at 435, Minnesota would lose a seat relative to what it is scheduled to get as a result of the 2010 Census. Third, if, on the other hand, the District of Columbia were to be given a vote in the House of Representatives and treated as if it were a state, Minnesota's delegation would fall to seven Representatives. The House size was increased from 435 to 437 in the 2010 Census and Minnesota's delegation would fall to 7 Representatives. a seat do not change if DC is treated like state, as DC is entitled the constitutional minimum of one Representative. DC is also entitled to a seat in the House of Representatives if it is treated as a state. DC currently has one seat in Congress, which would change if it were to become a state, but not if it was treated like a city. DC has one Representative in the Senate, which could change if the state were to be considered a city, and one in the state legislature. A House size of 468 would have resulted in no state losing seats held from the 112 th to the 116 th Congresses. However, by retaining seats through such an increase in the House size, other state delegations would become larger. For example, California's delegation size, for example, would be 56 instead of 53 seats, Texas's delegationSize would increase from 53 to 56 seats, and New York's delegation would increase to 56 from 53 seats. At a House Size of 4 68, the U.S. House of Representatives would have a total of 10,306 representatives. be 38 instead of 36 seats, and Florida's delegation size would be 29 instead of 27 seats. The exceptions to this general rule occurred when states were formed from other states (Maine, Kentucky, and West Virginia). These states' Representatives came from the allocations of Representatives of the states from which the new state was formed. New states usually resulted in additions to the size of the House in the 19 th and early 20 th centuries. The exception to this was in Maine, which was formed from the state of Kentucky. When Alaska and Hawaii were admitted in 1959 and 1960 the House size was temporarily increased to 437. This modern precedent differed from the state admission acts passed following the censuses in the 19 th and early 20 th centuries. The apportionment act of 1911 anticipated the admission of Arizona and New Mexico by providing for an increase in the HouseSize from 433 to 435 if the states were admitted. New state representatives would be added to theapportionment totals.new ones had been formed. As noted above, the House sizes were temporarily increased. to accommodate Alaska and Hawaii in 1960. In 1961, when the President reported the 1960 census results and the resulting reapportionment of seats in the reestablished 435-seat House, Alaska was entitled to one seat, and Hawaii to two seats. Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and Missouri each received one less seat than they would have if the House size had been increased to 438 (as was proposed by H.R. 10264, in 1962). Table 1 , below displays the apportionment. H.R. 157 / S. 160 provided for a permanent increase in the size of the U.S. House of Representatives, from 435 seats to 437 seats. The bills specified that one of the additional seats was to be allocated to the District of Columbia while the other seat would be assigned by the normal apportionment formula allocation procedure. Utah would have received the 436 th seat if the bill had passed. The bill was introduced in the 111 th Congress and died in the 112 th Congress. seat under the 2000 apportionment process. This would add a fourth seat to Utah's three ( S. 160 ). While both versions treated the District of Columbia as if it were a state for the purposes of the allocation of House seats, each bill restricted the D.C. to a single congressional seat under any future apportionments. On April 19, 2007, the House approved H.R. 1905 by a vote of 241 to 177 (Roll Call vote 231) and sent it to the Senate. S. 1257 was reported out of the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs with amendments on June 28, 2007. cloture on the motion to proceed to consideration of the measure was not invoked in the Senate on a Yea-Nay vote, 57 - 42, leaving the measure pending. The 435 seat limit for the size of the House was imposed in 1929 by statute (46 Stat. 21, 26-27) A new law would require a new law setting a different limit.

ROUGE-1: 88.23, ROUGE-2: 78.61, ROUGE-L: 37.06
BERTScore: 62.96

==============================================
==================== [18/100] ====================
Summary:
FSOC was created to address some of the perceived weaknesses that may have contributed to the financial crisis of 2008. The FSOC provides a common forum for financial regulators to evaluate and address risks to the stability of the financial system. This report will discuss the FSOC's mission and issues it is intended to address in Section I, and the members and their roles in Section II. Section III will analyze the perceived threats to financial stability as identified in law and by theFSOC in its 2013 annual report. exchange rate, expansionary monetary policies can cause exchange rates to depreciate, and thus exports to rise and imports to fall. The 2013 FSOC report addressed several issues related to global financial stability. The FSOC noted a number of positive developments in Europe, including the potential for the European Central Bank (ECB) to purchase sovereign debt of member states under some circumstances. However, the report also noted that banking disruptions and policy changes could have a negative impact on the global economy. responses in Cyprus (which briefly cast doubt on the status of insured bank deposits) create downside risk. austerity programs in Europe have "contributed to a contraction in euro-area economies," although euro area deficits may also have declined. The report also discussed expansionary monetary policies in Japan, which have contributed to a depreciation of the Yen. The FSOC took the view that "the U.S. has a strong financial stability interest in Japan finally escaping from deflation and securing more robust growth" The FSOC's annual report to Congress is to include an analysis of perceived threats to the financial system. The following sections analyze specific threats mentioned in the 2013 FSOC annual report. For each topic, the reader is provided a brief description of the issue, how it might contribute to a systemic event, and a analysis of the report. The reader is also provided a summary of each topic and the report's analysis of each issue. The report also explains the expected costs of resolving the firm. confidential information or disrupt their telecommunications (cyberattacks). The 2013 annual report noted several initiatives to address operational issues. The SEC recently proposed Regulation Systems Compliance and Integrity (Regulation SCI) to try to address malfunctions in capital markets. Future interest rate changes may be a factor in the future of the capital markets, according to the FSOC's 2013 annual Report. The 2013 report was released on Thursday, November 14. It is available online at: http://www.fsoc.org/. distress sales by lenders can magnify a downward spiral in prices. Both asset-backed commercial paper and repos use forms of collateral and may be subject to fire sales. FSOC's Perspective The 2013 annual report notes some positive and negative developments (from the FSOC perspective) in wholesale funding. However, the potential for runs on broker-dealers, or runs on banks, is still a concern for FSOC. The potential for run on banks is a concern, as well as runs on brokers. Pension systems may find it difficult to earn adequate returns safely, especially if they have committed to defined benefits (a preset fixed payment) Other investors may have a greater temptation to "reach for yield" by investing in more risky categories of investments, increasing the likelihood of asset bubbles in other markets. In its 2013 report, the FSOC attributes current interest rates (low yields) to three factors: low yields, low inflation, and low interest rates on long-term Treasury bonds and short-term interest rates. factors. Capital market participants forecast continued low interest rate policies by major central banks globally. The second is the pricing of short-term risk, which is partially caused by the increase in Treasury market purchases by institutions with low-risk sensitivity. The third factor cited by the FSOC is the willingness of bond market buyers to accept credit risk (i.e., the risk that borrowers will not pay back fully and on time) Provisions for credit losses and loan losses have declined recently. The FSOC notes a number of initiatives to mitigate the risks when FSOC to restore private capital as the primary source of long-term mortgage funding, along with improvements in consumer protection and financial stability. House prices have begun rising in a number of areas, default rates and foreclosures are no longer rising sharply, and the flow business of the GSEs has been positive in recent quarters. One possible contributing factor for a delay in the return of private capital to mortgage markets (in addition to general pessimism about the speed of the recovery) is the lack of interest rate relief. The 2013 annual report says that there has been significant improvement in mortgage markets, but additional progress is needed. There may be regulatory uncertainty as federal agencies implement changes to regulations related to the mortgage market. The conservatorship agreements (Treasury Preferred Stock Purchase Agreements, PSPAs) have been modified to expedite the wind-down of the retained portfolios of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Regulatory uncertainty in mortgage Markets may be reduced by the publication of final rules for the Real Estate Settlement Procedures. The Secretary of the Treasury has a consultative role with the OFR. The Secretary negotiates with foreign regulators and multilateral organizations to coordinate prudential supervision and regulation for all highly leveraged and interconnected financial companies. The secretary plays a role in recommending receivership procedures for failing firms that have been designated as systemic. Although the Fed and the FDIC can make their own request for a receivership of a systemic firm based in the U.S., the Treasury can recommend a plan of action. on the firm's creditors and other counterparties; (5) the likelihood of FSOC resolution avoiding or mitigating systemic risks, its likely cost to the general fund of the Treasury, and the potential of receivership resulting in excessive risk taking by the firm. (6) a federal regulatory agency has ordered the firm to convert all of its convertible debt instruments that are subject to the regulatory order; and (7) the company satisfies the definition of a financial company. The Secretary has a number of duties pertaining to the determination and procedures for the FSOC. from the resolution fund to support orderly liquidation under a liquidation plan must be acceptable to the Secretary. To date, no firms have been subject to an orderlyLiquidation. The FDIC is to assure the Secretary of a repayment plan for the orderly Liquidation plan, and the Secretary and the FDIC must report to Congress on the terms of the repayment plan. The Fed has had the authority to address financial market instability since its creation in 1913. Congress created the Fed as a central bank. lender of last resort following the recommendations of a commission established to investigate the causes of a financial panic that had occurred in 1907. Relative financial stability after WWII, and congressional directives to focus on price stability and maximum employment, may have redirected the Fed's focus to macroeconomic variables. But addressing financial market instability has always been a core mission of the Fed. Under the FSOC, the Fed will also have additional supervision and examination authority for individual non-banks designated by theFSOC. The The Secretary must notify certain majority and ranking members of Congress within 24 hours of the appointment of the FDIC as receiver. The rules and regulations that theFDIC issues for the use of funds pursuant to receivership must be acceptable to the Secretary. The FDIC is to provide to the secretary and the comptroller general an annual accounting report of receiverships. The Secretary has a number of roles regarding orderly liquidation plans of covered institutions. Amounts FDIC may pay resolution costs as described in Section 204(d) of the DFA. The Secretary may request a determination that a financial firm will default or is likely to default, with a systemic impact, and then appoint the FDIC as receiver. Note that the determination requires two-thirds vote of both the Fed and FDIC board. In cases in which the firm is a broker-dealer, or its largest subsidiary is a brokerage, the Fed makes the determination, in consultation with FDIC. The Fed and the director of the Federal Insurance Office make the recommendation for insurance companies. The FDIC must consult with the Secretary to obtain a second extension of the time limit for the receivership. Once a recommendation for receivership has been made, the Secretary is to make the determination and findings that trigger the resolution regime under the FDIC. The Secretary's determination must address (1) the likelihood that the firm will default or is in default; (2) the likely effect of the firm's failure on financial stability; (3) the viability of private sector alternatives available to prevent the default. The powers and duties of the FDIC with respect to resolving systemic firms are set out in Section 210 of DFA. Among the eight factors that the determination must address are the likelihood that the non-bank will default; a description of likely financial instability that could result from default; the recommended actions under liquidation authority; and an explanation of perceived deficiency of the bankruptcy process for this firm. The FDIC's resolution is intended to ensure that shareholders and unsecured creditors bear losses.must include the votes of two-thirds of theFDIC's Board. firms are systemically important, designates the Fed as the prudential regulator of these firms, and authorizes the FDIC to resolve covered non-banks outside the bankruptcy courts under certain circumstances. Under the DFA, policymakers have tried to construct resolution regimes for both banks and non-bank financial firms that will dispel investor expectations that some firms are too big to fail. The following sections provide more detail on the mission, members, and recommendations of the FSOC during the 113 disclosures, short-term debt limits, and other prudential standards. In fall of 2008, Congress provided Treasury with up to $700 billion to address troubled assets (such as mortgages) in the financial system. Congress passed the DFA to reform the financial regulatory system. For banks that accept deposits insured by the FDIC, technically "insured depositories," the general prudential regulatory approach and resolution regimes were relatively unchanged. For large, complex non-banks, the D FA instructs the FSOC to identify which non-bank institutions are at risk of collapse. investors that money market mutual funds exposed to holders of mortgage-related assets could be in financial trouble. If correct, it would be difficult to construct or estimate a firm-specific index of systemic risk arising from this type of contagion. The next section discusses the membership of the FSOC, and the special roles that some members have with respect to these six policy tools. The FSOC has 10 voting members and 5 nonvoting members. The council is chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury. a meeting of the FSOC. Otherwise, meetings may be called by a majority of the members, but shall be held at least quarterly. The Secretary must testify before the House Committee on Financial Services and the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs in conjunction with the release of the annual FSOC report. If any member agencies have notified Congress of deficiencies in systemic risk efforts, the Secretary is to address those concerns at the hearing. Under Section 113(a)(1), a two-thirds vote of theFSOC is required. Treasury Secretary serves as the chair of the FSOC. The chair has a number of powers and responsibilities related to FSOC meetings, congressional reports and testimony. As chair, the Secretary may call.to act without further approval from theFSOC as a whole. The Fed's role as prudential regulator of firms designated systemic by the FSoc, and the FDIC's role in resolving non-banks if the firm's failure is perceived as a threat to financial instability (not necessarily just firms designated as systemic) The FSOC is expected to facilitate communication among existing financial regulators. OFR is housed within the Department of the Treasury, although it is funded separately. Congressional staff may be interested in the organization, actions, and assessments of the FSOC, especially if a systemic financial event were to occur, a covered non-bank financial institution were to fail, and when the Secretary of the. Treasury offers testimony to Congress (which is required at least once per year its mission. The council facilitates communication among the heads of financial regulators and collects confidential financial information.  FSOC has the ability to classify certain non-banks as systemic. Systemic firms with more than $50 billion in assets must also provide and maintain resolution plans. The DFA establishes a regulatory framework of which the FSOC is a consultative council. The new regulatory regime has six basic policy tools with which to pursue, the DFA says. It says the new regime has the potential to reduce the risk of a financial crisis in the U.S. and the global financial system. Nonvoting members include state level representatives from bank, securities, and insurance regulators, as well as the directors from the OFR and the Federal Insurance Office (FIO) Several agencies have special roles in addressing the kinds of systemic risks that the FSOC was designed to monitor. The DFA grants specific authority under certain circumstances for the Secretary of the Treasury, the Fed, and the FDIC. The FSOC has a five-year term, and can be renewed for a further five years. The chair of the FSOC has an effective veto over the designation of individual firms as systemically important. This applies to domestic and foreign firms, and for anti-evasion. The chair's vote is required to rescind or reevaluate the systemic designation of a firm. In emergencies, the chair's affirmative vote is needed as part of the determination that a non-bank will not be granted the systemically-important designation by the Federal Reserve. The vote must be that of the Secretary of the Treasury. usual hearing before its designation as systemic. As part of those anti-evasion provisions, if certain large recipients of Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) funds (specifically, if they hold over $50 billion and were part of the Capital Purchase Program) cease to be bank holding companies, then they are automatically considered a systemically significant firm. As chair of the FSOC, the Secretary also has the responsibility to conduct or coordinate and report on periodic studies of the economic impact of systemic risk regulations. Dodd-Frank Act directs the Fed to supervise certain large non-bank financial companies. The FSOC recommends the standards for these firms. The standards must be more stringent than the standard for non-Bank financial firms which are not under Fed supervision and do not present systemic risks. The requirements include risk-based capital requirements, leverage limits, liquidity requirements, resolution plan and credit exposure report requirements, concentration limits, a contingent capital requirement, enhanced public disclosures, and enhanced public disclosure requirements. (8) short-term debt limits, and (9) overall risk management requirements. Standards for foreign firms are to acknowledge equality of competitive opportunity and take into account the extent to which the foreign non-bank is subject to comparable standards in its home country. The Fed has several powers and duties over covered bank holding companies and non-banks. For example, the Fed can limit the ability of the company to merge with other companies. It can restrict the products the firm offers, or impose conditions on the manner that the firm conducts activities. the Fed can require the company to sell or otherwise transfer assets or off-balance-sheet items to unaffiliated entities. The Fed also has information collection authority, including through examinations, for covered firms. In cases in which the covered firm has another primary regulator (such as the OCC), the Fed is to give the primary regulator reasonable notice of the proposed examination. The DFA permits the Fed to establish standards for systemic firms in a number of additional areas. These areas include a contingent capital requirement, enhanced public disclosure. The Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) is composed of the heads of the agencies that regulate financial institutions and markets. The FSOC has its own permanent staff in the newly created Office of Financial Research (OFR) that collects data on the financial system and provides information and technical expertise. Table 1 lists the member agencies of the FSOC. The Council was created by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (DFA) in 2010. The DFA established a new regulatory framework to address financial market instability. national and state-chartered banks are authorized to form financial subsidiaries to engage in activities that would not otherwise be permitted within the bank itself, subject to certain limits. The law provides a mechanism between the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve to decide what is an appropriate new financial activity for a financial subsidiary. Financial Stability Oversight Council — A council created by the Dodd-Frank Act ( P.L. 111-203 ) with identifying and monitoring systemic risks to the U.,S. financial system, reducing expectations of extraordinary government intervention. Net Asset Value (or NAV)—Value of an asset minus any associated costs; for financial assets, typically changes each trading day. Operational risk —The possibility that a financial institution will suffer losses from a failure to process transactions properly, from accounting mistakes, from rogue traders or other forms of insider fraud. Office of Financial Research (OFR)—An office created by the Dodd-Frank Act ( P.L. 111-203 ) to support the Financial Stability Oversight Council and member agencies. There are several examples of rising interest rates contributing to stress in the financial system. Rising rates in the 1970s and 1980s created a great deal of stress for banks that had funded long-term mortgages with short-term deposits. In 1994, rising rates in 1994 caused a significant sell-off in the bond market. Rising Rates during 2004-2006 contributed to the financial crisis of 2004-06. In 2008, the U.S. Federal Reserve raised interest rates by 0.25 per cent. Investigation and prosecutions related to LIBOR (and similar reference rates) may reduce the incentive to misreport. The FSOC did express concern at potential reaches for yield, noting that the issuance of high yield bonds (riskier classes of bonds) had increased markedly. Underwriting standards for collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) had reportedly loosened. Furthermore, threats to financial stability posed by rising rates are mitigated in part by one of the potential causes of rising rates—improved financial conditions. A combination of a global savings glut, deficient aggregate demand, and central bank interest-rate policies have contributed to an extended period of low interest rates. At some point, interest rates are likely to rise, either because the demand for loanable funds rises as the economy improves driving up the rates or because a negative shock causes a spike. Financial intermediaries, including but not limited to banks, can be damaged by rising interest rates if they have not adequately addressed the mismatch between the interest rates on their cost of funds. to the end of the housing bubble (which would have ended eventually, but perhaps not at that time) Under-reporting of LIBOR rates in 2008 may have given financial regulators an overoptimistic view of the lending ability of major financial institutions during the liquidity crunch. Low interest rates make it difficult for savers to earn significant returns with relative safety. Money market mutual funds are at greater risk because their income stream (from relatively safe bonds) is close to zero, according to the IMF. as if they were risk-free. Financial institutions and financial systems do not typically retain capital buffers against the possibility of sovereign debt restructuring. The resulting financial instability can cause credit to dry up, interest rates to rise, and may magnify the financial difficulties of the sovereign experiencing the financial stress. There is no formal way to address a sovereign default (no international bankruptcy law applies to sovereigns), and thus European sovereign debt crises have been a series of evolving government funding and banking crises. Even if central banks target their domestic economies rather than their sovereigns, financial instability could still spread. In introductory finance classes, sovereign debt of the governments of developed economies is often characterized as a risk-free asset. Recent events in Europe have cast serious doubt on this simplifying assumption. Changes in the perceived risk of the debt of sovereigns, such as Greece, Cyprus, Italy, Portugal, Ireland, are potential threats to financial stability in part because many financial regulators and financial institutions treat those debts as risk free.in some cases cause asset bubbles in the recipient country. Sovereign debt problems or banking policies in one country can cast doubt on the reliability of government debts or guarantees in other countries. fiscal cliff) and the February 2013 debt ceiling debates. Similarly, the downgrade of U.S. Treasury securities by Standard & Poor's did not cause a significant spike in Treasury yields. Financial markets are global; therefore, financial instability overseas can threaten financial stability in the United States. For example, the failure of a global bank could cause cross-border resolution issues. Capital flights away from some countries can cause global investment money (i.e., hot money) to flood other countries. The U.S. has not experienced any backlash in bond markets for running extended fiscal deficits. Unlike Cyprus or Greece, short-term fiscal problems of the United States could be cushioned by purchases of Treasury securities by the Fed. In the longer term, the combination of higher interest rates and higher outstanding debt can cause interest payments to crowd out interest payments. It is possible that a short-run fiscal crisis is often accompanied by the same kinds of poor economic conditions that cause the Fed to expand its monetary policies. The FSOC does not see a gradual normalization of long-term Treasury yields and volatilities as a significant threat to fiscal imbalances or the wider economy. However, the long-runImbalances could threaten financial instability if there is a sudden spike in yields. The FSOC notes that the financial impact of potentially disruptive short-run fiscal events has had "minimal impact" thus far. U.S. debt is still seen as a safe harbor despite the automatic tax increases and spending cuts at the start of 2013. rates rise for the "wrong" reason, a second credit crunch. The FSOC notes that the measurable financial resilience of major banks (such as capital levels and measures of liquidity) have improved. Typically, recessions cause government revenues to decline and government spending to rise (fiscal policy expands) Economic booms can cause fiscal policy to contract if government revenues expand faster than government spending. Long-term fiscal policy refers to the balance between expected government spending and revenues over an extended period of time. a firm provides a unique financial service with no close substitutes. domino effects, fire sales, and critical functions, depend upon a firm's connections to other firms. These three forms of interconnectedness will typically be correlated with the size and scope of the firm, at least in relation to its market or service. If potential creditors to large firms judge large firms to be too big, they may not be able to pay them. If a clearinghouse has a monopoly on settlement services for a market, and the clearinghouse fails, then other market participants may be unable to process their own transactions. that governments are likely to intervene to prevent an eventual bankruptcy, then this lower perceived risk of default may result in creditors being willing to offer the firms loans on easier terms. Big firms may thus gain funding advantages over smaller competitors, reinforcing the tendency of these firms to grow relative to their markets. The remaining source of systemic risk identified by Tarullo, contagion, is relatively independent of firm size and complexity. Systemic risk regulators may attempt to construct and estimate a firm-specific index of systemic risks. Possible features of systemic risks include externalities and the fallacy of composition. With externalities, there are costs or benefits of actions by financial market participants that are not borne by those participants. With fallacies of composition, what is true for each individual firm in isolation may not be true when all firms follow similar strategies. Just as while one person standing in a crowded stadium sees better, that strategy will fail if everyone stands at the same time. To better understand this article, please visit CNN.com/soulmatestories. Federal Reserve Governor Daniel Tarullo identified four such ways that in his view are most common. Domino effects occur when the failure of one firm causes its creditors to fail. Fire sales may become reinforcing when a product serves as the collateral to finance itself or in markets in which participants must post risk-based margin. The Fed's approach addresses commonly understood channels of risk proliferation, he says. The approach could be applied to other areas of the economy, such as the energy sector, he adds. the death of a canary in a coal mine, the failure of even the smallest firm may signal that large firms, if they are exposed to similar risks, may be in danger. Contagion is based on the information that a firm's failure provides to investors, rather than a specific transactions or interconnections of the failed firm. Tarullo interprets the run on money market mutual funds that occurred in September 2008 as contagion that had little to do with the size, complexity, or transparency of Lehman Brothers. self-reinforcing if failure to pay causes lenders to seize the collateral (the good itself), sell it at distressed prices, and thereby cause further losses on other holders of the asset. These holders may then default on their loans or fail to post margin. Contagion can occur if the failure of one firm is a signal to investors that firms in the same industry or with similar assets are likely to be in financial trouble. It can result in the restriction of liquidity to other firms as possible counterparties shy away. A fire sale occurs when someone holding an asset must sell it in a distressed market. Collateralized lending can be subject to fire sales because borrower defaults are likely to occur at the same time that the market for the collateral is also distressed. As a result, when the lender seizes the collateral, the value of the collateral may be falling—the addition of the government guarantee. Some wholesale sources of funding, such as repos and asset-backed commercial paper, may besubject to fire sale. The financial infrastructure is vulnerable to natural disasters and human activity. Hurricane Sandy temporarily halted trading on the New York Stock Exchange in October 2012. Malfunctions have disrupted the issuance of securities (such as the initial public offering of Facebook). Reportedly, major financial institutions have been subjected to attempts to access the system. The stability of such systems can be threatened by the potential disruptions to the operational network. It can be difficult to predict the impact of a cyber-attack on the financial system. It is possible that a cyber attack could have a significant impact on financial markets. financial activity for FHCs. Blue sky laws —State statutes that govern the offering and selling of securities. Broker/dealer —An individual or firm that buys and sells securities for itself as well as for customers. Bubble —Self-reinforcing process in which the price of an asset exceeds its fundamental value for a sustained period, often followed by a rapid price decline. Speculative bubbles are usually associated with a "bandwagon" effect in which speculators rush to buy the commodity (in the case of futures, "to take positions") institutions, even though in some cases they may have had relatively small subsidiaries that accepted deposits. Authority to regulate non-bank thrifts and their holding companies had resided in the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) Some non-banks accepted prudential regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Bankruptcy courts were to handle failures among most non- Banks. The government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, are large, complex financial institutions. Treasury. offered a temporary guarantee program for money market mutual funds. Lehman Brothers failed shortly thereafter, and declared bankruptcy. AIG, one of the world's largest insurers, would have failed the day after Lehman. However, the Fed subsequently intervened on behalf of AIG,. In this case avoiding a bankruptcy process. Following the declaration of bankruptcy, financial panic spread to other non-bank institutions and markets, with runs on money market Mutual Funds and repurchase agreements (also known as "repos") institutions that did not accept deposits, but had their own prudential regulatory regime under the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight. In common parlance, people have sometimes referred to "too-big-to-fail" firms (TBTF), but what is typically meant are complex and interconnected financial institutions that may not rely on deposits. As then-Federal Reserve Governor Donald Kohn evaluated lessons from the financial crisis, "We [the Fed] traditionally have provided backup liquidity to sound depository institutions" Governor Kohn expressed frustration for the perceived inadequacy of existing tools to deal with TBTF non-banks. Dissatisfaction with existing regulation grew with the progression of the mortgage crisis that began in August 2007. Some of this support was designed to prevent some creditors of failing non- banks from protracted uncertainty in the bankruptcy courts or other resolution process. Similarly, for some qualified financial contracts, support was also designed to help some creditors in the event of a failure of one of the firms. In March 2008, losses on mortgage-related securities caused the distress sale of investment bank Bear Stearns. In July 2008, the GSEs, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, had trouble raising additional capital. Policymakers tried unsuccessfully to enhance investor confidence by pledging financial support for the G SEs. Despite this pledge, in September 2008, F Freddie Mac were placed in conservatorship with explicit financial support from the Fed. The U.S. Federal Reserve is the world's largest lender of credit. almost completely evaporated, making the government sponsored enterprises (GSEs) the dominant providers of wholesale mortgage funding. GSE funding has a variety of government support, including preferred stock purchases by the U.S. Treasury. The lack of significant private capital in mortgage funding is a sign that financial instability in mortgage markets has not yet completely healed (things already went wrong). It has been an announced goal of the Obama administration to stabilize the mortgage market. It has not been achieved yet, but it is a step in the right direction. fire sales should there be a default by a major market participant, has not been completely eliminated. Efforts to address potential instability in money market mutual funds have not as yet been finalized by the SEC. Reliance on government assisted sources of funding increased markedly as a share of all mortgage funding in 2008. At the origination level, the mortgage market share of Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans increased even for borrowers who could offer significant down payments with their house purchase. Private mortgage securitization increased at the wholesale level. Mortgage-backed security (MBS) is a bond backed by a pool of mortgage loans. The bondholders receive a share of the interest and principal payments on the underlying mortgages. The cash flows may be divided among different cash flows. Most MMFs offer check-writing redemption features. The tendency of people to take more risks once another party has agreed to provide protection. Regulatory interventions to bail out failing firms are often said to create moral hazard, on the assumption that others will expect to be saved from their mistakes, too. Two companies are affiliated when one owns all or a large part of another. All subsidiaries are affiliates, but affiliates that are less than 50% controlled are usually not treated as subsidiaries. Asset-backed security is a bond that represents a share in a pool of debt obligations or other assets. The holder is entitled to some part of the repayment flows from the underlying debt. (See "Securitization.") Bank holding company is a company controlled by a third company (see "Subsidiary"). also have authority over securities companies, mortgage lending companies, personal finance companies, and other types of companies offering financial services. Structured debt —Debt that has been customized for the buyer, often by incorporating complex derivatives. Subordinated debt — Debt over which senior debt takes priority. In the event of bankruptcy, subordinated debt holders receive payment only after senior debt claims are paid in full. Subsidiary — A company whose controlling shares are owned 50% or more by another ("parent") corporation. Consolidated Supervised Entities program — Securities and Exchange Commission program that provided voluntary supervision for the five largest investment bank conglomerates. Conservatorship —When an insolvent financial institution is reorganized by a regulator with the intent to restoring it to an ongoing business. Counterparty —The opposite party in a bilateral agreement, contract, or transaction, such as a swap. Credit Default Swap (CDS)—A tradeable contract in which one party agrees to pay another if a third party experiences a credit event. Too-big-to-fail doctrine — An implicit regulatory policy holding that very large financial institutions must be rescued by the government. Tri-Party Repo Market — A repurchase agreement in which a third party agrees to clear and settle the transaction. Umbrella supervision — The term applied to comprehensive regulation of a holding company and its parts by one or more holding company regulator(s) Undercapitalized — A condition in which the business does not have enough capital to meet its needs. computing the value of assets for purposes of capital, segregation, or margin requirements. Hedge funds are pools of invested money that buy and sell stocks and bonds and many other assets, including precious metals, commodities, foreign currencies, and derivatives. Hedging —Investing with a hedge fund is similar to buying and selling shares of a stock or bond with the intention of betting on its future price rising or falling. It is illegal to sell shares of hedge funds with the intent of profiting from their losses. Mutual fund is an investing company that pools the funds of individuals and other investors. Owners of a mutual fund hold proportional shares in the entire pool of securities in which a fund invests. Owners pay taxes on their distributions from a fund; the mutual fund itself is not normally subject to federal or state income taxation. Naked option is the sale of a call or put option without holding an equal and opposite position in the same stock or bond. The naked option is a sale of an option to sell a stock without holding the opposite position. even greater rush to sell the commodity (unwind positions) when prices reverse. Capital requirements help assure that losses that might occur will accrue to the institution incurring them. In the case of banking institutions experiencing problems, capital also serves as a buffer against losses to the federal deposit insurance funds. Capital is the owners' stake in an enterprise. It is a critical line of defense when losses occur, both in banking and nonbanking enterprises. Capital —Assets minus liabilities; what a firm owns minus what it owes. Hedging instrument gains value as the hedged item loses value, and vice versa. Illiquid Assets —Assets that cannot be easily or quickly sold. Insolvent —A firm whose liabilities exceed its assets. Institutional regulation —Regulation that is institution-specific as contrasted with activity specific (see "Functional regulation"). Investment banking functions include underwriting (marketing newly registered securities to individual or institutional investors), counseling regarding merger and acquisition proposals, brokerage services, advice on corporate financing. respond to emerging threats to U.S. financial stability. Firewalls —Barriers to the flow of capital, information, management, and other resources among business units owned by a common entity. In case of financial distress of one operation ("fire"), the "walls" are intended to prevent the spread of loss to the other units. Example: losses in a securities subsidiary of a holding company could not be covered by any of the holding company's bank subsidiaries. Foreign bank —Banks and their holding companies headquartered in other countries may have a variety of financial operations in the United States.  securitization is the process of transforming a cash flow, typically from debt repayments, into a new marketable security. Holders of the securitized instrument receive interest and principal payments as the underlying loans are repaid. Shadow Banking is financial activities that in some respects parallel banking activities but are subject to less regulation than commercial banks. Institutions include mutual funds, investment banks, and hedge funds. Special-purpose entities (SPEs)—Also referred to as ‘shadow banks’  SPEs are legal entities created to perform a specific financial function or transaction. They isolate financial risk from the sponsoring institution and provide less-expensive financing. The assets, liabilities, and cash flows of an SPE do not appear on the sponsoring institutions' books. Speculation — A venture or undertaking of an enterprising nature, especially one involving considerable financial risk on the chance of unusual profit. State regulation —Under the dual system of bank regulation, states as well as the federal government may charter, regulate, and supervise depository institutions. Act (RESPA), the Truth in Lending Act (TILA), and the Dodd-Frank Act's ability-to-pay standard. Additional work may need to be done to raise GSE guarantee fees to make room for private competitors to the GSEs. The financial infrastructure can also be a source of systemic risk. This is essentially the "plumbing" of the financial system. It includes the environment in which financial trading occurs, communications of the interbank payment system, clearing and settlement of retail payments. Wholesale funding sources are not eligible for certain government initiatives that assist financial stability, such as deposit insurance. Non-banks that use wholesale sources to fund capital market activity may be subject to runs similar to a depository bank, but would not typically have access to certain emergency lending facilities such as the Fed's discount window. During periods of uncertainty and financial instability, financial intermediaries may lose trust in each other, and refuse to extend or roll over their loans. The resulting reduction in wholesale funding can have many of the characteristics of a bank run by depositors. Financial institutions are differentiated by the manner in which they invest their funds: in loans, bonds, stocks, or some combination; as well as by their sources of funds. Depository financial institutions may accept deposits which are federally insured against loss to the depositor. Non-depository financial institution such as life and property/casualty insurance companies, pension funds, and mutual funds obtain funds through other types of receipts, whose values may fluctuate with market conditions. Financial subsidiary —Under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ), both financial subsidiary and financial subsidiary. A holding company for securities firms authorized under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. Such holding companies are subject to regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The issuing of securities, where the proceeds accrue to the issuer, is distinct from the secondary, or resale, market. Lender of last resort —Governmental lender that acts as the ultimate source of credit in the financial system. In the United States, the Fed has this role. Leverage —The ability of a company or bank to make a profit by proprietary trading. credit unions, since traditionally the greater part of their funding has been in the form of deposits. Deposits are a customer's funds placed with an institution according to agreed on terms and conditions and represent a credit to the depositor. Derivatives are financial contracts whose value is linked to the price of an underlying commodity or financial variable (such as an interest rate, currency price, or stock index) Ownership of a derivative does not require the holder to actually buy or sell the underlying interest. to control large dollar amounts of a commodity or security with a comparatively small amount of capital. Leverage can be obtained through borrowing or the use of derivatives. Liquidity risk —The possibility that the market for normally-liquid assets will suddenly dry up, leaving firms unable to convert assets into cash. Also, the risk that other firms will refuse to extend credit on any of the firms listed. The ability to trade an asset quickly without significantly affecting its price, or the condition of a market with many buyers and sellers present. terms to a firm that is perceived as distressed. Mark-to-Market — The process by which the reported amount of an asset is adjusted to reflect true the market value. Market risk — The risk that the price of a tradeable security or asset will decline, resulting in a loss to the holder. Money market mutual fund (MMF)—A form of mutual fund that pools funds of individuals and other investors for investment in high-grade, short-term debt and bank deposits paying market rates of return. meet its capital requirements if it is a regulated entity. Variable Rate Demand Obligation — A security which pays a variable interest rate, and can be redeemed upon the demand of the holder. Write-Downs —Reducing the value of an asset as it is carried on a firm's balance sheet because the market value has fallen. Appendix B. Acronyms for this article include:  ‘’’, ‘””, ’ ’. Bank Holding Company Act regulates bank holding companies and financial holding companies. Federal Open Market Committee oversees market conditions and implements monetary policy through such means as setting interest rates. Financial holding company can control one or more banks, securities firms, and insurance companies as permitted by law and/or regulation. A financial institution is an enterprise that uses its funds chiefly to purchase financial services. The Federal Reserve and the Department of the Treasury decide what is an appropriate new these cushions against loss, according to the Act. Federal Reserve is primary federal regulator. States and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency may also regulate them. Government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) is private company with government charters. Government sponsorship typically gives them a funding advantage over purely private competitors. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ) called for more functional regulation than in the past. In the U.S. banks are regulated based on activity ("function") rather than organizational structure. Troubled Asset Relief Program provides financial assistance to U.S. financial institutions through the purchase of senior preferred shares in the corporations. Charter conversion —Banking institutions may, with the approval of their regulators, switch their corporate form between: commercial bank or savings institution, National or State charter. Clearing Organization —An entity through which futures and other derivative transactions are cleared and settled. Also known as a clearing organization may be a division or affiliate of a particular exchange, or a freestanding entity. Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 (CFMA, P.L. 106-554, 114 Stat. 2763)—Overhauled the Commodity Exchange Act to create a flexible structure for the regulation of futures and options trading. Commercial Paper Funding Facility Emergency Program —Created by the Fed in 2008, this program purchased three-month unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper from eligible companies. Community Reinvestment Act 1977 — A federal law which encouraged depository institutions to make loans and provide services. called a clearing house, multilateral clearing organization, or clearing association. Collateralized debt obligation (CDO)—A bond created by the securitization of a pool of asset backed securities. Commercial bank —A deposit-taking institution that can make commercial loans, accept checking accounts, and whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. National banks are chartered by the National Bank of Canada. (See CDO and CMO.) Collateralize mortgage obligation (CMO)—A multiclass bond backed by a pool. of mortgage pass-through securities or mortgage loans. Debt obligation, bankruptcy, or credit rating downgrade. Credit Risk — The risk that a borrower will fail to repay a loan in full. Credit Rating Agency — Private company that evaluates the credit quality of securities and provides ratings on those securities. Credit Union — A nonprofit financial cooperative of individuals with one or more common bonds (such as employment, labor union membership, or residence in the same neighborhood). May be state or nationally chartered. Credit unions accept deposits of members' savings and transaction. arising inside the institution. OTC transactions can occur electronically or over the telephone. Receivership —When an insolvent financial institution is taken over with the intent to liquidate its assets. Repurchase Agreement (Repos) —A method of secured lending where the borrower sells securities to the lender as collateral and agrees to repurchase them at a higher price within a short period, often within one day. Savings association —A savings and loan association, mutual savings bank, or federal savings bank. saving (thrift) and home buying through mortgage lending. In recent years, such institutions' charters have been expanded to allow them to provide commercial loans and a broader range of consumer financial services. The federal regulator for most savings associations is the Office of Thrift Supervision. Also known as savings and loans, thrifts, and mutual savings banks. The Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC) is a private nonprofit membership corporation set up under federal law to provide financial protection for the customers of failed brokers and/or dealers. The term "systemic risk" does not have a single, agreed-upon definition. Systemic risk is defined as the risk that the linkages between institutions may affect the financial system as a whole. Thrift holding company —Also known as a savings and loan holding company, a business that controls one or more savings associations. These holding companies are regulated under the Home Owners' Loan Act by the Office of Thrift and Deposit Guarantee.and reporting purposes with its parent. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Non-bank financial firms is important to understanding the FSOC. Many of the new powers attempt to create a regulatory and resolution regime for non-banks that is similar to the way depository banks are handled. The term bank generally refers to financial institutions with bank, thrift, or credit union charters that offer loans and raise a large proportion of their funds through insured deposits. Insured depository Banks have prudential regulators who monitor their assets and liabilities, including the ability to prevent concentrations in particular types of loans or reliance on particular funding sources. The term non-bank refers to financial institutions that offer loans or other sources of capital, but do not have a bank charter. Resolution of failing depository banks is done administratively by the FDIC (or NCUA for credit unions), not through the bankruptcy courts. Banks generally have access to liquidity facilities, such as the Federal Reserve discount window. Prior to the financial crisis of 2008, investment banks such as Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers were examples of large, complex, non- bank financial institutions. criteria and designates which financial market utilities be subjected to safety and soundness regulation. An example of a financial market utility would be an organization that provides settlement and clearing services. A covered non-bank in danger of failing may under certain conditions be resolved by the FDIC rather than through the bankruptcy process. The FSOC may set aside some financial regulations for consumers if the rules might cause systemic risk, under certain circumstances. The distinction between depository banks and non-depository banks will be clarified. The federal regulator for credit unions is the National Credit Union Administration. Commercial banks are typically limited to acting as dealers in specified high-quality debt obligations, such as those of the federal government. A dealer is an individual or financial firm engaged in the purchase and sale of securities and commodities such as metals, foreign exchange, etc., for its own account and at its own risk as principal (see "Broker/dealer"). Depository institution —Customarily refers to commercial banks, savings institutions, and the fact that banks may be either federally or state chartered. Exchange — A central marketplace with established rules and regulations where buyers and sellers meet to trade futures and options contracts or securities. Federal safety net — A broad term referring to protection of banking institutions through deposit insurance, discount window credit, other lender of last resort support, and certain forms of regulations to reduce risk. Commercial and industrial companies generally lack any of the above-listed safety net protection measures for banks and other commercial and industrial firms. profit if they can successfully forecast price trends. Examples include futures contracts, options, and swaps. It may be used to relieve temporary cash shortages at banks and other depository institutions. Borrowers are expected to have tried to borrow elsewhere first and must provide collateral as security for loans. The term derives from the practice whereby bankers would come to a Reserve Bank teller window to obtain credit in the early days of the Federal Reserve System. The phrase refers to the Dual banking system, which is a system of multiple banks.

ROUGE-1: 83.80, ROUGE-2: 77.75, ROUGE-L: 27.23
BERTScore: 61.43

==============================================
==================== [19/100] ====================
Summary:
Allegations that defendants had "played a critical role in the September 11 attacks by funding Muslim charities that, in turn, funded al Qaeda" Appeals court in 2008 affirmed dismissals of the first three sets of claims for lack of subject. In 2008, the appeals court dismissed claims against four Saudi princes in their official capacities and a banker in their personal capacities. The appeals court also dismissed the claims against the Saudi High Commission for Relief to Bosnia and Herzegovina (the SHC), a charitable organization. the entity holds exclusive rights to some right in the [foreign] country; and (5) how the entity is treated under foreign state law. The plaintiffs sued four Saudi princes for actions taken within their official capacities. All four princes held positions of power in the SHC; three of the princes were members of the country's "Supreme Council of Islamic Affairs" The court held that the Saudi government had formed SHC and paid its employees, and that it was an organ of the Kingdom. the laws of a third country. Whether the SHC was an agency or instrumentality turned on whether it was an "organ" of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The court applied a multi-factor test, derived from a previous Second Circuit decision and from decisions from other circuits. Specifically, the court applied the following five criteria: "(1) whether the foreign state created the entity for a national purpose; (2) whetherThe foreign state actively supervises the entity, (3) whether it requires the hiring of public employees and pays their salaries, (4) whether applied to the charities also commanded immunity for the Kingdom and the SHC. The plaintiffs, recognizing that their allegations about indirect funding for the attacks would not satisfy the tort exception, sought to allege that the activities of certain "operational level agents and alter-egos" of Saudi Arabia within the United States in connection with the attacks are attributable to Saudi Arabia. The court found that there was an insufficient factual basis to conclude that any of these individuals were employees of Saudi Saudi Arabia when they carried out the allegedly tortious activities in the U.S. In 2005, a district court ruled that Saudi Arabia's funding of Islamic charities was a matter of public policy. The previous judge had explained that "SHC's alleged misuse of funds and/or inadequate record-keeping" was the result of a discretionary function and cannot be the basis for a lawsuit against Saudi Arabia. He noted the 2005 district court decision in Terrorist Attacks I granting the defendants immunity for decisions involving which charities to fund, specifically, the holding that "Saudi Arabia's treatment of and decisions to support Islamic charities are purely planning level" did not appear to foreclose a finding of jurisdiction unless all conduct associated with the injury occurs wholly within the United States. In the case of the Saudi charities, the appellate court stated that all of the defendants' conduct had occurred abroad. Although the September 11, 2001 attacks constitute a "tort," the SJRC and the SRC are not alleged to have participated in that "Tort" Instead, the "torts" allegedly committed by the SJ RC and SRC only involve giving money and aid to purported charities that supported al Qaeda. Victims seeking to establish liability in U.S. courts against, and recover damages from, the terrorists. Victims have sued numerous individuals and groups with less direct ties to the attackers. In r e Terrorist Attacks on September 11, 2001 , is a consolidated case that includes, among other claims, claims against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The case is being heard by the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York, which is expected to hear the case later this year. The Supreme Court later abrogated the first of these holdings. The Second Circuit reversed its own position with respect to the tort exception to foreign sovereign immunity. The case is on appeal at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. If the appellate court reverses the district court's dismissal of the suit on "entire tort" grounds, the case will likely return to the districtCourt for a determination of whether the alleged tortious acts retain immunity as discretionary functions. In re Terrorist as at most a separate tort or as a discretionary act. Attacks ) is a case consolidated for pre-trial purposes in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals' opinion reviewed dismissals of only a subset of the claims at issue in the case. Plaintiffs in In r e Terrorist Attacks are individuals and businesses injured by the September 11 terrorist attacks. They brought claims based on state and federal tort law and various federal laws, including the Torture Victim Protection Act. The dismissed claims fall into four categories: Plaintiffs in the case were victims of the September 11 terrorist attacks. They alleged that the Saudi defendants had supported Al Qaeda's financial backers prior to the attacks and were therefore civilly liable for plaintiffs' injuries. In August 2008, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit (Second Circuit) affirmed dismissals of claims against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, a Saudi charity, Saudi princes, and a Saudi banker in In r e Terrorist Attacks on September 11, 2001. protected as an agent or instrumentality. Only the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit (Seventh Circuit) had reached the opposite conclusion. The Supreme Court granted review and established the minority position as the correct one. Consequently, jurisdiction over remaining Saudi officials is subject to the same inquiry that applies to other individuals and possibly a determination as to whether common law immunity applies. Because the officials dismissed from this case were Saudi nationals, they are not covered by the law of Saudi Arabia. S. 2040 would provide for exclusive federal court jurisdiction over foreign states under the new FSIA provision. It would clarify the relationship between the FSIA exception and the ATA's civil liability exception precluding suits against foreign officials. Aliens as well as U.S. nationals would likely be able to bring lawsuits under causes of action other than the ATa if jurisdiction is available under theNew FSIA clause.rise to jurisdiction where it constitutes "mere negligence" If the newFSIA exception applies, a U.s. national could pursue an ATA lawsuit against the foreign state. The FSIA authorizes jurisdiction over foreign nations in several exceptions. A foreign state is not immune from U.S. courts' jurisdiction where it has waived its immunity. For claims against foreign non-state defendants to whom the FSIA does not apply, federal law authorizes subject matter jurisdiction as long as the "amount in controversy" exceeds $75,000. The FSIA is a jurisdictional gatekeeper for claims againstForeign states and their instrumentalities. The federal courts have the power to deny jurisdiction to foreign defendants entitled to immunity. court, however, and is once again on appeal at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. This report explains the legal bases for the dismissals and provides an update to the status of the case. To address some issues involving the interpretation of the FSIA, Congress is considering the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act ( S. 2040 , H.R. 3815 ). The Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act applies to all foreign states and their "agencies and instrumentalities" Individual foreign officials are not covered by the FSIA if they are sued in their capacity as individuals. One such defendant, the former president of two of the Saudi-run charities sued for alleged involvement in funding the 9/11 terrorist attacks, prevailed in a motion to dismiss the lawsuit against him on the basis of common-law foreign sovereign immunity. Personal jurisdiction is the second threshold hurdle for assertion of judicial authority in cases involving foreign defendants. Whereas subject matter jurisdiction governs courts' power over particular. giving both within and outside the Kingdom"; and the fourth prince was the SHC's president, in addition to his roles as a provincial governor and crown prince. Although several other federal courts of appeals had ruled on the extension of foreign sovereign immunity to foreign officials, treatment of officials under the FSIA was a question of first impression for the Second Circuit. The court held that individuals acting within their official capacities were indeed "agencies" of their states and were therefore entitled to immunity under theFSIA. The court noted that at the time the FSIA was enacted, Congress expressed a desire to codify common law principles. The court also emphasized the potential erosion of immunity for foreign states if immunity extended only to government actions distinct from the actions of officials as individuals. The state cannot act except through individuals, the court said. The Second Circuit's holding was consistent with the conclusions of five of the six other federal courts of appeals that had considered whether an individual may be immune from prosecution, it said. instrumentality" is entitled to the same immunity to which the state itself is entitled under the FSIA. The key threshold question was whether the SHC and the princes sued in their official capacities qualified as agencies or instrumentalities. The FSIA defines "agency or instrumentality" as any entity which is (1) a "separate legal person, corporate or otherwise"; (2) "an organ of a foreign state or political subdivision thereof"; and (3) not a U.S. citizen or created under. claims, personal jurisdiction governs courts' power over particular defendants. Even if a court establishes jurisdiction over the subject matter of a claim, it cannot exercise its authority over a defendant for whom it lacks personal jurisdiction. Personal jurisdiction requires both statutory authority and satisfaction of Fifth Amendment due process standards. As with subject matter jurisdiction, statutory authority for personal jurisdiction over foreign defendants follows one of two distinct routes according to the FSIA's application. For a defendant who is not a foreign state or its agency or instrumentality, the ordinary procedure for obtaining personal jurisdiction applies. The type and quantity of contacts necessary to constitute "minimum contacts" differ according to the type of personal jurisdiction. General jurisdiction, which allows a court to exercise jurisdiction over a foreign defendant for any claim, does not require contacts related to the specific claim in the case. Conversely, specific jurisdiction involves no "continuous and systematic" requirement; instead, it requires that a defendant's contacts with the forum "relate to" or "arise out of""Justice" is a term used to refer to a court's jurisdiction over foreign defendants. Conspiracy gives rise to civil liability when it consists of an agreement between two or more persons. A defendant must be generally aware of his role as part of an overall illegal or tortious activity at the time that he provides the assistance. The defendant must knowingly and substantially assist the principal violation, according to the D.C. Circuit. The case was heard in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Washington, which heard the case on November 14. The jury deliberated for less than two hours. Secondary liability would attach under the Senate bill to any person who "aids and abets, by knowingly providing substantial assistance" The House bill would authorize secondary liability against anyone who aided, abetted, or conspired with the perpetrator. Neither bill would explicitly elucidate whether criminal liability under the material support provisions of the law would be covered by secondary liability. The bill would also clarify what type of intent or knowledge would be necessary to establish liability.that gives rise to the lawsuit. the defendant state to resolve the claims. The court would be authorized to issue a stay for 180 days, which could be renewed for additional 180-day periods if the Secretary of State certifies that such negotiations remain ongoing. All current versions of JASTA include a finding by Congress that expresses approval in the context of civil liability under the ATA for the test established by the D.C. Circuit for aiding and abetting and conspiracy liability. The test is that the party whom the defendant aids must perform a wrongful act. commercial conduct or a particular commercial transaction or act" The court noted the "circularity" of this definition. It relied upon the Supreme Court's definition of "commercial activity" as "the type of actions by which a private party engages in 'trade and traffic or commerce" With this framework, the court upheld the district court's finding that defendants' "charitable contributions" fell outside the scope of the commercial activities. The case is the first of its kind in the U.S. S. 1894 was ordered to be reported favorably out of the Senate Judiciary Committee in September 2012. A companion bill, H.R. 5904 , did not receive further action. Identical versions of the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act were introduced in the 113 th Congress as S. 1535 and H. R. 3143. The bill was introduced to reduce some of the burdens faced by victims of state-sponsored terrorism in the United States who seek to bring lawsuits against foreign officials. in civil actions for terrorist acts no matter where they occur. H.R. 3143 would have included the provision of material support for terrorism in the jurisdiction provision. The Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act (JASTA) has returned to the 114 th Congress as S. 2040. The Senate passed the bill by voice vote on May 17, 2016, after accepting it as an amendment to the ATA cause of action. The amended version of Section 2337 would have exempted only U.S. officials. S. 2040 would create a new exception to the FSIA for acts of international terrorism that occur on U.S. territory. "International terrorism" is defined with reference to the ATA, including the exclusion for "acts of war" The amendment would dispense with the "entire tort" rule and the statutory discretionary act exclusion for such cases only. The bill would include among congressional findings that "no country has the discretion to engage knowingly in the financing or sponsorship of terrorism, whether directly or indirectly" S. 2040 (as passed by the Senate) would leave the foreign official exclusion under the ATA intact, but, as noted above, would remove the immunity from prosecution for acts of international terrorism in which a U.S. national is injured. The bill would also extend the immunity to the maximum extent permissible under the 5 th Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. It would apply to any person who commits or aids and abets an act of internationalterrorism or otherwise sponsors such act or the person who committed such act. act was done pursuant to and in furtherance of the common scheme. The bills would implement secondary liability in somewhat different ways. S. 2040 (as passed by the Senate) and H.R. 3815 would amend the ATA to provide for secondary liability. The House bill would also apply liability in the case of an entity designated as a foreign terrorist organization as a result of the attack. The Senate bill would provide secondary liability for an act of international terrorism planned, committed, or authorized by an entity. ATA would also establish civil liability, as some courts have found. Language in the findings section suggest the intent that the knowing or reckless provision of material support or resources to a foreign terrorist organization, whether directly or indirectly, should give rise to liability. H.R. 3815 would remove the immunity of foreign officials from lawsuits as currently provided in 18 U.S.C. §2337(2) It would also add a provision to the ATA to address issues plaintiffs have confronted in establishing personal jurisdiction over foreign nationals.  exception for designated state sponsors of terrorism provides jurisdiction over cases involving designated "state sponsor[s] of terrorism" in suits involving "personal injury or death that was caused by an act of torture, extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking" However, the exception seems to apply only to countries designated as "state sponsors" of terrorism by the U.S. government. The U.N. Security Council passed a resolution this week condemning the use of torture and extrajudicial killings as terrorist acts. The resolution calls for an end to such practices. by the U.S. Department of State as state sponsors of terrorism. This list currently includes Iran, Sudan, and Syria. At the time suit was brought in the In re Terrorist Attacks litigation, the previous terrorism exception remained in force. Before asserting jurisdiction to accept a case, a federal court must establish its authority over the dispute involved and the parties to the litigation. For cases involving foreign defendants, the analyses for subject matter and personal jurisdiction differ according to the court's jurisdiction analysis. U.S. State Department has not designated the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia as a state sponsor of terrorism. The plaintiffs characterized defendants' charitable contributions to Muslim groups as a form of money laundering. The court rejected this characterization as incompatible with the Supreme Court's interpretation of the commercial activities exception. The FSIA defines "commercial activity" as "a regular course of activity" in the U.S., the court said in its ruling on the In r e Terrorist Attacks plaintiffs' case. It also said the commercial activity exception should apply to the Saudi defendants. that international terrorism did not meet this standard as of September 11, 2001. Quoting its 2003 opinion in United States v. Yousef , the court stated the following: We regrettably are no closer now ... to an international consensus on the definition of terrorism or even its proscription. The mere existence of the phrase "state-sponsored terrorism" proves the absence of agreement on basic terms among a large number of States that terrorism violates [customary] international law, the court said. with the forum to permit personal jurisdiction under the constitutional "minimum contacts" standard. Plaintiffs argued that the minimum contacts test was satisfied because the defendants had purposefully directed activity at the judicial forum by supporting the attacks. The court rejected this argument, acknowledging that it had been a successful argument in cases where defendants were "primary participants" in the terrorist acts but holding that the banker and princes' activities were too attenuated from the actual attacks to satisfy due process requirements. Similarly, the court rejected the plaintiff's argument that potential foreseeability of the terrorist attacks was a sufficient basis for personal jurisdiction. The court held that U.S. courts lack jurisdiction over the claims against the Saudi defendants. The legal bases for this holding were lack of subject matter jurisdiction under the FSIA and lack of personal jurisdiction. Because a foreign state's "agency or instrumentality" were not part of the motion to vacate, plaintiffs did not have an opportunity to pursue their lawsuit against them on remand. Claims against them in their official capacity would likely be deemed to be claimsagainst the state or its instrumentality in any event. The Supreme Court has described the tort exception as "cover[ing] only torts occurring within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States" The Second Circuit applies the so-called "entire tort" rule to determine whether the conduct of a foreign government or its instrumentality is subject to the FSIA tort exception. It is insufficient to overcome immunity to allege that an injury or damage occurred within the U.S.; it must also be demonstrated that the defendant's tortious conduct occurred in the United states. The constitutional standard requires "intentional" conduct "expressly aimed" at residents in the forum. the "entire tort" rule would apply, in which case the fact that the relevant Saudi government activity took place outside the United States would make the tort exception inapplicable. For claims made against a Saudi banker and against several Saudi princes for actions taken in their personal capacities, subject matter jurisdiction was not precluded by the FSIA. However, the appeals court upheld the district court's determination that it lacked personal jurisdiction over the Saudi defendants sued in theirpersonal capacities. Specifically, the court concurred with the districtCourt's finding that the princes sued in his personal capacities lacked sufficient contacts. exception by reason of their non-commercial nature, regardless of the contributions' alleged money laundering purpose. This portion of the decision remains undisturbed. Finally, the court of appeals rejected the tort exception as inapplicable to claims against the Saudi defendants. It emphasized that if the exception were expanded to include all conduct conceivably, it would not apply to the Saudi case. The court was concerned about the effect that an expanded tort exception would have on the other FSIA exceptions. calculated to result in injury or death to a particular individual or individuals, made for whatever reason, would be one most assuredly involving policy judgment and decision and thus exempt as a discretionary act. As it has been recognized, there is no discretion to commit, or to have one's officers or agents commit, an illegal act. The Ninth Circuit has held that the discretionary act exclusion does not apply in the case of a foreign official who, while acting in his home country, orders a killing. in the United States that would be a violation of the domestic law of that country. Courts may tend to view direct involvement on the part of a foreign official overseas in tortious activity that takes place on U.S. territory as included in the same tort. indirect contribution by means of lawful conduct could be viewed as part of the "entire tort" rule. Both of these cases applied the tort exception to injuries in the US orchestrated from abroad, suggesting that the rule is not in use in these appellate circuits. out of an act of extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking, terrorism, or the provision of material support or resources for such an act. It would also eliminate the "entire tort" rule by providing that the non-commercial tort exception covers physical injuries, deaths, and property damage or loss occurring in the United States "regardless of where the underlying tortious act or omission occurs" The discretionary function exclusion would remain, but the exception would not apply to the executive branch. Some courts have found the discretionary act exclusion inapplicable to tortious acts in the United States that amounted to illegal conduct. A district court in the D.C. Circuit found in Letelier v. Republic of Chile that an assassination occurring on U.S. soil under the direction of a foreign government was not a discretionary act within the meaning of the FSIA tort exception. While it seems apparent that a decision would overcome SHC's immunity, it is not clear that this would happen. Several bills have been introduced in Congress that would broaden the FSIA tort exception explicitly to cover terrorist acts that occur within the United States. The bills would have amended the tort exception to theFSIA expressly to include "any statutory or common law tort claim arising out of an act of extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking, terrorism, or the provision of material support or resources for such an act" S. 2930 was reported favorably out of the Senate Judiciary Committee with some amendments to the findings and provisions addressing aiding and abetting liability. H.R. 3815 would amend the FSIA tort exception in 28 U.S.C. §1605(a)(5) by limiting the type of injury to "physical injury" rather than "personal injury" It would specifically exclude "any claim for emotional distress or derivative injury suffered as a result of an event or injury to another person that occurs outside of the United States" The amendment was introduced late in 2015 and referred to the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Constitution and Civil Justice. Under the bill, a plaintiff could seek money damages from a foreign state for physical injury to person or property or death caused by an act of international terrorism. The bill would also clarify that a tortious act or omission would not give the plaintiff money damages in other cases. With respect to the FSIA non-commercial tort exception, the bill would clarify that the exception would not apply to foreign states acting within the scope of his or her employment, regardless of where the tortious conduct took place. state a claim on which relief could be granted. Plaintiffs brought claims against these defendants under a common-law tort theory as well as the Anti-Terrorism Act (ATA), the Alien Tort Statute (ATS), and the Torture Victims' Protection Act (TVPA) The ATA provides that U.S. nationals injured in their person, property, or business "by reason of an act of international terrorism" can recover treble damages, plus costs, but does not provide a specific amount. In Terrorist Attacks III , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit adopted narrow interpretations of the commercial activities and tort exceptions under the FSIA. Plaintiffs' efforts to hold non-government financial institutions liable for providing material to terrorist organizations have also seemingly been stymied by the courts' interpretations of ATA as the defendants breached any duty of care owed to the plaintiffs or that their actions proximately caused the plaintiffs' injuries. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few months. not describe who can be held liable. The plaintiffs in this case alleged that the defendants were liable for knowingly providing financial support and services to charities that supported Al Qaeda. Citing its recent holding in Rothstein v. UBS AG, the appellate court held that the ATA does not encompass liability on an aiding-and-abetting theory. The Supreme Court's interpretation of the phrase "by reason of," requires a showing of proximate cause. The Alien Tort Statute provides federal jurisdiction. characterized as tortious, the tort exception would "vitiate" the terrorist state exception's limitation to designated terrorist states. In a separate case, a later panel of the appellate court disagreed with this aspect of the decision, however, effectively overturning it for the Second Circuit. It is possible that other courts could read the terrorism exception as foreclosing suits against states not designated as sponsors of terrorism. The bills would have expanded liability for foreign government officials, as well as foreign governments. The Supreme Court in 2004 held that the statute does not provide a cause of action for such lawsuits. It permitted courts to give effect to the statute for civil actions arising from the violation of a very narrow class of international norms "defined with a specificity comparable to the features of the 18 th century paradigms" The Second Circuit concluded that the ATS's drafting in 1789 was understood to govern at the time of the case's drafting. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in the case. The court also rejected the plaintiffs' reliance on the Torture Victim Protection Act for a cause of action. The court rejected complaints based on common law tort theories, holding that they did not demonstrate that they do not apply to terrorism. We thus conclude ... that terrorism—unlike piracy, war crimes, and crimes against humanity—does not provide a basis for universal jurisdiction [under customary international law]," the court said. of the cliché that "one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter"

ROUGE-1: 79.56, ROUGE-2: 73.42, ROUGE-L: 27.98
BERTScore: 60.28

==============================================
==================== [20/100] ====================
Summary:
In the event of a future disaster, providing comparable services to all responders would ensure more equitable access to services. HHS has taken steps to ensure that responders are registered, but it has not developed a develop a list of responders. NIOSH’s proposal for a project to develop strategies for addressing responder health issues is a step in the right direction, but HHS has not yet developed a plan to address these issues. Timely implementation of such a system, prior to a disaster or emergency occurring, is important. HHS has not indicated whether its policies and actions following a disaster or emergency would apply these lessons. HHS has not described the roles and responsibilities of its components in designing and implementing responder health programs. Until HHS completes this work, responders to a future disaster could be left vulnerable if they experience health problems as a result of carrying out critical response and recovery activities. The NRF recommends that the Secretary of HHS take the following action: develop a department-level responder screening plan that incorporates the five lessons from the WTC. to provide screening and monitoring services for certain individuals affected by a presidentially declared disaster, including responders. The act also authorizes the President, acting through HHS, to establish cooperative agreements with a medical institution, including a local health institution. Such a program may include collecting exposure data, developing and disseminating information and educational materials, performing baseline and follow-up clinical and mental health evaluations, establishing and maintaining an exposure registry, studying short- and long-term health effects through epidemiologic and other health studies. occurs following a disaster. However, our discussions of the lessons on the importance of registering responders and of designing responder health programs to foster epidemiological research noted that implementing these lessons would help public health officials determine whether a specific disaster resulted in health effects and whether long-term monitoring was necessary. HHS also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 7 days after its issue date. Using experience gained from the WTC disaster, HHS’s ATSDR has developed and tested a Rapid Response Registry (RRR) survey instrument. The RRR survey instrument is designed to collect information that would enable officials to inform individuals about follow-up health services. NIOSH officials plan to meet with state health department representatives in May 2008 and to conduct a focus group with risk managers with an interest in responder safety and health in June 2008. The proposed guidance document would include guidelines for tracking responders during an event, including their activities, exposures and physical and mental health effects. department or a consortium of medical institutions, to carry out this program. We have identified five important lessons from the experience of the WTC health programs. These lessons relate to activities during the response to a disaster as well as during the recovery period, when follow-up monitoring or treatment may be needed. Some of the difficulties encountered by the WTC programs resulted from the unique nature of the World Trade Center disaster. applying these lessons could help to improve the response and recovery from future disasters, the authors say. would help ensure that responders are contacted before some scatter and become more difficult to locate. Having a complete registry could improve the ability of responder health programs to conduct outreach. Designing and implementing screening and monitoring programs that foster the ability to conduct epidemiologic research could help determine the need for ongoing monitoring. Despite an accumulation of evidence about the health effects experienced by responders, researchers have acknowledged that there is still a long way to go before we know the full extent of responders' health problems. Thousands of responders to the WTC disaster have experienced serious physical and mental health problems as a result of their response and recovery efforts. The federal government has provided significant resources to support screening, monitoring, and treatment services for these responders. Designing and implementing these services has involved many challenges. We have identified lessons from this experience that include both practical issues, such as the need to provide screening and monitoring programs, and the need for epidemiologic research. The project’s objective to develop a responder surveillance system acknowledges aspects of the second lesson. HHS is the primary agency for coordinating the federal government’s public health and medical response. OSHA is the lead agency for responding to worker safety and health concerns, with HHS as a cooperating agency. HHS can also assist state, tribal, and local officials in establishing a registry of potentially exposed individuals and conducting long-term monitoring for potential health effects. Under ESF#8, HHS can deploy its publichealth and medical personnel, including civilian volunteers, to the affected area. The Environmental Protection Agency or the American Red Cross can also activate and deploy its medical personnel. surveillance and monitoring and for evaluating the need for longer-term medical monitoring of response and recovery workers. OSHA and NIOSH have established an interagency agreement that broadly describes NIOSH’s role in carrying out the Worker Safety and Health Support Annex. FEMA issued a mission assignment to OSHA for such activities and OSHA in turn assigned activities to NIOSH. In addition to the NRF, there are certain statutes that are relevant to HHS's responsibilities concerning responder health. components would be used, and how efforts would be coordinated. NIOSH developed a proposal in February 2008 for working with some of the relevant HHS components to develop strategies to ensure responder safety and health. A NIOSH official told us that the purpose of the project would be to help HHS determine how it would respond to an activation of the NRF and how to implement the SAFE Port Act. One of the objectives of theproject would be for HHS to develop a plan for responding to an NRF activation. HHS says the recommendations and guidance are intended to reach a larger audience than HHS. HHS says long-term monitoring and treatment, including referral for treatment, are appropriate each time a Stafford Act declaration is made. NIOSH has held or is planning meetings with state health department representatives, risk managers with an interest in responder safety and health, and other federal organizations, such as the United States Army Corps of Engineers, to obtain their perspectives on the project, HHS says. The draft report says it is possible to infer from our draft report that long- Term Monitoring and Treatment, including Referral for Treatment, is appropriate for Stafford Act declarations. As of February 2008, 21 states had included the RRR survey in their disaster planning. NIOSH has also taken some steps that relate to the registering of responders. In 2005, NIOSH posted interim guidance on its Web site to help occupational health and other clinicians conduct postexposure medical screening of workers leaving hurricane disaster recovery areas. The data would be collected and maintained by state or local entities with ATSDR’s and RTI’S assistance. The instrument has been shared with other federal agencies, all state health departments, and local response organizations. NIOSH partnered with other HHS components, such as ASPR and NIEHS, to develop the proposal. NIOSH officials plan to meet with ATSDR officials about adapting the RRR and other surveillance tools to collect more specific data. A second objective would be to develop a responder surveillance system to document and integrate data on exposures and health effects. The goal is to identify ways to control potential hazards and determine the need for long-term monitoring, NIOSH said in a statement. ATSDR established a contract with Research Triangle Institute International (RTI) to support state and local efforts to implement the RRR survey instrument during responses to disasters. RTI’s responsibilities include providing information to the entire at-risk population on how to enroll in the R RR. The RRR is intended to collect basic demographic and health information, including contact information; exposure information; and information on exposure-related health effects, immediate health and safety needs, and health insurance. According to research studies. guidance states that all responders should receive some basic screening services. The guidance outlines minimum screening information needs, including contact information, health status information, type of response work, exposure information, and injuries or symptoms. Although ASPR is required under the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act to register federal public health and medical personnel who are deployed under the Secretary of HHS’s authority, it has not completed efforts to ensure that these responders would be registered in the event of an are reprinted in appendix II. According to the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act, HHS is the lead federal agency for public health and medical responses to emergencies and disasters. The act specifies that ASPR must carry out certain functions during a response, including registering federal public health, medical personnel. These personnel include members of the National Disaster Medical System (NDMS) Section 709 of the Security and Accountability for Every Port Act of 2006 provides that the President, acting through HHS, may establish and implement a program. ATSDR has developed a survey instrument that state and local entities can voluntarily adopt to register responders. ASPR is also taking steps to establish a system to register HHS employees and certain other volunteers, but it has not completed its effort. HHS has not developed a department-level plan for designing and implementing responder health programs that incorporates the lessons from the WTC health programs. In the absence of a plan, NIOSH developed a plan for responding to emergency situations in the emergency room and community. emergency or a disaster. HHS has not developed a department-level plan for designing and implementing responder health programs that incorporates the five lessons from the WTC health programs. As part of its efforts, ASPR recently established the Center for Responder Safety, Health, and Risk Management. The Center is working to develop a system to register responders and record their health problems and make referrals. An ASPR official told us that the Center is exploring how to adapt two existing electronic record systems used by NDMS. All responders, excluding FDNY firefighters and emergency medical service technicians and current federal employees. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) Until December 26, 2006, ASPR was the administrator. GAO-08-429T. September 11: Improvements Needed in Availability of Health Screening and Monitoring Services for Responders outside the New York City Area. Washington, D.C.: January 22, 2008.GAO-09-429t. September 9: Improvements still needed in availability of health screening and monitoring services. WTC health programs and other researchers have helped to identify the physical and mental health effects of the WTC disaster. Physical health effects included injuries and respiratory conditions, such as sinusitis, asthma, and a new syndrome called WTC cough. Almost all firefighters who responded to the attack experienced respiratory effects. One study conducted by researchers affiliated with the FDNY WTC Program found that exposed firefighters on average experienced a decline in lung function equivalent to that which would be produced by 12 years of federal funding for research. program is based in FDNY’s Bureau of Health Services, which has an established research infrastructure. In contrast, the NY/NJ WTC Consortium has had more difficulty conducting research. There have been fewer studies conducted by researchers affiliated with the Consortium, and it has taken longer for the studies to be published. The NY/ NJ WTC Consortium serves a more heterogeneous responder population of workers and volunteers. It lacks baseline health status information on this population. In addition, in our discussions indicated a need for treatment. through December 2007 have totaled about $369.2 million. The four programs are the FDNY WTC Medical Monitoring and Treatment Program; the NY/NJ WTC Consortium; HHS’s WTC Federal Responder Screening Program; and the WTC Health Registry. Unlike the other key programs, the WTC Registry does not provide in-person screening or monitoring services. Instead it uses periodic surveys of self-reported health status to collect health information on responders, as well as people who resided, worked, attended school, or were present in the vicinity of WTC. WTC health programs have been able to collect information only on responders who seek out their services or fill out their surveys. Without a complete registry of responders, it is difficult to accurately determine the incidence and causes of health problems experienced by the responder population. There was no registry with reliable information on the amount, duration, and types of exposure (e.g., physical hazards, environmental toxins, psychological trauma) experienced by responders. For example, a WTC health program official told us that not knowing where responders are located around the country has made it difficult to determine how to design services. of screening and monitoring services. Neither NYC nor the federal government developed a registry of all responders who worked at the WTC disaster site. WTC health program officials had to compile a list of responders who were potentially eligible to receive services. According to WTC Health Registry officials and WTC Federal Responder Screening Program officials, the list of potentially eligible responders was only partially successful. The list was compiled by contacting government agencies, private-sector employers, and volunteer organizations to locate employees who had responded to the World Trade Center. The effort to compile a list of responders potentially eligible for the WTC Health Registry cost about $1 million and took about 19 months. Some government agencies and many employers did not cooperate with program officials, primarily because of concerns about confidentiality. Not registering responders during disaster response efforts affects outreach activities and hinders efforts to plan services. An official from the NY/NJ WTC Consortium said that without a definitive list, the program had to issue widespread and costly public service announcements to identify and enroll eligible responders. by responders, it has been difficult to determine the relationship between level of exposure and changes in physical and mental health. The WTC health programs have had to rely on participants’ recollection of their exposure. Responders to the WTC disaster were at high risk for mental health problems. Many workers and volunteers worked for extended periods of time without sufficient respite. Some of them did not have training in disaster response and were therefore more vulnerable to the stress of the event. The mental health status of responders did not receive as much attention as physical health. A study conducted by WTC Health Registry researchers found that responders’ risk of newly diagnosed asthma increased with greater exposure to the WTC disaster site. The Mount Sinai School of Medicine clinical center of the NY/NJ WTC Consortium found that about half of the participants in its screening program met the threshold criteria for being referred for a clinical mental health evaluation. Commonly reported mental health effects among responders and other affected individuals included symptoms associated with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), according to the study. WTC health programs need to be able to scientifically document the health effects of a disaster. NIOSH officials identified a need for additional funding to allow the monitoring programs to conduct research and answer important scientific questions about the health of WTC responders. Providing timely mental health screening and monitoring that is integrated with physical health screening is a key component of the WTC health programs, the authors say. In addition, conducting scientific research of health effects can help public health officials determine whether long-term monitoring is needed. that there remains some uncertainty and controversy about the health risks associated with the disaster. In addition to a lack of information about the number and identity of responders and their exposures, another serious limitation to understanding the health effects of the WTC disaster is the fact that the WTC screening and monitoring programs were not explicitly designed and implemented to conduct research, in particular epidemiologic research. NIOSH officials told us that the FDNY WTC program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium were not designed to collect and analyze data. with clinicians and researchers affiliated with the NY/NJ WTC Consortium, they raised concerns such as the program lacking sufficient in-house experience for conducting research. For example, it did not have an adequate electronic medical records system. In addition, information collected by the program had to go through a protracted data cleaning process before it could be analyzed. WTC health program officials and others also noted that there was a lack of previously tested, scientifically based protocols for conducting physical and mental health screening, making it difficult to obtain conclusive results. initially as their physical health status. Mount Sinai School of Medicine is one of the clinical centers in the NY/NJ WTC Consortium. The mental health status of responders was initially assessed with a short written questionnaire, and depending on a person’s score, individuals were referred for an in-person clinical mental health evaluation. Recognizing the seriousness of mental health problems among responders, the Mount Sinai school of Medicine Department of Psychiatry sought private funding from the Robin Hood Foundation. The program is federally funded. to develop a broader mental health component to the screening program. With the additional funds, the program was able to develop and use a more extensive mental health questionnaire and have a trained mental health professional conduct in-person interviews. Such programs can improve the ability to accurately diagnose and differentiate physical and mental health conditions. For example, gastrointestinal problems can sometimes be a sign of psychological stress. Timely mental health screening can help identify and treat mental and physical health conditions, experts say. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. HHS’s WTC Federal Responder Screening Program provides screening services to federal responders nationwide through its network of FOH clinics. Beginning in late 2002, NIOSH funded services for nonfederal responders residing outside the NYC metropolitan area. Responders who traveled to NYC from around the country following the attack have testified before the Congress about having difficulty receiving services. Officials involved with the WTC health programs have recognized the value of designing responder health programs that provide comparable services to all responders and their employers. NIOSH took steps to increase the availability of services to nonfederal responders outside the NYC metropolitan area. In June 2007 it arranged for QTC Management, Inc., to provide screening and monitoring examinations nationwide for 1 year. In March 2008, CDC issued a request for organizations to indicate their interest in coordinating a national program for WTC responders that would ensure that all WTC responders who reside outside of NYC have access to federally funded screening, monitoring, and other services. For more information, visit www.nihos.org. depression, and anxiety. Behavioral health effects such as increased alcohol and tobacco use were also reported. In previous reports we noted limitations of the WTC health programs and problems with their implementation. For example, we reported that federal responders were eligible only for screening services and did not receive monitoring services as other responders did. We also reported on the service interruptions in the WTC Federal Responder Screening Program. HHS established the program in June 2003, suspended it in March 2004, resumed it in December 2005 and suspended it again in January 2007. and monitoring can also prevent some mental health conditions from progressing to more serious disorders. For example, obtaining treatment for mild depression might prevent a major depressive disorder from developing. Before federal funding became available in fiscal year 2006 to pay for treatment of responders’ health effects, WTC health program officials told us that it was a challenge to find providers who would treat responders whose screening or monitoring examination was done. Including a treatment referral process in screening and monitoring programs could improve the ability of responders to gain access to needed treatment. need of care to treatment services. Screening and monitoring programs for responders to the WTC disaster were set up as separate programs. Making comparable services available to all responders, regardless of their employer or geographic location, could ensure more equitable access to services for responders. Data collected about responders’ health are consistent and comprehensive, the NIMH says. The agency says providers who identified a need for treatment during screening examinations acquired a responsibility to provide access to care. The NIMh says it has no plans to change its screening and monitoring program. and monitoring plan that defines the roles and responsibilities of HHS components. This plan should facilitate the registration of all responders and ensure that screening and monitoring services are designed to foster epidemiologic research. It should provide timely mental health screening and. monitoring that is integrated with physical health screenings and monitoring. It must include a treatment referral process; and make comparable services. available to all responders, regardless of their employer or geographic location. HHS reviewed a draft of this report and provided comments on our findings. Screening and Monitoring Services for Responders. September 11: Monitoring of World Trade Center Health Effects Has Progressed, but Program for Federal Responders Lags Behind. GAO-07-1229T. Washington, D.C.: September 10, 2007. HHS Needs to Ensure the Availability of Health Screening. and Monitoring for All Responders for World Trade Centre Health Effects. September 9: HHS Has Screened Additional Federal Responder for World trade center Health Effects, but Plans for Awarding Funds for Treatment Are Incomplete. HHS officials, clinicians involved with the WTC health programs, and other experts said that an integral part of screening and monitoring is the establishment of a linkage to treatment services. Some indicated that as professionals they also felt an ethical obligation to be able to refer people in. Case study: WTC responders who carried out cleanup services after the WTC attack often did not have health insurance, according to a labor official. Case case: WTC workers who were construction workers often lost their health insurance when they became too ill to work the number of days required for coverage. Secretary of Health and Human Services, congressional committees, and other interested parties. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7114 or bascettac@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. for Federal Responders. September 11: Health Effects in the Aftermath of the World Trade Center Attack. GAO-04-1068T. Washington, D.C.: September 8, 2004. September 10: September 10, 2005. September 12: September 12, 2006. September 13: September 14: September 15. September 16: September 17. September 17: September 18: September 19. September 19: September 20: September 21. September 21: September 22: September 23: September 24: September 25. In December 2004, DHS issued the National Response Plan (NRP), which detailed missions, policies, structures, and responsibilities of federal agencies. The NRP was to be invoked when the President issued a major disaster or emergency declaration under the Stafford Act. The NRF is intended to provide resource and programmatic support to states, localities, and other entities. It was first invoked in August 2005 in response to Hurricane Katrina and was subsequently updated in May 2006. In January 2008, DHSissued the NRF to supersede the NRP. a coordinated approach to disaster and emergency response and short-term recovery. FEMA is responsible for assigning work and providing funding to other federal agencies for performing operations included in the NRF. To execute this responsibility, FEMA uses mission assignments, which are interagency agreements. When a disaster or emergency is declared under the authority of the Stafford Act and FEMA issues a mission assignment, a federal agency has 60 days after the declaration to complete tasks described in the mission assignment. unless time is extended by FEMA due to unusual circumstances. conduct epidemiologic research but rather were established as clinical programs focused on the health of individual responders. For example, the programs were not designed to test specific hypotheses about health effects. FEMA primarily provides funding for programs to address the short-term effects of a disaster, in its interagency agreement with NIOSH to establish the monitoring. A NIOSH official told us NIOSH did not design and implement FDNY and Consortium’s monitoring programs to conduct research because of restrictions that FEMA placed on the funding for the programs. programs, FEMA specified that the funding it provided could not be used for research. HHS’s Federal Responder Screening Program also was not designed to collect any information on responders’ health for the purposes of research. The interagency agreement between FEMA and ASPR to establish the program limited the program to a onetime screening examination. HHS officials said they did not have the resources to conduct epidemiologic research with the federal responder population. In hindsight, such research clearly would have provided useful data and benefited the program. FEMA collaborates with HHS on health issues related to disasters. FEMA provided funding to HHS to establish certain WTC health programs. HHS’s disaster response and recovery activities operate within an administrative and legal framework that helps to define federal agency roles and responsibilities and gives HHS certain authorities. Following the attack on the WTC, the Congress appropriated approximately $8.8 for the WTC health program, which was later expanded to include other buildings. The World Trade Center was damaged in the September 11, 2001, attacks. services for nonfederal responders residing outside the NYC area were not continuously available for all responders. In addition, some of the screening and monitoring programs initially faced difficulties referring responders for treatment. Throughout the history of these programs, program officials have raised concerns about whether the duration of federal funding would be adequate. HHS’s disaster response activities, including efforts to address the health of responders, operate within an administrative and legal framework, according to the HHS website. In response to the attacks on September 11, 2001, the Congress enacted the Homeland Security Act of 2002, which established DHS and required the department to consolidate existing programs. FEMA entered into interagency agreements with HHS agencies to implement health screening and monitoring programs for responders and other affected groups. In fiscal year 2006, the Congress appropriated $75 million to CDC that was available for monitoring and treatment services for certain WTC responders. The Congress made additional appropriations to CDC available for the same purpose in fiscal years 2007 and 2008. Federal funds appropriated or awarded for the WTC health programs from October 2001 to October 2008. $1.billion to FEMA, over several years, for response and recovery activities.

ROUGE-1: 80.32, ROUGE-2: 74.54, ROUGE-L: 27.37
BERTScore: 60.57

==============================================
==================== [21/100] ====================
Summary:
DHS’s progress on this outcome. DHS has fully addressed 3 of poorly planned and by DHS as poorly performing IT management. DHS must develop and implement a plan for filling key vacant positions identified through its staffing analysis reports. DHS should continue to improve its acquisition program management by effectively using the Joint Requirements Council, which it reinstated in June 2014, the authors say. They recommend that DHS reinstate the Joint. Requirements Council or establish another departmental joint requirements oversight board to review and approve acquisition. requirements. 2 outcomes, partially addressed 1 outcome, and initiated actions to address the remaining outcome. DHS has taken a number of actions to fully address establishing effective component-level acquisition capability. We continue to track DHS’s progress through ongoing reviews of the Joint Requirements Council, non-major program acquisitions, and our annual assessment of major acquisition programs. To ensure that recent efforts are sustained, the department must continue to implement its sound acquisition policy consistently and effectively across all components. We would like to thank Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Carper, and members of the committee for their time. Security, improve disaster response, and execute a wide variety of other operations. Each of DHS’s major acquisition programs generally costs $300 million or more and spans multiple years. DHS has established an acquisition management policy that we found in September 2012 to be generally sound. In September 2012 we also found that DHS had not consistently met the policy's requirements. At the time of our 2012 review, the department had only verified that 4 of 66 programs documented all of the critical knowledge the policy requires. the risk of end users—such as border patrol agents or first responders in a disaster— receiving technologies that do not work as expected. Reflecting the shortcomings we have identified since 2005, we have made 64 recommendations to DHS on acquisition management issues; 42 of which have been implemented. Our findings also formed the basis of the five acquisition management outcomes identified in the high risk list, which DHS continues to address. As detailed below, DHS has fully addressed one outcome, mostly addressed two outcomes, partially addressed one outcomes, and initiated efforts to address the final outcome. We found that DHS remained a collection of disparate organizations, many of which were performing functions with insufficient oversight. We concluded that unless DHS’s top leaders addressed these challenges, the department was at risk of continuing to exist with a fragmented acquisition organization that provided stopgap, ad hoc solutions. In November 2008, we found that billions of dollars had been spent on the Department of Homeland Security since 2007. We also found that the department had lost $1 billion in revenue in the same period. invested in major acquisition programs continued to lack appropriate oversight. Of DHS’s 48 major programs requiring milestone and annual reviews, 45 were not assessed in accordance with this policy. At least 14 of these programs had reported cost growth, schedule slips, or performance shortfalls. DHS has concurred with and presented plans for addressing all of the acquisition management recommendations that we have addressed to the Secretary since September 2012, the implementation of which will enhance acquisition management, the report says. The report is published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. leadership has taken to address the acquisition management shortcomings we have identified over the past 10 years. However, in our April 2015 review, we continued to find enduring challenges to acquisition programs, such as staffing shortfalls. 11 of the 22 programs we reviewed faced funding gaps (projected funding vs. estimated costs) of 10 percent or greater, including five programs that faced gaps of 30 per cent or greater. Inconsistencies in how programs are funded and managed are still a problem. issues, we have, among other things, recommended that DHS assess program-specific affordability tradeoffs at all acquisition review meetings and ensure that funding plans submitted to Congress are comprehensive. DHS concurred with these recommendations and is taking actions to implement them. For example, DHS established that department leadership would, during all acquisition program reviews, specifically address affordability issues and make explicit tradeoffs as necessary, and DHS officials told us that DHS leadership is discussing affordability at all program reviews to help ensure adequate funding. components were implementing the department’s acquisition management policy. The funding plans for Coast Guard programs continued to be incomplete, in that they did not account for all of the operations and maintenance funding the Coast Guard planned to allocate to its major acquisition programs. These gaps in information reduce the value of the funding plans presented to Congress. Further, as we noted in our most recent high risk update, the department has additional work to do to fully address the remaining acquisition management outcomes. To address these This testimony is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from the published product. This testimony is based on are listed in each product. Homeland Security: Weak Oversight of Human Resources Information Technology Investment Needs Considerable Improvement. DHS Training: Improved Documentation, Resource Tracking, and Performance Measurement Could Strengthen Efforts. DHS: Progress Made; Significant Work Remains in Addressing High-Risk Areas. GAO-14-228T. DHS Financial Management: Continued Effort Needed to Address Internal Control and System Challenges. GAO-13-524. Department of Homeland Security: Taking Further Action to Better Determine Causes of Morale Problems would Assist in the Agency’s Morale Improvement Efforts.GAO: Additional Executive Review Sessions Needing to Address Troubled Projects. GAE: Additional OMB and Agency Actions Are Needed To Achieve Portfolio Savings. GAo: Additional Efforts Needed. to Resolve Deficiencies in Internal Controls and Financial Management Systems. be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time. Individuals making key contributions to this statement include Larry Crosland, Jennifer Kamara, James Kernen, Emily Kuhn, Elizabeth Luke, Valerie Freeman, David Lysy, Taylor Matheson, Shannin O’Neill, Lindsay Taylor, Nathan Tranquilli, Katherine Trimble, and Shaunyce Wallace. For further information about this testimony, please contact Rebecca Gambler at (202) 512-8777 or gamblerr@gao.gov. The daily transcript is a written version of each day's featured news story. Use this transcript to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com. The Daily Transcript is published weekly and is curated by CNN's iReport team. For more information, go to the Daily Transcript's News Quiz, or go to http://www.cnn.com/newsquiz/2013/01/07/26/29/28/290715/news/features/top-stories/topstories. letter to DHS, we identified and DHS agreed to achieve 31 actions and outcomes that are critical to addressing the challenges within the department’s management areas. DHS issued its initial Integrated Strategy for High Risk Management in January 2011. DHS has generally made improvements to the strategy with each update based on feedback we provided. In our 2015 report we found that DHS established a framework for monitoring its progress in implementing the integrated strategy it identified for addressing the 30actions and outcomes. But, as we concluded in our report, it is too early to assess their impact. DHS’s efforts to strengthen and integrate its management functions have resulted in progress addressing our criteria for removal from the high-risk list. As of March 2016, DHS has met three criteria and partially met the remaining two criteria, as shown in table 1. We concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe that it will be important for DHS to maintain its current level of top leadership support and commitment to ensure continued progress in successfully executing its corrective actions through completion. We found that DHS has established a plan for addressing this high- risk area. of Homeland Security, the Under Secretary for Management at DHS, and other senior officials have continued to demonstrate exemplary commitment and top leadership support for addressing the department’s management challenges. For example, in April 2014, the Secretary of Homeland Security issued a memorandum entitled Strengthening Departmental Unity of Effort. Further, in August 2015, DHS identified four integrated priority areas to bring focus to strengthening integration among the department's management functions. These priorities include, for example, strengthening resource allocation and reporting ability and developing and deploying secure technology solutions. executing its corrective actions through completion; continue to implement its plan for addressing this high-risk area and periodically report its progress to us and Congress. identify and work to mitigate any resource gaps and prioritize initiatives as needed. closely track and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective action and make midcourse adjustments as needed; and make continued progress in achieving the 20 actions and outcomes it has not fully addressed. demonstrate that systems, personnel, and policies are in place to ensure that results can be sustained. outcome by continuing to use performance measures to assess progress made in achieving department-wide management integration. Since our 2015 update, DHS fully addressed another outcome as a result of actions it has taken to improve the maturity of its system acquisition management practices. As of March 2016, DHS has partially addressed 9 and initiated 4 of the actions and outcomes. DHS has fully addressed 1 of the 5 acquisition management outcomes, mostly addressed 3 since our 2015 report, and still has work to do on the remaining 20 outcomes. DHS agreed were needed to address the high-risk area. The 30 actions and outcomes address each management function (acquisition, IT, financial, and human capital) as well as management integration. Achieving sustained progress requires leadership commitment, effective corrective action planning, adequate capacity, and monitoring the effectiveness and sustainability of supporting initiatives, the DHS said in a statement. For example, one of the outcomes focusing on acquisition management is validating required acquisition documents in accordance with a department-approved, knowledge-based acquisition process. We found in our 2015 report that DHS had made important progress across all of its management functions and significant progress in the area of management integration. DHS continued to face significant management challenges that hindered the department’s ability to accomplish its missions. For example, DHS did not have the acquisition management tools in place to consistently demonstrate whether its major acquisition programs were on track to achieve their cost, schedule, and capability goals. DHS has continued to demonstrate important progress over the last year by, for example, obtaining a clean opinion on its financial statements for a third consecutive year. have ready access to reliable information for informed decision making. Over the last year DHS has continued to take actions to address these challenges but they persist. As we concluded in our 2015 report, addressing these and other management challenges will be a significant undertaking that will likely require several years. Key to addressing the department’s management challenges is DHS demonstrating the ability to achieve sustained progress across the 30 actions and outcomes we identified and discussed in this report. The report concludes that the department's management weaknesses pose a risk to mission accomplishment. 2014 update. DHS had not yet entered into a contract for independent verification and validation services in connection with its efforts to establish this program. Effective implementation of these modernization projects is important because, until they are complete, the department’s current systems will not effectively support financial management operations. As we concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe, moving forward, DHS will need to closely track and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective measures. We currently assess DHS to have met the framework to monitor progress criterion. 2015, the department’s financial statement auditor designated deficiencies in IT systems controls as a material weakness for financial reporting purposes. This designation was due to flaws in security controls such as those for access controls, configuration management, segregation of duties, and contingency planning. DHS continues to make progress on three multi-year projects to modernize selected components’ financial management systems. According to its January 2016 strategy update, DHS has made progress on 2 financial management outcomes, partially addressed 3, and initiated 3. the most progress on its U.S. Coast Guard modernization project. Additional planning and discovery efforts need to be completed on its projects to modernize Federal Emergency Management Agency and Immigration and Customs Enforcement financial management systems. Without sound controls and systems, DHS faces long-term challenges in sustaining a clean audit opinion on its financial statements and in obtaining and sustaining an internal control over financial reporting, the report says. The report concludes that DHS will be in a position to implement modernized solutions for these components and their customers. Each year, DHS invests billions of dollars in its major acquisition programs to help execute its many critical missions. In fiscal year 2015 alone, DHS reported that it planned to spend approximately $7.2 billion on these acquisition programs. DHS expects it will ultimately invest more than $180 billion in them. We will continue to monitor DHS’s efforts in this high-risk area to determine if the actions and outcomes are achieved and sustained over the long term.over time. The department is acquiring systems to help secure the border, increase marine safety, screen travelers, enhance cyber. DHS could not ensure that annual funding decisions for its major investments made the best use of resources and addressed mission needs. Almost a third of DHS’s major investments received funding without having validated mission needs and requirements. Two-thirds did not have required life-cycle cost estimates. In July 2008, 15 of the 57 DHS major investments we reviewed were designated by the Office of Management and Budget as “critical’ or “urgent” by the White House. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. steps to implementing the outcomes, if implemented effectively and sustained, should provide a path for DHS to be removed from our high- risk list. In October 2014, DHS identified that it had resources needed to implement 7 of the 11 initiatives the department had under way to achieve the actions and outcomes. DHS did not identify sufficient resources for the 4 remaining initiatives. In addition, our prior work has identified specific capacity gaps that could undermine achievement of management outcomes. For example, in April 2014, we reported that DHS needed to increase its cost-estimating capacity. the department had not approved baselines for 21 of 46 major acquisition programs. In its January 2016 strategy update, DHS stated that the department had addressed capacity shortcomings it previously identified. We are analyzing DHS’s capacity to resolve risks as part of our 2015 report. The report concludes that DHS needs to continue to identify resources for the remaining initiatives; work to mitigate shortfalls and prioritize initiatives, as needed; and communicate to senior leadership critical resource gaps. It also states that DHS self-assesses the capacity criterion as fully met. leadership’s ability to effectively manage those programs and provide information to Congress. Nearly all of the DHS program managers we surveyed in 2012 reported their programs had experienced significant challenges. Sixty-eight of the 71 respondents reported they experienced funding instability, faced workforce shortfalls, or their planned capabilities changed after initiation. Most survey respondents reported a combination of these factors. We were only able to gain insight into the magnitude of the cost growth for 16 of 77 programs we reviewed. We found that their aggregate cost estimates had increased by 166 percent. its human resource environment, which with respect to learning management, included limitations resulting from nine disparate learning management systems that did not exchange information. DHS established the Performance and Learning Management System (PALMS) program to provide a system that will consolidate DHS’s nine existinglearning management systems into one system. We made 14 recommendations to DHS to, among other things, address HRIT's poor progress and ineffective management. DHS concurred with all 14 recommendations and provided estimated completion dates for implementing each of them. DHS has also developed and implemented mechanisms to assess training programs but could take additional actions. In February 2016, we reported that DHS had initiated the Human Resources Information Technology (HRIT) investment in 2003 to address issues presented by employees. In September 2014, we found that DHS has implemented component- specific and department-wide training programs. However, to fully achieve this outcome, DHS also needs to, among other things, issue department- wide policies on training and development and strengthen its learning management capabilities. later versions, most recently in January 2016. The integrated strategy includes key management initiatives and related corrective actions plans. For example, the January 2016 strategy update includes an initiative focused on financial systems modernization. These initiatives support various actions and outcomes, such as modernizing the U.S. Coast Guard’s financial management system and implementing an IT human capital strategic plan. We concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe that DHS's strategy and approach to continuously refining actionable plans is effective. the 6 IT management outcomes, mostly addressed another 2, and partially addressed the remaining 1. DHS has finalized a directive to establish its tiered governance and portfolio management structure for overseeing and managing its IT investments. The department has also made progress in implementing its IT Strategic Human Capital Plan for fiscal years 2010 through 2012. However, in January 2015 DHS shifted its IT paradigm from acquiring assets to acquiring services, and acting as a provider of IT services to the federal government. For more information on DHS' IT strategy, visit the department's website. information for day-to-day decision making as a routine business operation. Human capital management. DHS has fully addressed 1 human capital management outcome, mostly addressed 3, and partially addressed the remaining 3. The Secretary of Homeland Security signed a human capital strategic plan in 2011 that DHS has since made sustained progress in implementing, fully addressing this outcome. DHS also has actions under way to identify current and future human capital needs, an outcome it mostly addressed since our 2015 report. However, DHS has considerable work ahead to improve employee morale. a service broker (i.e., an intermediary between the purchaser of a service and the seller of that service) According to DHS officials in May 2015, this paradigm change will require a major transition in the skill sets of DHS’s IT workforce. The hiring, training, and managing of staff with those new skill sets will need to be closely managed. DHS continues to take steps to enhance its information security program. However, while the department made progress in remediating findings from the previous year, in November it was still struggling. DHS ranked last among 37 large federal agencies in all four dimensions of the survey’s index for human capital accountability and assessment. DHS has developed plans for addressing its employee satisfaction problems, but as we previously recommended, DHS needs to continue to improve its root-cause analysis efforts related to these plans, the authors say. The report was published by the Office of Personnel Management, a division of the Department of Health and Human Services. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/.

ROUGE-1: 69.86, ROUGE-2: 63.99, ROUGE-L: 21.44
BERTScore: 62.11

==============================================
==================== [22/100] ====================
Summary:
National Guard uses response-specific analytics to help make data-driven decisions with respect to future applications of social media for emergencies and disasters. The National Guard Bureau does not use disaster specific web pages and does not respond to individual requests for assistance. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) provides emergency response activities through more than 40 planning and response teams (PRTs) These deployable teams have been specifically trained to perform USACE emergency response functions, including provision of emergency power, debris removal and temporary housing. USACE social media platforms include Facebook, Twitter, Google+, Youtube, and Pinterest. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers synchronizes outgoing information across the platforms and coordinates with other federal agencies such as FEMA and NWS. In general, the Emergency Operations Center and the Joint Field Office for each incident have external affairs personnel with social media responsibilities. USACE does not use incident-specific web pages or respond to individual requests. The text box at right provides composite data and provides a link to the full report. Social Media Council consists of 15-20 individuals representing program areas within CDC. Oversight for CDC social media is carried out by the Social Media Council. During an emergency, social media information is coordinated through CDC's Joint Information Center (JIC) The National Guard is both a state and federal organization: it is simultaneously the organized militia of a state or territory and a reserve component of the Army and the Air Force. Due to its size (over 450,000 individuals), trained personnel, and available. also uses social media through internal pages to conduct internal communications. For example, uploaded images of damages posted by social media users are circulated internally to help understand the extent of damages caused by an incident. The images, however, are not used for damage estimates. The National Guard Bureau also monitors social media for situational awareness, and rumor control. Policy guidance for the NGB's use of social media is outlined in the Department of Defense's "Web and Internet-Based Capabilities (IBC) Policies. The National Guard Bureau (NGB) is a joint activity of the Department of Defense. It serves as the channel of communications between the Departments of the Army and Air Force and the states on all matters pertaining to the National Guard. NGB operates its social media efforts out of its public affairs office to educate and inform the public about National Guard preparedness and response efforts. It uses a variety of social media platforms including Facebook, Twitter, Google+, Instagram, and YouTube.32 remain under state control, but pay and benefits are provided by the federal government. The National Guard operates in a state status, under the control of state and territorial governors. In this state capacity, National Guard personnel are not subject to the restrictions of the Posse Comitatus Act. Under certain conditions, the National Guard can also be activated to respond to emergencies and disasters under Title 32 of the U.S. Code. Guard personnel who are activated under Title. 32 can perform law enforcement functions. The National Guard is frequently used for emergency response, and has a wide range of equipment. strategies, to monitor the effect of environmental conditions on health, and to study illness and injury in the workplace. CDC responds and supports state and local efforts to save lives and reduce suffering when a disaster occurs. CDC also helps states and localities recover and restore public health functions after the initial response to an incident. CDC uses Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest, and YouTube among other social media platforms. In some cases, CDC has a number of profiles on each platform (for example,CDC has 30 different Facebook profiles and over 60 Twitter profiles addressing various public health topics). does not use incident-specific social media accounts, but does have web pages for specific incidents. In an emergency, CDC coordinates with other federal entities, state and local agencies, and partners through the emergency operations center. CDC uses a handful of social media staff in an emergency event, but has the capacity to surge if needed. During the 2014 Ebola response, the social media team used a number of different social media platforms to answer questions and obtain situational awareness. CDC does not respond to individual requests for assistance. HHS uses a variety of social media platforms including Facebook and Twitter. In particular, social media plays an integral role in HHS's National Health and Security Strategy. HHS also provides health information through social media during incidents and directs people to health resources through web links and hashtags. HHS does not use dedicated web pages for incidents and does not collect data on social media usage. Each subentity of HHS contains working groups with separate social media efforts that that are separate from each other and do not share data. focus on their particular organizational mission and goals. The HHS working group is relatively small but has capacity to surge if needed for large incidents. The working group monitors social media to dispel rumors, obtain situational awareness, and answer questions about preparedness and public health issues. HHS does not respond to immediate requests for assistance. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) works with states and localities, as well as other nations to detect, investigate, and prevent disease and injury, to develop and implement prevention. outreach, approximately 1.6 million people have subscribed to SBA's e-newsletter online. SBA comingles emergency and disaster information with other information about small business programs on their social media platforms. HHS directs and coordinates preparedness activities and oversees public health agencies within the Department with responsibilities for emergency preparedness and response. These include the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the Agency for Healthcare. The NWS can send weather alerts, and the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children can send AMBER alerts over IPAWS. Social media can also be used by users to let family and friends know they are safe if they are near an incident or natural Hurricane/Post-Tropical Cyclone Sandy. For example an estimated 3.5 million tweets with the hashtag #sandy were generated in 24 hours during Hurricane Sandy and roughly ten pictures per second were uploaded using Instagram. The NWS is a component of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration within the Department of Commerce. The social media platforms used by the NWS mainly consist of Twitter and Facebook. Each of the Weather Service's 122 weather forecast offices, along with other specialized field offices, national centers, and regional and national headquarters utilize social media. NWS uses social media as a tool to provide information about weather events to users, including important safety information on a variety of hazards. In some instances the field offices utilize social social media information in conjunction with traditional spotter reports to identify and confirm weather events. The NWS does not have incident specific pages, but does use social media outlets to address specific threats. Local users can follow a field office for more specific information to their local area or the headquarter account for national or general information. The NWS may utilize social media to let users know a hurricane is approaching a particular area and that people should prepare for dangerously high wind and flooding. Following the event, they may assist the emergency response community by providing critical post-event information that aids in emergency response efforts. Department to keep citizens up to date in real-time throughout the Boston Marathon bombings and subsequent manhunt. The National Weather Service also used social media to alert citizens in Massachusetts of road conditions during the 2015 snowstorms. Similarly, the U.S. Geological Survey launched a pair of Twitter feeds to give out automated,real-time river levels and rainfall amounts during heavy rains in Texas. The platform automatically Tweets out river gauge levels and flow rates when they hit the flood stage. The Boston Police Department also used Twitter to address and correct instances of misinformation. Smart phones and tablets can be used to send images of damaged structures. The Army Corps of Engineers has used a smart phone application to identify and report breeches, seepage, overtoppings, and other areas of structural weakness in levees. The application allows the Corps to take a photo of problem areas and then "geotag" its precise location. According to Corps officials, the application has helped improve the efficiency of the Corps' damage estimate process.for Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy respectively. The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) "Did You Feel It?" project creates automatic intensity maps based on "felt" reports submitted online. More than 2 million reports have been filed on this website, with 40 earthquakes receiving more than 10,000 reports each. Another useful source of information during an incident are crisis maps. Crisis maps combine information scattered across the Internet along with other information and places them on a single map. Users can use the crisis map to ascertain storm paths and flood zones, as well as identify flood zones. as expansive information as individuals who are experiencing the incident first-hand. Stepka provided an example of crowdsourcing in his testimony to the Subcommittee. During Sandy, a group of student volunteers called stations in New Jersey to check whether they were open and had gas available. Within a few days they had data for more than 1,000 different stations, which was fed into our Sandy crisis map automatically. The Department of Energy's call center ended up referencing this information. Study findings reported at the bottom of the page. more objectives more efficiently through PPPs than they could on their own. Inaccurate information could also jeopardize the safety of first responders and the community. The extent to which inaccurate information poses a problem to the emergency management community is not clear and claims of inaccuracy are debatable. Some studies have concluded that social media information is generally accurate; suggesting that reports about the spread of misinformation during incidents may have been exaggerated. In addition to inaccurate information, too much information can also pose a problem. As a disaster or crisis unfolds the amount of information generated by users can be enormous. Unofficial sources are often trusted and used as information sources by the general public. This is because citizens may think official sources are too slow, general, or inaccurate. Some reports have indicated that information from unofficial sources can be just as, and even more desirable than information from official social media websites. The volume and speed with which available information is disseminated, combined with an inability to identify, verify, coordinate, aggregate, and contextualize it can leave this information unused and ultimately, unactionable. Section 208 of the E-Government Act requires federal agencies to complete PIAs. The PIA uses the Fair Information Privacy Principles (FIPPs) to assess and mitigate any impact on an individual's privacy. In March 2011, the Department of Homeland Security completed a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) for the U.S. Department of Justice. The document that results from these mandated assessments is called a Privacy impact assessment (Pia) and is called the Privacy Impact assessment (PIAs) for federal agencies. DHS issued a Privacy Impact Assessment for the Use of Unidirectional Social Media Applications Communications and Outreach. The PIA does not cover users sending content to the Department. It describes the personally identifiable information (PII) and the limited circumstances under which DHS will have access to PII. In 2010, DHS published a PIA on the use of Social Networking Interactions and Applications (Communications/Outreach/Public Dialogue). Neither PIA covers other social media. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Privacy concerns exist about the potential for the collection, retention, and data mining of personal information by the federal government. Others are concerned how the information might be used. The E-Government Act of 2002 mandates that federal agencies conduct an assessment of the privacy impact of any social media use. The use of status alerts and the creation of personal pages to establish situational awareness may raise privacy concerns.identify cost saving opportunities. For example, would the government compile records after a terrorist attack to help investigate certain individuals? activity such as monitoring initiatives, law enforcement and intelligence activities, and other similar operations. Some have argued that privacy laws can hamper the use of information obtained from social media during disasters. Such laws restrict how the government can collect, maintain, and use PII. Efforts are being made to develop software that could remove personal information from social social media messages without loss of vital disaster information. Congress could consider amending existing laws to make theUse of PII less restrictive during disasters, or investigate methods that could help the federal government develop software. within three hours of posting a request on social media. Some jurisdictions may not yet have the capacity or resources to meet this expectation. Others might argue that this expectation is unrealistic, particularly during large-scale disasters, due to the potential volume of incoming messages and posts. They may further argue that some jurisdictions do not have the capabilities to effectively monitor social media for incoming requests for assistance. For example, according to the West Virginia State Police, citizens should not use social media to request immediate help because they don't have the manpower and resources to monitor its. Congress could explore the feasibility of using social media to make requests. Congress could also investigate the use of a pilot program that would allow people to request assistance through social media. The program could then be evaluated to determine its effectiveness. A key issue of interest would be how to use social media around the clock. The use of social media as a tool to ask for assistance would be similar to a call to 911. It could also help state, local, and federal jurisdictions develop their capacity to receive and effectively respond to the requests. Congress could examine whether parts of the U.S. might experience similar problems with Internet traffic. It is unclear how much the federal government is paying for its various social media efforts with respect to emergencies and disasters. The number of personnel required to monitor multiple social media sources, verify the accuracy of incoming information, and respond to and redirect incoming messages is also uncertain. In addition, federal entities may experience a large amount of Internet traffic, which could be difficult to handle. In response, Belgian officials requested that users reduce their Internet consumption. The term "social media" refers to Internet-based applications that enable people to communicate and share resources and information. Social media can be accessed by computers, tablets, smart and cellular telephones, and mobile telephone text messaging (SMS) The use of social media is an evolving phenomenon. Rapid changes in communication technologies in the past decade have enabled people to interact and share information through media that were non-existent or widely unavailable as recently as 15 years ago. In the last 10 years, social media has become more popular than ever. traditional forms of communication are not available. The use of social media to request assistance is likely to become more common. According to a study by the American Red Cross, younger people generally use social media more frequently than older segments of society. They are also more likely to request help through social media, believe agencies should monitor their postings, and have high expectations that agencies will respond quickly to their requests. There are also indications that older adults are increasingly using social media. As more older adults usesocial media, they too may develop similar expectations. Social media can also use inputs to provide unique emergency and disaster information. For example, Facebook activated a feature called "safety check" during the Paris terrorist attacks to allow users to post if they are safe or not in the area of an incident. Crowdsourcing consists of obtaining needed services, ideas, or content by soliciting contributions from people. The above are examples of how information is disseminated through outputs. For more information on how to use social media to help in a crisis or disaster, visit www.disaster.org. Malicious use of social media during an incident could range from mischievous pranks to acts of terrorism. One tactic that has been used by terrorists involves the use of a secondary attack after an initial attack to kill and injure first responders. Social media could be used as a tool for such purposes by issuing calls for assistance to an area, or notifying officials of a false hazard or threat that could be posed.help prevent or reduce the spread of misinformation. There is some concern that individuals or organizations might intentionally provide inaccurate information to confuse, disrupt, or otherwise thwart response efforts. Social media is often used by organizations to provide key public safety information during emergency situations. For example, Orlando authorities used social media to inform the public on the shootings in the Pulse nightclub. Social media are also used for community outreach and customer service purposes by soliciting feedback on public safety-related topics. Further, social media is being increasingly used to provide "real-time" updates as the event unfolds. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) used Twitter to provide information on Zika virus prevention. evacuation routes, shelter locations, and power outage areas. Information posted at the time of an event could be valuable later for investigative and research purposes. For example, viewers at the 2012 theater shooting in Aurora, CO, tweeted and posted messages moments before the attack took place. Forensic analysis of the information was used to construct incident timelines and retrieve first-hand accounts of the event as it unfolded. Social media is used to alert emergency managers and officials to certain situations. Monitoring information flows help establish "situational awareness" During Hurricane Gustav, a Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) used social media to send mass email notifications to team members through Facebook when its call notification system went down. Social media has been used to disseminate a wide range of public safety information before, during, and after various incidents. Prior to an incident (or in the absence of an incident), many organizations and agencies provide citizens with preparedness and readiness information through social media. For more information on how to use social media for public safety, visit CNN.com/Social. Social media is increasingly altering emergency communications. Information can flow in multiple directions (known as backchannel communications) Social media are increasingly seen by some as a supplement or replacement to "911" emergency system lines and can be particularly useful when there is a disaster in the area. The public can now use social media to get information before first responders reach the disaster area. It is.possible to obtain this information beforefirst responders arrive in a disaster area, according to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. First responders can leverage social media to enhance situational awareness and assist in decision-making. Obtaining real-time information as an incident unfolds can help officials determine where people are located and assess victim needs. Emergency managers can also use the information to direct certain resources to reduce damages, loss of life, or both. In some cases it might be a good idea to use social media as a tool to communicate and gather and share real- time, dynamic information, such as on social media sites such as Twitter. A potential method that could be used to accelerate diffusion is through public-private partnerships. FEMA provides a number of tools and models to help organizations start emergency management PPPs. Some argue that government agencies can potentially achieve what the private sector can't. The new technology would be shared with the public sector, the report says. It would increase private sector involvement, potentially reduce costs and project delivery times, and reduce public sector risk. The report is the result of a joint effort by CNN and the Center for American Progress. emergencies and disasters while others have emergency and disaster information comingled with other agency information. When possible statistics on social media use are provided; however, not all entities collect such data. It is important to note that social media is subject to rapid advances in applications and technologies. New uses are being adopted on a continual basis. Social media products typically require digitally signing terms of service agreements. Many terms ofService agreements are, however, incompatible with federal law, policies, and decisionmaking and policymaking. The emphasis on outputs could prevent the federal government from fully realizing social media's potential as an effective emergency management tool. A different approach would be to reorient the focus with an emphasis on inputs. The reorientation, however, could be a complicated matter. Some might argue that the federal role in social media efforts should be limited because the decentralized nature of social media makes the medium too unwieldy for large, centralized organizations to control. They may further argue that federal involvement might lead to standardization and rigid usage. guidelines which might hinder the nimbleness of social media to be applied in new and novel ways. They may therefore conclude that state and locals should take the lead with social media with the support of the federal government. Some starting points would include pilot programs and public private partnerships. Congress could also require FEMA to develop and deploy 3G and 4G mobile networks in presidentially declared disasters, and provide grants to state and local governments to help them develop their social media capabilities. It could also investigate the use of social social media at the federal level to help inform the public. The use of social media for emergencies and disasters can be conceptualized as two broad categories of usage. Social media can be used as an output to disseminate public safety related information. While social media may improve some aspects of emergency and disaster response, some may be concerned that overreliance on the technology could be problematic under prolonged power outages. Another concern is the potential of overwhelming Internet traffic during crisis situations. For example, Internet traffic in Belgium after the terrorist attacks in Brussels slowed down. The following is not an exhaustive list and some of the examples may change or quickly become outdated due to advances in social media. Social media are often used by emergency management organizations to coordinate and send out notifications of upcoming training events and exercises. Notifications can also be sent to mobilize first responders to respond to an incident. At the federal level, social media is commonly used to provide information concerning what types of assistance is available to individuals and households. The state and local level, groups are using social media to manage donations and organize volunteer efforts. social media has played an increasing role in emergencies and disasters in both the public and private sectors. Social media has made tremendous inroads into emergency management for a variety of reasons. By and large, the federal government uses social media as an output to disseminate information. There is also evidence that social media is increasingly being used at the community and household level to respond to emergencies and an emergency management tool through the use of inputs. Not all of these examples valuable disaster information. The following sections provide examples of the ways in which social media are being used. how to apply for assistance, announce application deadlines, and provide information and links to other agencies and organizations that provide recovery assistance. Social media could be used to raise funds in such cases through private contributions. However, it would not likely be capable of supplanting federal assistance altogether. Recovery from large-scale disasters can cost billions of dollars (the federal government provided approximately $120 billion and $50 billion in supplemental funding in 2012). In some cases, individuals and households do not qualify for FEMA Individual Assistance (IA) grants. FEMA's Office of External Affairs has a growing digital engagement section. Their responsibility includes designing and developing social media items. SBA has been a major source of assistance for the restoration of commerce and households in areas stricken by natural and human-caused disasters. It can also be activated to assist with social listening in the event of an emergency or major disaster. It offers low-interest, long-term loans for physical and financial assets. It also has a social media section for third party outlets. FEMA began using Youtube in 2006, Twitter in 2008, and Facebook in 2009. FEMA also uses social media to inform people where and how to apply for federal and nongovernmental assistance. FEMA can use social media as an emergency management tool by integrating various social media platforms through the use of tools referred to as "social media management systems" FEMA also provides a mobile app that provides weather alerts from the NWS and information on where to find open shelters. For example, FEMA provides information about the Small Business Administration's (SBA) Disaster Loan Program through social media. short text description, to the "Disaster Reporter" which gathers crowdsourced disaster-related information within the United States. FEMA has staff responsible for day-to-day social media operations but has the capacity to deploy people from Regional Offices for surge support. For example, 10 people were deployed to the National Response Center during Hurricane Sandy to assist social media efforts. FEMA's social medial policies are guided by its Web 2.0 policy which describes how to sign up for FEMA's service. SBA utilizes social media on several different platforms including Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and blogs. Each SBA region has its own Twitter account to provide users with specific local information. Using social media SBA will often provide links to information on their website for more technical information and may link and share posts from FEMA and other agencies. SBA thinks of their social media as part of their larger digital engagement with users. and to help repair, rebuild, and recover from economic losses after a declared disaster. Federal agencies have negotiated federal-compatible terms of service agreements with social media vendors. The Government Services Administration provides government-wide support, training, and assistance with various social media platforms. Doing so allows FEMA to quickly create a Facebook page, upload pictures and videos, or post information. In FEMA's case, the agency developed negotiated terms ofService agreements with varioussocial media outlets. Do you have a social media problem? Share it with FEMA by emailing jennifer.smith@dailymail.co.uk. allows the agency to better handle information overload by eliminating non-critical information. Listening information is used to improve customer service, obtain situational awareness of an incident or situation, and discredit inaccurate information about the incident. FEMA's app also allows users to take a photograph in a disaster area and submit it, along with a description of what they are doing and where they are located. The agency's social media, however, cannot be used for individual or immediate requests for assistance, the agency says. Act of 2002 to direct the Secretary of Homeland Security to establish a social media working group. The law requires the social media group to submit an annual report to Congress. The report includes a review of current and emerging social media technologies being used to support preparedness and response activities related to terrorist attacks and other emergencies. It also includes recommendations to improve DHS's use of social media for emergency management purposes, to improve public awareness of the type of information being disseminated through social media and how to access such information during a terrorist attack. 75% of social media users use the medium to seek information about an incident. One noteworthy finding from the hearings was a reported need to enhance public and private partnerships. Legislation to address this need was introduced in the 113 th Congress and later in the 114 th Congress. H.R. 623 , which was enacted on November 5, 2015 ( P.L. 114-80 , the DHS Social Media Improvement Act of 2015) amended the Homeland Security Act of 2014. The bill was passed with bipartisan support. 114 th Congress, H.R. 3517, requires the DHS Secretary to conduct a one-year pilot program with the American Red Cross. The program would research and develop mechanisms to better leverage social media to improve preparedness and response capabilities. It would include timely dissemination of public preparedness information for terrorist attacks and other disasters, and the delivery of response supplies to affected areas. The bill requires the Homeland Security Secretary to issue a report to the House and Senate no later than 90 days after completion of the pilot program. The American Red Cross found that 20% of Americans received some form of emergency information from an app. 76% of American expect help within three hours of posting a request on social media. 40% would use social media to inform others they were safe. The study also found that roughly 40% of people would use a social media app to report that they were in a safe place. The figures are higher than the percentages reported (68% and 24% respectively) in their 2011 survey. The survey also finds that roughly 25% of those surveyed would use an app in the future. H.R. 3517 was referred to the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications. This list is not exhaustive—there are many federal entities that use social media for emergencies and disasters in various capacities. The federal government does not use a single platform for emergency and disasters. Rather, federal entities use different social media. for different purposes. Some have platforms dedicated to emergency and disaster preparedness and response, while others have dedicated social media platforms for other purposes. The Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee is considering the bill. A study conducted in 2012 by the American Red Cross found that 40% of the respondents said they would use social tools to tell others they were safe. That percentage is most likely higher today given the rapid proliferation and acceptance of social media in recent years. Other examples of community and household use of the media include warning others of unsafe areas or situations, creating ad hoc volunteer response groups, and raising funds for disaster relief and recovery efforts. Perhaps one of the greatest benefits ofsocial media is that it allows people to communicate when traditional lines are down. Crowdsourcing information can be geotagged with longitude and latitude coordinates. The hearings also explored how social media was transforming preparedness, response, and recovery efforts in the private sector and how lessons learned in these sectors might be applied at the federal level. Lessons learned were also discussed as well as how crowdsourcing can be used to enhance the quality and timeliness of critical information. According to Mathew Stepka, Vice President, Technology for Social Impact for Google, during some disasters, authoritative sources may not have been available. The number of people using Twitter and Facebook spike during disasters because they are searching immediate information they cannot find on traditional broadcast channels. Congress could investigate the accuracy of emergency and disaster information and examine strategies and best practices that could increase organizational capacity to handle a large influx of information. Similarly, Congress could examine methods that could be used to ensure that emergency information is accurate, timely and accurate to the public. To donate to the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, call 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. volume of incoming messages from the public during a disaster. Financial information is also useful for congressional oversight of the entities that have received the funds and to evaluate the overall effectiveness of the expenditures. Knowledge concerning federal expenditures on social media use during disasters can help Congress determine how the money has been spent and what resources have been provided to the nation. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. speed, and accuracy of detecting and responding to levee failures. In addition, the application has also helped reduce human error by reducing instances of mislabeling or misreporting problems. Within the past decade, reports on successful use of social media during emergencies and disasters have spurred congressional interest and policy discussions. Much of the congressional and executive branch interest has centered on how social media can be used to improve disaster response and recovery capabilities. On May 5, 2011, Craig Fugate, the FEMA Administrator, testified before the Senate Committee on Emergency Preparedness. Fugate met with representatives from Apple, Craigslist, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, and Twitter to discuss how to harness the "capabilities of the digital world to better serve the public" Possible future applications include using smartphone-friendly mobile versions of FEMA websites to allow users to access information, request assistance, and facilitate communication between citizens, first responders, volunteer groups, the private sector, and all levels of government. Subsequent hearings were held by the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications Committee on Homeland Security. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Personal Localized Alerting Network known as "PLAN" (technically the Commercial Mobile Alert System, or CMAS) Implemented in 2011, PLAN expands the emergency alert system notifications sent over TV and radio to include mobile and smart phones. PLAN sends geographically targeted alerts through cell towers in the form of text-like messages to the cell phones of people who have requested to be notified in the event of an emergency. It also includes searchable hashtags and links to more information on the agency's website. target emergency alerts to specific geographic areas, which then push the information to dedicated receivers with PLAN-enabled mobile devices. Over 150 entities, including 75 counties, 25 states, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, have access to the IPAWS-OPEN gateway. The gateway allows them to transmit messages to cellular phones (using Wireless Emergency Alerts or WEA), radio and television (using the Emergency Alert System), and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) The gateway was developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which oversees development and operation of the system. Many smartphones and tablets have battery lives lasting twelve hours or less depending on their use. In some cases disaster survivors will not have the means to recharge their devices. In other cases, the device may have adequate power, but cellular towers in the area do not, significantly limiting their use in the event of a disaster.requires a response. When using social media for situational awareness and response efforts, officials and first responders should be aware it could be used for malicious purposes and develop measures to mitigate those possibilities. Congress could require FEMA to develop and deploy 3G and 4G mobile networks in presidentially declared disasters. Congress could also consider other methods that would help residents recharge their devices during power outages. We encourage the subcommittee to explore innovative solutions to provide deployable 3/4G mobile Networks. Without both, social media is useless without power and connectivity, the subcommittee says. The subcommittee urges FEMA to provide 3G or 4G networks to the public during large-scale emergencies. It could also provide mobile device charging stations, the panel says.

ROUGE-1: 84.08, ROUGE-2: 77.33, ROUGE-L: 22.16
BERTScore: 58.34

==============================================
==================== [23/100] ====================
Summary:
through 2007. Forest Service’s data, for fiscal years 1996 through 2007. EPA’S data, from fiscal years 1988 through 2007; and OSM’ s data from 1993 to 2007. We presented these data for the past 10 years (1998 through 2007) because of variability in the program start year across the agencies. Some data recording errors in early years at some agencies also contributed to the lack of year-by-year presentation. We performed a limited reliability assessment of the expenditure data. in 2008 constant dollars. Because of limited time in preparing this testimony, we were unable to fully assess the reliability of the agencies’ expenditure data. We concluded that the data are appropriate as used and presented to meet our objectives because we (1) attribute the data to what agencies report as their expenditures, (2) present rounded data to minimize the perception of precision, and (3) do not base any conclusions or recommendations on the data. To answer our second objective, we summarized selected prior survey efforts by federal agencies and organizations. BLM’s approach to determining the adequacy of financial assurances is not useful because it does not clearly lay out the extent to which financial assurances are inadequate. For example, in California, BLM reports that, statewide, the financial assurances in place are $1.5 million greater than required, suggesting reclamation costs are being more than required. In contrast, we totaled the difference between the financial assurance in place for an operation and thefinancial assurances needed for that operation to determine the actual shortfall for each of the 52 operations for which BLM had determined that financial assurances were inadequate. requiring an increase in the amount of the financial assurance. Conversely, hardrock mining operators may have financial assurances greater than required for a number of reasons. BLM’s estimate of reclamation costs has increased and there is a delay between when BLM enters the new estimate into LR2000 and when the operator provides the additional bond amount. There are about 2.4 times as many notice-level operations on BLM lands in 11 western states than there are financial assurances in place for those operations. fully covered. However, according to our analysis of only those California operations with inadequate financial assurances, the financial assurances in place are nearly $440,000 less than needed to fully cover reclamations costs. BLM officials said that financial assurances may appear inadequate in the Bond Review Report when expansions or other changes in the operation have occurred. BLM agreed that it would be valuable to report the dollar value of the difference between financial assurances. in place and required for those operations where financial assurances are inadequate and have taken steps to modify LR2000. Review Report from BLM’s Legacy Rehost System 2000 (LR2000) database. Because we had previously reported reliability problems with data on financial assurances in LR2000, we conducted a limited reliability assessment of the bond report data. This limited assessment included (1) basic logic checks on the data we received, (2) interviews with BLM minerals management officials knowledgeable of the changes made to LR2000. Although the data are of undetermined reliability, our limited assessment indicates that they are reliable. Bond Review Report: 1,463 hardrock mining operations on BLM lands in 11 western states. 52 of the 1,467 operations had inadequate financial assurances, report says. Agency regulations require reclamation of sites after operations cease, but do not require financial assurances for the reclamation. If a mining operator fails to complete required reclamation, BLM or the Forest Service can take steps to obtain funds from the financial assurance provider to complete the rewatering, the report says, citing regulations and officials. surface disturbance on 5 acres or less. About 99 percent of the value of financial assurances is for plan-level operations. A greater percentage of plan- level operations had inadequate financial assurances. Over one-third of the number of all hardrock operations and about 84 percent of  value of all all BLM operations were inadequate for financial assurances, according to the report. The report was published by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management on Wednesday, November 14. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. The Forest Service allows cash, letters of credit, certificates of deposit or savings accounts, and negotiable U.S. securities and bonds in a trust account. BLM also allows surety bonds, state bond pools, trust funds, and property. Neither agency centrally tracks all the types of financial assurances in place for hardrock operations on its lands. BLM’s LR2000 tracks most of the types, and BLM is updating the database to include more types. The Forest Service does not have readily available information on the types. financial assurances are for hardrock mining operations located in Nevada. See appendix IV for further details on the number of plan- and notice-level operations in each state. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or Members of the Committee may have. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony. For further information about this testimony, please contact Robin M. Nazzaro, Director, Natural Resources and Environment (202) 512-3841. agencies and state-developed…inventories presented may possess inconsistencies and are not intended for exact quantitative comparisons. BLM and the Forest Service have also had difficulty determining the number of abandoned hardrock mines on their lands and have no definitive estimates. In September 2007, the agencies reported that there were an estimated 100,000 abandonedhardrock mine sites, but we found problems with this estimate. According to this estimate, the Forest service may have about 29,000 Abandoned Hardrock Mine Sites on its lands. BLM and the Forest Service are responsible for managing more than 450 million acres of public lands in their care. BLM manages about 258 million acres in 12 western states, including Alaska. Forest Service manages about 193 million acres across the nation. In 1997, BLM and Forest Service each launched a national Abandoned Mine Lands Program to remedy the physical and environmental hazards at thousands of abandoned hardrock mines on the federal lands they manage. In 2007, they had inventoried thousands of abandonment sites and taken actions to clean up hazardous substances and mitigate safety hazards. EPA is developing a database to collect this and other information on hardrock operations by late summer 2008. EPA administers the Superfund program, which was established under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980. According to EPA’s Office of Inspector General in 2004, 63 hardrock mining sites were on the National Priorities List and another 93 sites had the potential to be added to the list. Typically, these sites are expensive to clean up and the cleanup can take many years. Historically, the mining of hardrock minerals, such as gold, lead, copper, silver, and uranium, was an economic incentive for exploring and settling the American West. When the ore was depleted, miners often left behind a legacy of abandoned mines, structures, safety hazards, and contaminated land and water. Even in more recent times, after cleanup became mandatory, many parties responsible for hardrock mining sites have been liquidated through bankruptcy or otherwise dissolved. Under these circumstances, some hard rock mining companies have left it to the taxpayer to clean up the mining site. Between 1998 and 2007, the four federal agencies spent at least $2.6 billion to reclaim abandoned hardrock mines on federal, state, private, and Indian lands. EPA has spent the most—$2.2 billion. OSM has provided more than $3 billion to clean up dangerous abandoned mine sites. BLM officials told us that in addition to the expenditure data they provided, the agency receives funding allocations from other sources, such as the Department of the Interior’s Central Hazardous Materials fund. as needed through telephone interviews to clarify and confirm problematic responses. To answer our third objective—to determine the value and coverage of financial assurances in place to guarantee coverage of reclamation costs— we requested the BLM Bond. Using these final edited data, we calculated the estimated number of abandoned mine sites, the number of features that pose physical safety and environmental hazards in the 12 western states and Alaska. Our definitional and editing processes provided us with reasonable assurance that the data were as clean and consistent as possible. that management controls were improved for the generation of bond review reports from LR2000. We concluded that the data are appropriate as used and presented, and we did not base any conclusions or recommendations on these data. This appendix provides information on federal expenditures used to clean up abandoned hardrock mines by fiscal year (table 5) and by state (table 6). Range of estimated abandoned mines previously (2001) (2007) Mineral Policy Center (2003) Earthworks (formerly Mineral policy Center) ( 2007) (2004) “openings” No data provided Western Governors’ Association and National Mining Association, Cleaning Up Abandoned Mines: A Western Partnership, 1998. Median amount spent for public lands by BLM and the Forest Service was about $5 million and about $21 million, respectively. EPA spent substantially more to clean up mines that are generally on nonfederal lands. OSM provided grants with an annual median value of about $18 million to states and Indian tribes through its SMCRA program. Wyoming was the largest recipient of OSM grants for cleaning up hardrock mine sites—receiving about $99 million. See appendix II for BLM, EPA, and OSM total funding by state. on cleaning up abandoned coal mine sites. OSM, under amendments to the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) of 1977, can provide grants to fund the cleanup and reclamation of certain hardrock mining sites. A state certifies that it has cleaned up its abandoned mine sites and the Secretary of the Interior approves the certification, or at the request of a state or Indian tribe to address problems that could endanger life and property, constitute a hazard to the public and safety, or degrade the environment. an abandoned hardrock mine site is a site that includes all associated facilities, structures, improvements, and disturbances at a distinct location associated with activities to support a past operation. Using this definition, states reported to us the number of abandoned sites in their states. At these sites, on the basis of state data, we estimated that at least 332,000 features may pose physical safety hazards. At least 33,000 sites have degraded the environment, by, for example, contaminating surface water and groundwater or leaving arsenic- contaminated tailings piles. There is no generally accepted definition for a hardrock mine site. Using our consistent definition, 12 western states and Alaska estimated a total of at least 161,000 abandoned mine sites in their states. The estimates for a particular state do, in some cases, vary widely from study to study. An abandoned mine site includes all associated facilities, structures, improvements, and disturbances at a distinct location associated with activities to the site. For example, an abandoned hardrock operation with two mine openings, a habitation and recreational areas than on more remote sites, like in the desert. were up to six times as many. As of November 2007, hardrock mining operators had provided financial assurances valued at approximately $982 million. Some states were less readily able to provide the data directly from their systems without manipulation or estimation. For example, New Mexico estimated the number of abandoned mine sites from the data it maintains on hazardous features. Nevada estimated theNumber of abandoned hardrock mine sites from the data it maintains on the number of mining districts in the state. to public health and safety and require actions to secure, remedy or reclaim. Sites with environmental degradation include features that lead to environmental degradation, and, consequently, require remediation of air, water, or ground pollution. Because most states do not maintain environmental degradation data by feature, states could only speculate about this figure. Because of these limitations with feature-level data, we report only the number of sites with data on environmental degradation in order to ensure more reliable and consistent reporting across the states. features that pose significant public health and safety hazards, and the number of sites with environmental degradation. While states used our definition to provide data on the estimated number of mine sites and features, these data have two key limitations. First, the methods and sources used to identify and confirm abandoned sites and hazardous features vary substantially by state. Some states, such as Colorado and Wyoming, indicated they had done extensive and rigorous fieldwork to identify sites and were reasonably confident that their estimates were accurate. Other states, however, relied less on rigorous field work, and more on unverified, unverified sources. readily available records or data sources, such as published or unpublished geological reports, mining claim maps, and the Mineral Availability System/Mineral Industry Locator System (MAS/MILS), which states indicated were typically incomplete. Several of those states that relied primarily on literature used the literature only as a starting point, and then estimated the number of features on the basis of experience. For example, while one state estimated that there were about three times the number. of public safety hazards as identified by the literature, another state estimated. there were four times as many. pit, and a tailings pile could be listed as one site or four sites, depending on the definitions and methodologies used. See appendix III for more information on estimates from these studies. Some regional or state estimates included coal and other non-hardrock mineral sites because it was not important to distinguish between the type of minerals mined. In 2004, EPA commented on this problem, noting that a universally applied definition of an does not exist at present. The various estimates are based on different methods and definitions. support a past operation, including prospecting, exploration, uncovering, drilling, discovery, mine development, excavation, extraction, or processing. Can range from an isolated prospect shaft and its associated waste rock pile and adjacent prospect pits, to a complex site with multiple entries, shafts, open pits, mill buildings, waste rock piles, a tailings pond, and associated environmental problems. includes only hardrock (also known as locatable), non-coal sites. Features that pose a significant hazard to public health and safety include features, such as mine openings, structures, and highwalls.

ROUGE-1: 66.72, ROUGE-2: 62.63, ROUGE-L: 24.89
BERTScore: 56.82

==============================================
==================== [24/100] ====================
Summary:
GPO's budget authority is contained in three accounts: (1) congressional printing and binding, (2) Office of Superintendent of Documents (salaries and expenses), and (3) the revolving fund. GPO requested $100.0 million, an increase of $6.4 million (6.9%) over the $93.6 million provided for FY2011. The Senate-reported bill would have provided $81.3 million, a decrease of $12.3million (-13.1%). Formerly the General Accounting Office, the agency was renamed the Government Accountability Office effective July 7, 2004. The Senate-reported version of H.R. 2551 would have provided $504.5 million (not including $18.3 million in offsetting collections), a decrease of $41.7 million (-7.6%). The Accountability Act, which was enacted in 1995, applies various employment and workplace safety laws to Congress and certain legislative branch entities. The office requested $4.78 million, an increase of $705,000 (17.3%). The Library requested $666.7 million, an increase of $38.1 million (6.1%) from the FY2011 level. The House-passed version of H.R. 2551 would have provided $575.3 million, a decrease of $53.4 million (-8.5%). The Senate-reported version would have. provided $579.2 million. The Consolidated Appropriations Act provides $587.3million, a decreases of $41.3m (-6.6%) The GPO had requested $148.5million, an increased of $13.4m (9.9%) from FY2011. The Library had requested nearly $456.0 million (not including $6.35 million in authority to spend receipts), an increase of $24.2 million (5.6%). The Copyright Office had requested $16.1 million, a decrease of $1.7 million (-9.5%), not including authority to spending $35.5 million in receipts. The House-passed bill also would have provided $50.7million. The Senate-reported bill would have. provided $38.5million, a decreases of $17.2million (-25.5%) from the $68.0million provided for FY2011. The Consolidated Appropriations Act provides $567.5 million, a decrease of 5.5% from the FY2011 enacted level of $600.4 million. The Architect had requested $754.8 million, an increase of $153.2 million (25.5%). In FY2010, a 21.7% increase (or $644.6 million) was requested and a 13.6% increase was provided ($601.6m). In FY2009, a 55.4% increase ($642.7 million)was requested and $601.4m was provided. December 23, 2011, provided $4.307 billion in discretionary funding for the legislative branch. This level is $236.9 million (5.2%) below the FY2011 enacted level. The legislative branch represents approximately 0.4% of the total discretionary appropriations provided in this act. A substantial portion of the increase requested by legislative branch entities was to meet (1) mandatory expenses, such as increased government contributions, and (2) expenses related to increases in the costs of goods and services due to inflation. The legislative branch operated on a series of continuing appropriations resolutions from October 1, 2011, until December 23, 2011. Division G of the FY2012 Consolidated Appropriations Act ( H.R. 2055 , P.L. 112-74 ), was enacted on $45.2 million. $44.1 million was provided in the FY2009 Omnibus Appropriations Act, and $2.0 million, to remain available through FY2010, was provided. CBO requested two administrative provisions for FY2012, neither of which were included in the House-passed or Senate-reported versions of H.r. 2551. represented a decrease of nearly 3% from the $4.66 billion provided for FY2010. From October 1, 2010, until the enactment of this legislation on April 11, 2011, the legislative branch operated on continuing resolutions. Both the House and Senate adopted language in the 112 th Congress affecting spending within each chamber. H.Res. 22 , adopted by the House of Representatives, was passed by the Senate and signed into law by President Barack Obama on April 8, 2011. The Senate passed the bill on April 9, 2011 and the House passed it on April 10. a decrease in FY2011 of $57.6 million (-4.2%) from the FY2010 level of $1.369 billion. The Members' Representational Allowance (MRA) is available to support Members in their official and representational duties. The Consolidated Appropriations Act provides $573.9 million, the same level as the House-passed version of H.R. 2551. The FY2011 level was a decrease of nearly $47 million from the $660.0 million provided in FY2010. The House Rules Committee met on July 20, 2011, to discuss a special rule for the legislative branch appropriations bill. A total of 33 amendments were submitted, and 16 were made in order. The full committee ordered reported a $3.3 billion bill with a roll call vote of 28-19 ( H.R. 2551 , H.Rept. 112-148 ). The total funding level represents a $227 million, or 6.4%, reduction from the FY2011 level (not including Senate items). The Senate had requested $161.3 million for inquiries and investigations, an increase of $21.1 million from the $140.2 million provided in FY2011 and FY2010. Nearly $447.0 million was requested for FY2012, an increased of $37.8 million. At a hearing on May 12, 2011, the Senate subcommittee discussed the transfer of the administration of subscription services from the office of the Sergeant at Arms to the Secretary of the Senate. The House-passed version of H.R. 2551 would have provided $1.226 billion for FY 2012, a level continued in the Consolidated Appropriations Act ( P.L. 112-74 ). Appropriations account contains funds for the Senate Appropriations Committee. The Senate has requested $15.8 million, which is equal to the FY2010 and FY2011 funding level. The Senators' Official Personnel and Office Expense Account provides each Senator with funds to administer an office. It consists of an administrative and clerical assistance allowance, a legislative assistance allowance and an official office expense allowance. The funds may be used for any category of expenses, subject to limitations. The bill would have provided $14.9 million, a decrease of $948,000. The Senate-reported bill would have provided $18.2 million, a decrease of $8.7 million (-32.4%). The Consolidated Appropriations Act continues funding at the same level as FY2011. The conference agreement also contained administrative provisions related to the waiver of erroneous payments as well as the transfer of funds between the "salaries" and "general expenses" headings. The conferees also recommended no more than 634,667 hours of overtime and added reporting requirements. The Capitol Police requested $299.3 million for salaries. The Senate-reported bill would have provided $276.9 million. The Consolidated Appropriations Act continues funding at the same level as FY2011 for both salaries and general expenses. The Architect of the Capitol account contains funds for Capitol Police buildings and grounds. The House-passed bill increased this amount by $1 million. and the district office security amendment increased thisamount by $ 1 million.. The Capitol Police had requested $32.3million, an increase of $5.4 million (19.9%), over the FY2011 enacted level of nearly $27.0 million. the FY2011 enacted level. The Consolidated Appropriations Act provides $340.1 million, the same level as FY2011. Previously, the FY2010 appropriations act provided $328.3 million and P.L. 111-212 provided an additional $12.96 million. The USCP had requested $15.956 million in FY2010 supplemental appropriations. The salaries account contains funds for the salaries of employees; overtime pay; hazardous duty pay differential; and government contributions for employee health, retirement, Social Security. GAO had requested $556.8 million (not including $18.3 million in offsetting collections), an increase of $10.6 million (1.9%) from FY2011. GAO received $531.0 million in the FY2009 Omnibus Appropriations Act and an additional $25 million in P.L. 111-5 to cover responsibilities under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. The Consolidated Appropriations Act provides $126.2 million, a decrease of $8.9 million (-6.6%) from the $135.1 million provided for FY 2011. The House-reported bill ( H.R. 2551 ) would have provided $113.0million. Section 1902 of P.L. 112-10 also contained language reducing allowances for Senators' offices by 5%. Previously, the FY2010 Legislative Branch Appropriations Act provided $4.66 billion for FY2010 legislative branch operations. In FY2009, an additional $25 million was provided for the Government Accountability Office (GAO) in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. The FY2009 Supplemental Appropriations Act, also contained funding for the police radio system ($71.6 million) and Congressional Budget Office ($2 million) The Open World Leadership Center administers a program that supports democratic changes in other countries. The first program was authorized receives services from the Library through an inter-agency agreement. Open World requested $12.6 million for FY2012, an increase of $1.2 million (10.7%) from the $11.38 million provided in P.L. 112-10. The Senate-reported bill, in contrast, would have provided $10.0 million (-12.1%). Congress, as well as its inclusion in the legislative branch budget, has been a topic of discussion at appropriations hearings. The center was created by Congress in 1988 to encourage public service by congressional staff. The House-passed bill did not provide funding for FY2012. The Senate-reported bill does not fund the center for fiscal year 2011, as originally planned. The bill was passed on a party-line vote in the House of Representatives on Friday. The vote was approved by a voice vote on the Senate side. The Center for Russian Leadership Development was established by Congress in 1999. The program encouraged young Russian leaders to visit the United States and observe its government and society. In 2003, the program was expanded to include specified additional countries. In 2004, Congress further extended the program's eligibility to other countries designated by the center's board of trustees, subject to congressional consideration. The center is housed in the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C., and has offices in New York and Washington, DC. Two amendments were adopted by voice vote, including a manager's amendment with report language related to Open World and workforce diversity. An amendment offered by Ranking Member Honda directed the House Chief Administrative Office to review and improve contracting controls. Three amendments were rejected, including an amendment offering by Representative Flake prohibiting the use of the Members' Representational Allowance for online advertising (voice vote) The House of Representatives voted to approve a bill to ban the purchase of polystyrene products for food service facilities in the House. 16. H.Amdt. 712 , offered by Mr. Moran, to prohibit the use of funds for polystyrene containers in the food service facilities of the House of Representatives, failed by recorded vote (179-234). The House passed the bill, as amended, on July 22 (Roll no. 629, 252-159). On September 8, 2011, the Senate Appropriations Committee reported a subcommittee allocation of $4.307 billion ( S.Rept. 112-76 ). The committee reported its version of H.R. 2551 , as amended,. by a recorded vote of 28–2.  subcommittee discussed Member and district office security, including costs; expenses for legal services related to the Defense of Marriage Act. Panel also discussed greening efforts, including functions of the Architect of the Capitol and the use of Styrofoam in the House cafeteria. Subcommittee also discussed the House wounded warrior program and the experiences and long-term employment of the wounded warriors. The subcommittee was made up of members of the House Armed Services Committee, the House Rules Committee, and the House Small Business Committee. which was agreed to by voice vote. H.Amdt. 698 , offered by Mr. Watt, to reduce funding for the Office of Congressional Ethics by 40% ($619,200) and transfer the funds to the Spending Reduction Account, failed by recorded vote (102-302). H. amdt. 699, offered by. Mr. Broun, to. reduce funding. for the Joint Economic Committee by $1,050,750 (25%) and. transfer those dollars to the spending reduction account, which failed by voice. vote. voice vote. H.Amdt. 701 , offered by Ms. Hayworth, to reduce funding for the Botanic Garden by $632,780, which was agreed to by recorded vote (299-112). 6. Mr. Broun, offered by Mr. Altmire, to. reduce funding to the Thirty-Year Mass Deacidification Program with the Library of Congress's Salaries. and Expenses Account, which failed by voice vote (153-260). 7. Mr Stutzman, offered, to restore $1 million in funding. to the 30-year program with the L.C. Salaries and Exp expenses Account. H.Amdt. 707 failed to prohibit use of funds to purchase, acquire, install, or use any medium screw base compact fluorescent lamp or light bulb (CFL), which failed by recorded vote (130-283). H. amdt 708 failed by voice vote to prohibit the Chief Administrative Officer to make any payments from any MRA for the leasing of a vehicle in an amount that exceeds $1,000 in any month, which was agreed to by voiceVote. H.amdt 709 failed to require all mail funded by the Members' Representational Allowance to be delivered to the MRA. H.Amdt. 710 failed to prohibit use of funds by Members, committees, and leadership for purchase of online ads that link to a website maintained by Members and committees. H. amdt 711 failed to provide $2.5 million for the congressional Office of Technology Assessment and reduce funding for the House Historic Buildings Revitalization Trust. The House passed the bill with a voice vote, and the Senate passed it with a vote of 24-17. The bill now goes to the Senate, where it is expected to be voted on in the coming days. requested, an increase of $22.2 million (48.5%). The FY2011 level represented a 0.2% reduction from the $45.8 million provided for Library buildings and grounds in FY2010. The Library requested two recurring administrative provisions related to authority to obligate funds for reimbursable and revolving fund activities. The provisions also requested in FY2011 would make available balances of expired Library of Congress appropriations available for the purposes of making payments for employees under Section 8147 of Title 5, United States Code. Librarian of Congress to dispose of surplus or obsolete personal property of the Library of Congress. Amounts received credited to funds available for the operations of the library. The House-passed bill contains the workers compensation provision but not the surplus property provision. The Senate-reported version of the bill contains both of these provisions as well as a provision amending the library's use of revolving funds. The Consolidated Appropriations Act included the four provisions requested by the Library. The bill was passed by the House and the Senate. reduce the GPO funding by $4,946,140.80 by transferring $3,414,150.29 from GPO, Congressional Printing and Binding, to the spending reduction account. 9. H.Amdt. 705 , offered by Mr. Paulsen, to prevent the distribution of printed legislation to Member offices unless a Member requests the legislation, which was agreed to by voice vote. 10. Mr.Paulsen offered to prevent use of funds to distribute printed copies of the Congressional Record. of Congress and federal agencies, as statutorily authorized; the compilation of catalogs and indexes of government publications. At a hearing in the House on May 11, 2011, the subcommittee discussed the cost of producing and delivering the Congressional Record; GPO's overhead; security concerns; staffing issues, including the management structure and efforts to reduce discrimination complains. The future of paper in digital age and the operation of GPO was also discussed. The hearing was held in Washington, D.C. authorized printing, binding, and distribution of government publications for specified recipients at no charge. Included within these publications are the Congressional Record ; Congressional Directory ; Senate and House Journals; memorial addresses of Members; nominations; U.S. Code and supplements. publications printed without a document or report number, for example, laws and treaties. envelopes provided to Members of Congress for the mailing of documents. House and Senate business and committee calendars; bills, resolutions, and amendments. Committee reports and prints; committee hearings; and other documents. United States. acquisition, maintenance, and preservation of a collection of more than 147 million items in a wide range of traditional and new media. Administration of U.S. copyright laws by its Copyright Office; and administration of a national program to provide reading material to the blind and physically handicapped. Its direct services to Congress include the provision of legal research and law-related services by the Law Library of Congress, and a broad range of activities by the Congressional Research Service (CRS), including legal research. Congressional Budget Office to be used to pay the compensation of certain employees with non-immigrant visas. At the House hearing on May 11, 2011, the subcommittee discussed CBO's workload, impetus for reports, protocols for determining priorities, process for making long-term projections, and potential consequences of budget cuts on CBO operations. The Senate subcommittee discussed the prioritization of cost estimates; CBO's information technology request; its use of outside specialists. The Library of Congress serves simultaneously as Congress's parliamentary library and the de facto national library of the United States. At a hearing on March 11, 2011, the House subcommittee examined Library operations at various potential funding levels. The Senate subcommittee discussed the impact of funding cuts; the deferral of projects; and requests for additional staff and information technology security funding. GAO works for Congress by responding to requests for studies of federal government programs and expenditures.GAO may be asked to provide information to the Library of Congress on issues relating to its operations. The Library may also provide information about the use of overseas offices. 2012 presidential nominating conventions; the size of the Inspector General office and the request for three additional full-time equivalents (FTEs); the status of the radio modernization project; and potential cost savings, including savings from minimizing entry doors. On June 2, 2011, the House subcommittee discussed the activities and budget request of the Capitol Police, including determinants of the police mission and how the police could adjust to a funding reduction. The status of racial and gender discrimination complaints and the hiring of Capitol Police officers was also discussed. of FDsys (the Federal Digital System), which will replace GPO Access. The timing of requested funding for the 2013 presidential inauguration. The Office of Compliance is an independent and nonpartisan agency within the legislative branch. It was established to administer and enforce the Congressional Act of 1974. The Senate subcommittee discussed the changing role of the GPO in the digital age. It also discussed the use of GPO's revolving fund for capital improvements and possible alternatives, and plans for responding to the tight budget environment. Budget http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/Budget.html. White House.gov: Budget.Budget: $1.2 trillion. Whitehouse. Department of the Treasury: $2.1 trillion. Budget: $3.2 billion. WhiteHouse.gov : Budget. Budget.com: $4.1 billion. Budget.White House: $5.3 billion. budget.com. Budget, budget.org: $6 billion.budget.gov. a new diversity officer; and district office security assessments. The Architect of the Capitol (AOC) is responsible for the maintenance, operation, development, and preservation of the United States Capitol Complex. Operations of the Architect are funded in the following 10 accounts: general administration, Capitol Power Plant, Botanic Garden, Capitol Visitor Center, and Capitol Police buildings and grounds. appropriations for their expenses are not contained in the legislative branch appropriations bill. The AOC is not responsible for Supreme Court buildings or grounds. The Consolidated Appropriations Act contains an administrative provision directing the Architect of the Capitol to transfer amounts made available for construction projects to the Capitol Police to reimburse them for overtime expenses related to these projects. The act also contains language transferring a parcel of land from the National Park Service to the architect. CBO is a nonpartisan body that advises Congress on budget matters. The House Appropriations Committee holds a hearing every year on Capitol Hill. The hearing is open to the public and is open only to members of Congress and their staffs. The U.S. Capitol Police (USCP) are responsible for the security of the Capitol Complex. The USCP had requested $387.6 million for FY2012, an increase of $47.5 million (14.0%). The House-reported bill would have provided $340.1 million, the same as provided in FY2011. H.Amdt. 697 increased this amount by $1 million,. transferred from transition activities, for district office security. The Senate- reported bill would has provided $331.4 million, a decrease of $8.7 million from. The Architect had requested $706.1 million, an increase of $120.3 million (20.5%) from the FY2011 level. The House-reported bill ( H.R. 2551 ) would have provided $489.6 million, not including funding for Senate office buildings. H.Amdt. 701 reduced funding for the Botanic Garden account by $632,780. The Senate-reported version of H.r. 25 51 would haveprovided $506.6million, a decrease of $93.8 million (-15.6%). The FY2008 budget authority represented a decrease of 8.1% from the $449.9 million (including supplemental appropriations) provided in FY2007. The FY2012 request and FY2011 funding level for each of the AOC accounts is presented in Table 8. At a hearing on March 3, 2011, the Senate subcommittee discussed the timing of repairs to the Capitol dome; the completion of the tunnel project, scheduled for 2012; and potential savings from a unified legislative branch financial management system. The Capitol Power Plant east chiller relocation project was also discussed. on January 6, 2011, reduces the authorized amounts for the Members' Representational Allowances, House leadership offices, and all committees except the Committee on Appropriations by 5%. An amendment ( S.Amdt. 182 ) offered by Senator Nelson (NE) to S. 493 , the Small Business Innovation Research/Small Business Technology Transfer Reauthorization Act of 2011, stated, "It is the sense of the Senate, that it should lead by example" The amendment was adopted on March 16, 2011. under the rule for consideration of the bill ( H.Res. 359 , H.Rept. 112-173 ). The House agreed to this rule on July 21, 2011 (Roll no. 613, 239-172). Consideration of theBill began on July 20, 2011, and continued the next day. The following 16 amendments were considered, and 7 were adopted: 1. H.Amdt. 697 , offered by Mr. Honda, to transfer Member Transition Activities funds to increase the Capitol Police fund by $1,000,000.

ROUGE-1: 65.76, ROUGE-2: 59.58, ROUGE-L: 23.57
BERTScore: 63.79

==============================================
==================== [25/100] ====================
Summary:
$1 billion and $2 billion. Based on our review of design documents as well as interviews with cognizant agency staff, there has been substantial improvement in this area since our last review. Both the grants and procurement portions of the pilot showed substantial improvements in the extent to which they reflect leading practices for pilot design. We found that HHS’s March 2016 revised design for the these pilots at OMB, HHS, and General Services Administration. We determined that the design met the criteria when we saw evidence that all aspects of a leading practice were met. grants portion of the pilot partly reflects all five of the leading practices for effective pilot design. OMB and HHS developed a plan to analyze survey and other data prior to the start of data analysis. HHS also added a sampling plan and information on participant outreach efforts to the design of the grants portion ofThe pilot is now in its second year. The pilot is expected to be completed by the end of the year and will be used to assess the effectiveness of the program. The program is being funded by the Department of Health and Human Services. HHS has engaged in a number of outreach efforts to recruit participants for its test models. Officials have attended an estimated 70 events since 2015 to discuss the grants pilot. As of August 2016, HHS officials reported e-mailing almost 8,000 potential participants. They plan on implementing the design of the grants portion of the pilot by the end of the first quarter of 2017. The program will be funded by a combination of federal and state grants. It will be rolled out in phases over the next few years. grants and procurement portions of the Section 5 Pilot. We determined that the updated design for both parts of the pilot meets the statutory requirements for the pilot established under the DATA Act. We recommend that the Director of OMB clearly document in the pilot’s design how data collected will be used. By addressing issues such as this and continuing to focus on implementing the act, the administration greatly increases the likelihood of creating a system that will achieve the goals of the act. The goal is to increase the transparency of financial information and improve the usefulness of that data. We reviewed Section 5 of the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006, as amended by the DATA Act. We met with OMB and Treasury to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our recommendation related to providing technical guidance. We reviewed the draft design documents to assess OMB’s plans for meeting these requirements. To supplement our review of those plans, we also spoke with cognizant staff implementing. and DATA Act implementation team members. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. determined that the design partially met the criteria. When we saw no evidence of a leading practice, or if we identified a critical gap or shortcoming related to the practice, we determined that the criteria were not met. In continuation of our constructive engagement approach for working with agencies implementing the DATA Act, we provided HHS and OMB with feedback on the design of the grants and procurement portions of the pilot. These officials generally accepted our feedback as useful and, in some instances, noted that they have or planned to make changes to their design. effective pilot design. Compared to the previous version, dated November 2015, we identified progress in several areas. The revised design includes a data-analysis plan that describes how OMB will collect, track, and analyze data produced by the pilot. We found some areas where the revised procurement design does not fully reflect leading leading practices in the area of contract management and oversight for Davis Bacon requirements. It also provides additional detail about how potential findings could be scalable from the experiences of the individual pilot participants to the larger population of contractors. decisions about scalability and whether, how, and when to integrate pilot activities into overall efforts. Develop a detailed data-analysis plan to track the pilot program’s implementation and performance and evaluate the final results of the project. Ensure appropriate two-way stakeholder communication and input at all stages of the pilot project, including design, implementation, data gathering, and assessment. The July 2016 revision of the design of the procurement portion of the Section 5 Pilot also showed substantial improvements in reflecting the leading practices for procurement. program, known as the Section 5 Pilot, aimed at developing recommendations for reducing reporting burden for grantees and contractors. OMB partnered with HHS to design and implement the grants portion of the pilot and with the General Services Administration (GSA) to implement the procurement portion. HHS developed six “test models” to evaluate different approaches to potentially reducing grantee reporting burden. O MB’s Office of Federal Procurement Policy (OFPP) worked on the procurement portions of the program. types of FAR-required reporting and the revised design briefly mentions other FAR requirements such as those for service contracts and affirmative action plans. The absence of an assessment methodology and an approach to test the scalability of the design is inconsistent with leading practices for pilot design. The pilot design will meet its stated objective of reducing procurement reporting burden more broadly. HHS has taken a number of steps to reduce the reporting burden on the federal government, including the creation of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) as a result of our input. We also met with OMB to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our recommendation related to the design of the pilot for reducing recipient reporting burden. We conducted the work upon which this report is based from May 2016 to December 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. OMB staff said that despite the security-related delay, they still plan on collecting 12 months of data through the procurement pilot as required by the act. In order to meet the act’s requirement that OMB deliver a report to Congress on ways to reduce recipient reporting burden by August 2017, OMB staff told us that they plan to only include data collected up to June or July 2017. Across the federal government, agencies have efforts under way to implement the DATA Act by the May 2017 deadline. practices for effective pilot design. OMB intends to broaden the pilot’s initial focus on centralizing certified payroll reporting to other types of FAR-required reporting. Despite advances in several areas, the current design remains limited by its lack of specifics regarding how a pilot focused on assessing contractors’ experiences with a centralized portal designed for certified payroll Reporting. The plan does not take the next step of clearly describing and documenting how findings related to centralized certified payroll. reporting will be more broadly applicable to the many other type of required reporting. beyond citing general concepts such as data pre-population and system integration. More specifically, the current design lacks a plan for testing the assumption that the experiences contractors have with centralized certified payroll reporting will be similar when they use the system to meet different reporting requirements and other databases. This is of particular concern given the diversity of reporting requirements contained in the FAR. OMB staff have identified over 100 different types of FAR reporting requirements with different reporting frequencies, mechanisms, and required information. O MB staff told us that they expect to test the centralized portal on other platforms. through the centralized certified payroll reporting portal will be used to test hypotheses related to reducing reporting burden involving other procurement reporting requirements. This should include documenting the extent to which recommendations based on data collected would be scalable to other FAR- required reporting. We provided a draft of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the Treasury; the Director of OMB; the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation of National and the CEO of the National Association of Manufacturers. We also provided additional details about the methodology that would be used in the future. with GSA’s 18F to develop and test a proof of concept reporting portal for reports required by the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) GSA is piloting it with the centralized reporting of certified payroll by contractors working construction projects in the United States. GSA completed a prototype for the procurement portion of the Section 5 Pilot at the end of May 2016 and presented it to OMB in June 2016. In August 2016, GSA awarded NuAxis the contract to build the prototype from information obtained as a result of the 18F prototype process. NuAxis began developing a web-based reporting interface that will allow users to centrally enter and submit certified payroll data. They plan to make this interface compatible with other existing systems, such as the System for Award Management (SAM) and Wage Determination Online (WDOL) In late November 2016, OMB staff and GSA officials informed us that they decided to delay launching the portal to conduct the procurement portion of the pilot in order to ensure that security procedures designed to protect personally identifiable information (PII) were in place. GSA officials said the centralized reporting portal that would be used to collect data on certified payroll did not receive the required Authority to Operate. The portal did not include necessary security measures to protect the PII, officials said. GSA officials expect to be able to begin the pilot program in the next few weeks, they said. The pilot program will be limited to contractors participating in the pilot, the GSA said, and it will be funded through a federal contract with a private company.  Complex validations perform tasks such as checking data against other sources or using calculation rules to verify whether certain data elements sum up to each other. Treasury has configured these complex validation rules so that if a rule is not met, the broker can either produce a warning message while still accepting the data for submission or produce a fatal error. As of September 30, 2016, data uploaded to the broker needs to successfully meet less than a quarter of these complexvalidation checks in order to be accepted for submission to Treasury. Treasury released the first version of the broker in spring 2016. Treasury continues to develop the system’s capabilities through 2-week software development cycles, called sprints. On September 30, 2016, Treasury released a version of. the broker, which it stated was fully. functional. The broker will assist reporting agencies in validating their data prior to submitting it to Treasury. See figure 1 for a depiction of how Treasury expects the broker to operate and how it will be used. Treasury to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our previous recommendation related to the provision of policy guidance. To examine the technical structure and specifications for reporting, we assessed Treasury’s processes for developing technical guidance. We reviewed the broker made available by Treasury through open source code posted on a public website (GitHub repositories associated with the DATA Act) In addition, we observed several demonstrations of how agencies submit their data to a prototype of the broker. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. The broker is capable of performing the key functions of extracting and validating agency data. Treasury officials told us that although they plan to continue to refine the broker, they have no plans to alter these key functions. Agencies may use the broker to verify the data files the agency plans to submit to Treasury. The broker uses validation rules to test the completeness and accuracy of the data elements and linkages between financial and award data. If data does not pass validation (see Step 6), the broker will update information and systems. As of October 2016, 21 of 24 CFO Act agencies reported that they had begun testing their data files in the broker. Only the National Aeronautics and Space Administration had completed testing the broker and revised its data files accordingly. Treasury also collects data from the four shared service providers that are helping to manage data submissions for their agency clients. As of October2016, two of these shared service provider reported to Treasury that they have completed testing all of their files in their broker. The broker is available to agencies so they can begin testing theirData. officials (SAO) certification and reporting non-financial data. One agency reported that its SAO may be unable to certify the quality of data if OMB’s guidance for the SAO certification cannot be supported by existing processes. Another agency reported concerns with the burden of reconciling account data with financial and award data. OMB staff and Treasury officials said that they are reconsidering this position and are exploring ways that agencies can submit data with qualifications and how these qualifications can be conveyed to the public.  Memorandum No. 2016-03 directs agencies to leverage existing procedures for providing assurances of the quality of their DATA Act data submissions. OMB expects SAO assurance of the data through this process would mean that data submitted to Treasury by May 2017 complies that their internal controls support the reliability and validity of the agency account-level and award-level data. Currently, if SAOs are not able to provide this assurance, their agency will be prevented from submitting the files and their data will not be included in the data reporting. Treasury implemented additional validation checks on the file containing agency financial assistance award information through its source system, the Award Submission Portal. These checks include verifying that required information is present and formatted correctly. Treasury officials told us that the responsibility for ensuring the accuracy of these files lies with the DATA Act SAO at each agency. For example, OMB Management Procedures Memorandum 2016-03 specifies that SAOs must provide reasonable assurance that the files will be accurate and complete. September and early October 2016. provide error details to the agency. The agency should then reference the authoritative data sources and address the discrepancies. Step 8: Submit Data. Once the data is linked, validated, and standardized, agencies are to submit the data to Treasury for posting on USASpending.gov or a successor system. Agency senior accountable officials (SAO) are to provide reasonable assurance that their internal controls support the reliability and validity of the agency account-level and award-level data they submit to Treasury.  ERP vendors are developing patches that will extract data to help their clients develop files that comply with DATA Act requirements. Patches will help link an agency’s financial and award systems, create additional fields in existing systems to report new data elements, and extract data files formatted for submission to Treasury. Two agencies reported in their implementation plan updates that a delay in the release of the patches could jeopardize complete and timely data submission for May 2017. Treasury officials told us that agencies should still be able to create and submit the required files to the broker without these patches. The release of one of these patches has been delayed. Oracle, one of the ERP vendors developing these patches, had planned to release a patch that would allow award attributes to be captured in their clients’ core purchasing systems and general ledger journals in August 2016. The release was delayed until September 13, 2016. Representatives from SAP, another such ERP vendor, said that they were able to deliver one of those needed patches to their clients in August 2015 and in September 2016, respectively. they developed plans for interim solutions to construct these files until the patches can be developed, tested, and configured. Some of these interim solutions rely on manual processing, which can be burdensome and increase the risk for errors. For example, USDA officials said that the effort to create an interim solution has been very resource intensive. This process involved surveying USDA’s bureaus to identify how their systems are configured and using that information to modify the financial system. HHS has also developed an interim reporting solution that can generate the required files without depending on a patch. officials said this interim solution is complex and their processes cannot be fully automated until the Oracle patch is released. Since these processes are not fully automated, they carry a risk of errors being introduced though human error. Agencies that are developing interim solutions will only have until May 2017 to test the data before the reporting deadline. An OMB document commended these agencies for developing robust contingency plans since this will better position them for timely implementation. Long-term reporting solutions are still needed. As required by the DATA Act, OMB is conducting a pilot. ability to comply with the May 2017 reporting deadline could be affected. Some agencies also reported concerns about the requirement for SAOs to certify the data reported quarterly. For example, one agency reported that if guidance clarifying certification procedures is delayed, it may not have time to implement appropriate validation steps needed to give assurance over the data. Because of the lack of timely and consistent guidance, agencies may need to continuously update or change their processes, which could adversely affect their ability to meet the DATA Act requirements. in their implementation plan updates indicates that some agencies are at increased risk of not meeting the May 2017 reporting deadline. In addition, inspectors general for some agencies, such as the Departments of Labor and Housing and Urban Development, have issued readiness review reports. As discussed further below, the technical software requirements for agency reporting are still evolving, so any changes to the technical requirements over the next few months could also affect agencies’ abilities to meet the reporting deadline, as well as the April 2017 deadline. with existing controls for ensuring the data quality. However, our prior work has shown that relying on these quality assurance processes is not sufficient to address the accuracy and completeness challenges that we have previously identified. Offices of Inspector General, which are required to assess the completeness, timeliness, quality, and accuracy of data submitted under the act, have expressed concerns about agencies' abilities to provide assurances of the quality of their data. The inspectors general are particularly concerned about their agencies’ ability to provide quality assurances for data that are not directly provided. warnings rather than fatal errors would provide agency officials with the flexibility to correct issues flagged by the broker. For example, for some of the programs, grants award-level information may not be reported for security reasons. In addition to assisting agencies in collecting and validating agency- generated data, the broker also extracts award and sub-award information from existing government-wide award reporting systems. This function was added during software development efforts in late 2012. The broker also helps ensure these files are in the standard format. The lack of properly integrated systems increases the risk that agencies may have difficulty compiling and validating the information they are required to report under the DATA Act. Fourteen of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported challenges related to staffing issues or funding constraints. The lack of sufficient resources, including staff expertise and proper funding, increases the chance that agencies will have difficulty taking all the actions needed in a timely manner to fully implement the requirements of the Data Act. The data quality and their ability to report all the required data elements in their initial DATA Act submissions are also concerns. Nineteen of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported challenges related to systems integration. These include concerns with systems limitations, modernization efforts, and timing. One agency reported that validation presents challenges because its financial systems are not properly integrated with procurement and grant systems. Similarly, several of its components are undergoing grant, procurement, or financial system improvements that coincide with implementing the DATA Act. If the improvements are delayed, they could pose a risk to timely DATA Act implementation if they are not completed in time. 19 of the 24 CFO Act agencies continue to face challenges in their efforts to implement the DATA Act. OMB identified four overarching categories of challenges reported by agencies that may impede their ability to effectively and efficiently implement the Data Act. These include systems integration issues, lack of resources, evolving and complex reporting requirements, and inadequate guidance. See appendix III for more details about the information that OMB required C FO Act agencies to include in their implementation plan updates and remaining actions to implement Playbook 2.0. to agency data submissions, and 13 CFO Act agencies did not include information about testing linkages of program and financial data. Without such information in agencies’ updates, it may be more difficult for OMB and Treasury to determine where to target their monitoring and assistance efforts. A lack of complete and accurate agency data increases the risk that agencies may not be able to meet the DATA Act reporting requirements within the mandated timeframes. Eleven of the 24 C FO Act agencies reported ongoing challenges related to the timely issuance of, and ongoing changes to, OMB policy and Treasury guidance. Total estimated costs for full DATA Act implementation ranged from approximately $1.0 million to $59.1 million, for a total of about $202.4 million. This total estimated cost reported by CFO Act agencies to implement the DATA Act includes costs for systems integration and modernization. One agency reported future estimated costs, but did not report costs to date. Two agencies did not provide any cost estimates. It is important to note that the estimated total costs reported by the 22 agencies for implementing the Data Act are not final. of the updates included most of the OMB required information. Some of the CFO Act agencies did not include information about some of the remaining actions to implement the suggested steps in Playbook 2.0. For example, 5 of the 24 CFO. Act agencies didn't include information. about testing for completeness and accuracy of data elements submitted to Treasury. 11 C FO Act agencies don't include. information about workflows for addressing validation errors and revisions needed. For. example, 11 CFO act agencies don’t include information on workflows. for addressingvalidation errors and revise needed. a minimum, that data reported are based on appropriate internal controls and risk management strategies identified in OMB Circular A-123. Five CFO Act agencies reported challenges in each of the five categories of challenges reported by 19 of the 24 agencies in their implementation plan updates. OMB required agencies to include information on remaining actions the agencies should take to implement suggested steps 5 through 8 in Playbook 2.0, and the number of agencies that included the information in their updates. Five agencies reported problems in each category of challenges. May 2015 request. Each agency was to (1) update its timeline and milestones and explain the agency’s progress to date and the remaining actions it would take to implement the act. As of October 2016, only 16 of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported that they had completed all steps 1 through 4. For example, there were four agencies reporting they had not completed their inventory of data and identified the gaps in systems and processes for data elements (step 3). DATA Act Implementation Playbook (Version 1.0) indicated that agencies would be working on steps 5 through 8 throughout fiscal years 2016 and 2017. expanded guidance on actions to be included in steps 5 through 8. Playbook 2.0 did not include expected timeframes for agencies to complete each step. Instead, it referred agencies to Treasury’s implementation roadmap, which includes high level milestones for Treasury's technical deliverables. Step 5: Prepare Data for Submission to the Broker. This step involves reviewing the schema version 1.0, extracting data from source systems, mapping agency data to the schema and submitting it to the broker. August 2016, in response to our prior recommendation, OMB established procedures for reviewing and using agency implementation plan updates that include procedures for identifying ongoing challenges. OMB will also be monitoring progress toward the statutory deadline and setting up meetings with any of the 24 CFO Act agencies that OMB identifies as being at risk of not meeting the implementation deadline. To help address their challenges, 16 of the24 CFO. Act agencies have reached out to OMB to help address the challenges they are experiencing. analyzed the agency-reported challenges and mitigating strategies and categorized them. We compared the categories of challenges reported by the CFO Act agencies in their implementation plan updates to the challenges that had been reported in their initial implementation plans in 2015. We interviewed cognizant OMB and Treasury officials and obtained any supporting documentation to further understand the implementation challenges. We also met with O MBM and Treasury to obtain the supporting documentation and processes and controls for reviewing the updated implementation information and monitoring agencies’ progress. Act agencies reported that they use certain mitigating strategies in their implementation plan updates. The most commonly reported categories of mitigating strategies were changing internal policies and procedures and leveraging existing resources. These strategies, as a whole, were similar to the mitigating strategies reported by agencies in their initial implementation plans, the report says. The report says these strategies include using external resources, continuing communications, employing manual and temporary workarounds, monitoring and developing guidance, and enhancing existing systems. It says the strategies are similar to those used in initial plans. Act agencies did not identify any challenges in their implementation plan updates. Table 5 describes the mitigating strategies reported by 16 of the 24 CFO Act agencies. The number of agencies reporting mitigating strategies in each category is listed in Table 5. The agency contacts included: Peter Del Toro, Michael LaForge, Kathleen Drennan, Diane Morris, Shirley Hwang, Aaron Colsher, Katherine Morris, Sophia Tan, Thomas Hackney, Charles Jones, Laura Pacheco, Maria Belaval. response, engaged a contractor to interview key stakeholders and develop a set of potential next steps. The Data Standards Committee held its inaugural meeting on September 15, 2016, and will meet on a monthly basis. The committee has also drafted a charter that will delineate the scope of the committee’s work, as well as a proposal for a new Office of Management and Budget (OMB) budget. The first of these steps was to establish a new Data Standards committee that will be responsible for maintaining established standards and developing new data elements. well as the composition and responsibilities of its members. Members include representatives from a range of federal communities including the grants, procurement, financial management and human resources communities. OMB staff told us that the committee will focus on clarifying existing data standard definitions, including the definition of predominant place of performance, and identifying new standards that may be needed going forward. In October 2016, according to O MB staff, the charter was under review by the DATA Act, and the committee's composition was being considered. In June 2016, OMB directed the 24 CFO Act agencies to update their initial DATA Act implementation plans that they submitted in response to OMB’s structure. The absence of a robust and institutionalized data governance structure presents additional potential risks regarding the integrity of data standards over time. In the event that priorities shift with the incoming administration or momentum is lost, delays and missed deadlines can occur. Such transitions may disrupt the momentum for meeting implementation timeframes or cause the government to fail to continue to build on previous accomplishments. key practices. For example, processes have not been developed to both approve new standards and ensure that already established standards are consistently applied and enforced across the federal government. The transition to a new administration presents one such situation. We have previously reported that, given the importance of continuity when implementing complex, government-wide initiatives, the potential for gaps in leadership that can occur as administrations change can impact the effectiveness and efficiency of such efforts. One reason why having a robust, institutionalized data governance structure is important is to provide consistent data management during times of change and transition. To identify key practices for data governance we reviewed our past reports to identify applicable laws, regulations, and guidance. We selected a range of organizations, including domestic and international standards-setting organizations, industry groups or associations, and federal agencies. All of the organizations we identified endorse establishing and using a governance structure to oversee how data standards, digital content, and other data assets are developed, managed and implemented. We drew on work from the following organizations to help us identify data governance key practices across several domains. In July 2015, we reported that OMB and Treasury had not yet established a formal framework for providing data governance. Such a framework is key for ensuring that the integrity of data standards is maintained over time. A common set of key practices endorsed by standards setting organizations recommend that data governance structures should include the key practices shown in the text box below. We have shared these key practices with O MB and Treasury. OMB has made progress but still need to fully address the recommendations we have made in our previous reports. Community Service received comments from OMB, Treasury, CNCS, HHS, and GSA. USDA had no comments. OMB provided an overview of their implementation efforts since the passage of the DATA Act. These efforts include issuing three memoranda providing implementation guidance to federal agencies and finalizing 57 data standards for use on USASpending.gov. The data standards committee also established the Data Standards Committee to establish standards for the use of data on the federal government’s website. factors, we chose the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), the. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the Corporation for National and Community Service (CNCS) Although the information obtained from these three agencies is not generalizable to all agencies, they illustrate a range of conditions under which agencies are implementing the act. These are the same three agencies we selected for our January 2016 and August 2016 reports. This allowed us to assess progress in DATA Act implementation at these agencies since our last review. Signed into law on May 9, 2014, the DATA Act expanded on previous federal transparency legislation. The act requires government- wide reporting on a greater variety of federal funds. It also calls for the federal government to set government-wide data standards, identify ways to reduce reporting burdens for grantees and contractors (Section 5 Pilot) and regularly review data quality to help improve the data quality. It was signed into law by President Barack Obama on May 8, 2014. It will take effect on July 1, 2015. This review is part of an ongoing effort to provide interim reports on the progress being made in implementing the Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of our report. This report examines: (1) steps taken to establish a clear data governance; and (2) the progress made in meeting the reporting requirements for us mandated by the act. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. iterative approach enabled agencies and other key stakeholders to provide feedback and contribute to improving the technical guidance and the public website. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the Treasury; the Director of OMB; the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation of National and Community Service; the Administrator of the General Services Administration; as well as interested congressional committees and other interested parties. This report will be available at no charge on our website at http://www.gao.gov. major contributions to this report. Additional members of GAO’s DATA Act Internal Working Group also contributed to the development of the report. The report was compiled by the GAO and the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office of the Inspector General for the Office of Management and Budget. For more information, go to GAO.gov and the Office for the Inspector general for the Health Care Professionals, or go to http://www.gao.gov/. For more on the Data Act, click here. 11 of the 24 CFO Act agencies highlighted challenges related to the guidance provided by OMB and Treasury in their implementation plan updates. One of the commonly cited challenges concerned complications arising due to the iterative nature or late release of the guidance. For example, one agency reported that developing its implementation plan was highly dependent upon the concurrent development of the schema version 1.0 and technical guidance being developed by Treasury. This agency stated that any delays or changes to these components will significantly affect its solution design, development and testing schedule, and cost estimate. Treasury released the schema version 1.0 on April 29, 2016. It is intended to standardize the way financial assistance awards, contracts, and other financial data will be collected and reported under the DATA Act. Under the act, agencies must report data in compliance with established standards by May 2017. OMB and Treasury have directed agencies to begin submitting data by the beginning of the second quarter of fiscal year 2017 (January 2017) with the goal of reporting by the end of the year. reviewed over 200 comments on the draft guidance. The final guidance, OMB M-17-04, was issued on November 4, 2016. OMB has made some progress with these efforts, but other data definitions lack clarity. These challenges, as well as the challenges identified by agencies, underscore the need for OMB and Treasury to fully address our prior recommendation to provide agencies with additional guidance to address potential clarity issues, the authors say. The newly established Data Standards Committee will be working with OMB to address these issues. develop and maintain standards for federal spending; and developing and executing the Section 5 pilot. OMB and Treasury met with each of the 24 CFO Act agencies to discuss their implementation timelines, risks, and mitigation strategies, and took steps to address issues that could affect successful implementation. Through these meetings, OMB staff learned that 19 of the 22 agencies expect that they will fully meet the May 2017 deadline for DATA Act implementation. In their written response, Treasury provided an overview of the steps to be taken. transparency and accountability of federal spending data. OMB and Treasury have taken significant steps toward implementing the act’s various requirements. We have previously reported on these efforts and others and have identified a number of ongoing challenges that will need to be addressed in order to successfully meet the act's requirements. In May 2015, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) directed federal agencies to submit Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014 (DATA Act) implementation plans. In June 2016, OMB directed Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (CFO Act) to develop recommendations to reduce recipient reporting burden. timely feedback and have made a number of recommendations that, if addressed, could help ensure the full and effective implementation of the act. OMB and Treasury have made progress implementing 5 of our recommendations related to DATA Act implementation. However, additional effort is needed to address 11 previous GAO recommendations that remain open. See appendix II for a list of our previous recommendations relating to the DATA Act and their implementation status. O MB and Treasury are developing a governance structure, but more work will be needed to ensure that this structure is consistent with key practices for developing and maintaining the Act. Treasury says it is using an iterative approach to provide incremental technical guidance to agencies. According to Treasury, among other things, this includes the DATA Act Implementation Playbook, version 2.0, and the Data Act Information Model Schema version 1.0. The Treasury response also noted that as a result of the aggressive implementation timelines specified in the act and the complexity associated with linking hundreds of disconnected data elements across the federal government, they made the decision to use an iteration approach to help agencies. In January 2016 we reported that ensuring that data definitions are generally consistent with leading practices is important. We also reported that although the standardized data element definitions issued by OMB largely adhered to leading practices for establishing data definitions, several definitions had limitations that could lead to inconsistent reporting. In May 2016, in response to our prior recommendation, OMB released additional guidance on reporting financial and award information required under the act. See table 5 in appendix III for descriptions of the categories of mitigating strategies and the number of CFO Act agencies that report using strategies from each category. OMB and Treasury officials intended to assess agency implementation status. Among other challenges, agencies indicated the need for additional guidance on reporting intergovernmental transfers, providing assurances over their data. OMB staff told us that they received feedback from 30 different agencies and information on the status of efforts to address our previous recommendations related to agency implementation plans. For example, officials from USDA, one of our case example agencies, said they are waiting for guidance on insurance and indemnity reporting, but no guidance has been issued. by the agency, such as data submitted by non-federal entities who receive federal awards. OMB released draft guidance in August 2016 that specifies DATA Act reporting responsibilities when an intragovernmental transfer is involved. The guidance explains how to report financial assistance awards with personally identifiable information (PII) and clarifies the SAO assurance process over the data submitted to the broker. It was drafted in response to questions and concerns reported by agencies in their implementation plan updates, as well in meetings with senior OMB staff. the broker and the feedback produced by the system regarding data verification. We interviewed knowledgeable officials from OMB, Treasury, and selected federal agencies and inspectors general. We also interviewed enterprise resource planning (ERP) vendors assisting federal agencies with technical implementation. Based on these selection, we selected three agencies based on whether they were in compliance with existing federal requirements for federal financial management systems, and the type of federal funding provided (such as grants, loans, or procurements), and their status as a federal shared service provider for financial management.

ROUGE-1: 75.19, ROUGE-2: 69.19, ROUGE-L: 22.37
BERTScore: 61.36

==============================================
==================== [26/100] ====================
Summary:
The Tenth Circuit has a relatively routine caseload when compared to some of its sister circuits. More than forty percent of the cases that the Tenth Circuit hears are criminal law matters or petitions from the federal government. The lack of a robust record for Judge Gorsuch on environmental law matters may not be surprising. The Tenth Circuit does not hear many environmental law cases because many major environmental statutes require parties challenging nationally applicable federal laws or administrative agency actions to file a petition in the D.C. Circuit. federal or state prisoners, a number in line with the national average for the regional federal courts of appeals. The Tenth Circuit also hears a number of private civil litigation disputes, such as cases on labor, insurance, contract, and tort law. On the other hand, some seven percent of the Tenth Circuit's docket is devoted to administrative agency appeals, a percentage far below that of the D.C. Circuit, where over half the docket consists of administrative matters. Similarly, the Ninth Circuit rarely has the The Supreme Court enjoys "almost complete discretion" in selecting its cases. Unlike the Supreme Court, the federal courts of appeals are required to hear many cases as a matter of law. As a result, the appellate courts consider "many routine cases in which the legal rules are uncontroverted" Perhaps indicative of the nature of federal appellate work, the vast majority of cases decided by three-judge panels of federal courts are decided by federal courts. The Supreme Court is bound by Supreme Court and circuit precedent and is not normally in a position to espouse freely their views. Administrative law cases at the Supreme Court are often contentious, resulting in divided decisions on legal issues of national import. The Tenth Circuit's docket does not include as many administrative law cases as other federal courts. In the few cases that have come before the court, the justices have been split 4-4 in favor of the government. On statutory interpretation, the views of the justice he would replace would largely appear to align with those of the Justice he'd replace. On the issue of the scope of an agency's discretion to issue guidance documents to set regulatory policy, the Justice would likely side with the agency in this case. to the degree to which he will defer to the purported interests suggested by claimants seeking to rely upon such laws. The Supreme Court has issued a number of notable opinions over the past decade respecting the First Amendment and freedom of speech. Many of the Court's recent First Amendment rulings have been closely divided, and the eight-member Court split evenly during the October 2015 term on a notable case regarding the First amendment and free speech. Some legal scholars and practitioners have described the Roberts Court as the "strongest First Amendment Supreme Court in our history" A vote to rehear a case en banc could signal disagreement with the legal reasoning of the panel decision. En banc review is extraordinary, and is generally reserved for conflicting precedent within the circuit. A vote for or against rehearing a case does not necessarily equate to an endorsement or repudiation of a particular legal position. Despite having served on the federal appellate bench for a decade, I have never been a member of a rehearing panel. Most of us vote against most such petitions and suggestions even when we think thePanel decision is mistaken. concurring or dissenting opinions are filed, it still may be difficult to determine the preferences of the nominated judge. The act of joining an opinion authored by another judge does not necessarily reflect full agreement with the underlying opinion. For example, in an effort to promote consensus on a court, some judges will decline to dissent unless the underlying issue is particularly contentious. As one commentator notes, "[T]he fact that a judge joins in a majority opinion may not be taken as indicating complete agreement. Rather, silent acquiescence" Use caution when interpreting a judge's vote isolated from a written opinion. For example, a vote to grant an extension of time for a party to submit a filing generally does not signal agreement with the substantive legal position proffered by that party. And while some observers have highlighted votes by Judge Gorsuch in favor of the Supreme Court, it may be understood to mean something more like 'I accept the outcome in this case, and I accept that the reasoning in the majority opinion reflects what a majority of my colleagues has agreed on' deciding a weighty question of first impression and recognizing a previously unrecognized constitutional right. In a 2009 concurrence, the nominee wrote that "[j]udicial restraint usually means answering the questions we must, not those we can" In a number of opinions the nominee expressly limited the scope of the majority opinions he authored. He has also frequently concurred or dissented to take issue with majority opinions that, in his view, reached issues that were unnecessary to the court's ultimate holding. The nominee is not wholly opposed to scrutinizing a state's imposition of the death penalty. In line with his general views on judicial restraint, he generally accords a large degree of deference to decisions by state legislators, judges, and executive branch officials. One issue over which the Court has remained divided concerns the manner in which states carry out executions. The nominee's votes and opinions suggest that, while the nominee is not wholly opposed to scrutinizing a state's imposition of the death penalty, he is generally deferential to its decisions. certification is appropriate, which he then relied upon in several subsequent cases. "While we apply judgment and restraint before certifying, . . . we will nonetheless employ the device in circumstances where the question before us (1) may be determinative of the case at hand," he said. In articulating these principles, the nominee emphasized that "[i]n making the assessment whether to certify, we also seek to give meaning and respect to the federal character of our judicial system," he added. Under the McDonnell Douglas test, a plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination, and then the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its employment action. If the employer meets this burden, the plaintiff can still prevail by offering evidence demonstrating that the employer's explanation is pretextual. In Paup v. Gear Products, Inc. , Judge Gorsuch joined a per curiam opinion that, while acknowledging McDonnell Douglas was "binding on us" in the case at hand, noted criticism that its multipart, burden shifting test is unfair. Douglas test "has proven of limited value even in its native waters," with the Tenth Circuit finding it inapplicable outside of motions for summary judgment in cases relying on circumstantial evidence. While it is unclear whether the elimination of the McDonnell Douglas test would necessarily favor a particular side in employment litigation, legal commentators have noted that because the test is "bedrock employment law doctrine" any limits Judge Gorsuch might impose on the use of this test could cause a "significant change in how employment discrimination lawsuits are prosecuted and prosecuted" Gorsuch's most pointed critique of McDonnell Douglas came in a 2016 First Amendment retaliation case, Walton v. Powell. Rejecting the defendant's argument that the test should be applied in a free association case, the nominee noted that the "special and idiosyncratic" McDonnell Douglas test is not "helpful enough to justify the costs and burdens associated with its administration" In Barrett v. Salt Lake County , the nominee highlighted criticism by two colleagues that the Test is "not helpful enough" to justify its administration. to be arbitrary, capricious, [or] an abuse of discretion." The nominee has joined or written several unanimous decisions upholding agency actions. However, the nominee has sometimes departed from his colleagues and written separately to find agency actions arbitrary and capricous. The majority panel upheld the Board's decision to "exclude interim earnings from backpay calculations when the employer has wrongfully reduced employee wages" in National Labor Relations Board v. Community Health Services. The nominee doubted that the parties received fair notice of applicable rules and regulations. The agency had considerable discretion under the National Labor Relations Act to determine how back pay should be calculated. Judge Gorsuch dissented, claiming that the agency's decision failed to explain why it treated similarly situated entities differently. His opinion faulted the agency for essentially announcing a new rule without justification, and arbitrarily distinguishing between situations where terminated employees worked reduced hours, but not terminated employment. The majority noted that while the decision was inconsistent with prior determinations, the agency had plenty of discretion to make the decision.  Secsys is unusual in that the plaintiff corporation alleged that state officials had deprived it of equal protection by requiring it to award a subcontract under a state contract to a specific individual. Judge Gorsuch rejected this claim, in part, on the grounds that the state officials would have required a similar subcontracting agreement from any other contractor, making Secsys' claim moot. The ruling also explains what types of government action may be subject to heightened scrutiny, and explains what type of government actions may be under heightened scrutiny. The Supreme Court granted certiorari in the case. A majority of the High Court voted to affirm the Tenth Circuit's decision in Dolan. Justice Scalia joined a dissenting opinion authored by Chief Justice Roberts that viewed the "clear statutory text" to preclude the court from granting restitution more than 90 days after sentencing. It could suggest certain differences between his textualist approach and that of Justice Scalia, writes Julian Zelizer. "This difference between the Tenth Court's textualist interpretation ... seems to have been shaped primarily by the different emphases that Justice Scalia had," Zelizer says. the Tenth Circuit and the Chief Justice gave to different words in the statute. The Tenth Circuit focused on the "notwithstanding" clause, viewing it as mandating restitution in every case. The dissenters on the High Court, in contrast, relied, at least in part, on the phrase "n notwithstanding any other provision of law," which they say requires restitution even if it is not made at sentencing or within 90 days thereof. The Supreme Court's ruling is expected to be appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. At issue was language in the Mandatory Victims Restoration Act stating that the "court shall set a date for the final determination of the victim's losses, not to exceed 90 days after sentencing" The defendant argued that the language was jurisdictional, which would have meant that the court lacked the authority to enter any restitution order after the 90 days had passed. A unanimous panel of the Tenth Circuit in United States v. Dolan ruled in favor of the defendant in the case. The case was decided on a unanimous vote. Gorsuch wrote that the 90-day rule was a claims processing rule intended to promote speed and unconnected to the court's authority. In so doing, the nominee noted various factors, including the "statute's language and structure," as well as an interpretative canon calling for courts to construe statutes as "directory," rather than jurisdictional. Although Dolan was written relatively early in Judge Gorsuch's tenure, it was written early in the judge's tenure as a federal judge. the Ninth Circuit—where he was sitting by designation—in Kastl v. Maricopa County Community College District. In both cases, unanimous panels purported to rely on direct precedent in reaching their conclusions. For example, in Druley , the panel noted Tenth Circuit precedent holding that transsexuals are not members of a class for which heightened heightened protection is required. In Druley, the court held that a transsexual instructor whose contract was not renewed after she had been banned from using the women's restroom "until she could prove completion of sex reassignment surgery" Government with endorsement. Contending that "like cases should be treated alike," Judge Gorsuch's dissent further argued that the county's "inclusive display" of the Ten Commandments was indistinguishable from the display at issue in Van Orden v. Perry. In that case, the Supreme Court had upheld a display of the decalogue among other monuments and historic markers on the grounds of the Texas state capitol. Given these perceived parallels, the nominee's dissent concluded by noting the "long" custom of displaying the Ten commandments in public places. In United States v. Manatau, Judge Gorsuch relied on the plain language of sentencing guidelines to reach a more lenient interpretation of the mens rea requirement. The court also noted the longstanding tradition in American criminal law of restricting liability to "cases where an intentional choice to do wrong is present" A more stringent approach to mens. rea requirements is often associated with concerns about overcriminalization, something that Judge. Gorsuch has criticized in much the same way Justice Scalia did. to determine how to apply the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (SORNA) to those whose offenses occurred prior to its enactment, had foisted too much of its authority on the executive branch. He explained his view that: By separating the lawmaking and law enforcement functions, the framers sought to thwart the ability of an individual or group to exercise arbitrary or absolute power. And by restricting lawmaking to one branch and forcing any legislation to endure bicameralism and presentment, they sought to make the task of lawmaking more arduous still. reflected by their dictionary definitions. In his 2015 opinion for a majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz, Judge Gorsuch diagrammed a segment of a sentence in a criminal statute. The specific interpretative question in Rentz was whether multiple charges could be brought against the same person at the same time. In Figure 1 below, the nominee shows how he diagrammed the sentence to help address the underlying interpretativequestion in the Rentz case. For more information, visit the U.S. Supreme Court's website. including his 2015 opinion for the majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz . Like Games-Perez , the Rentz case was concerned with how to interpret a federal criminal statute related to firearms. Judge Gorsuch's opinion, which primarily centered on a text-based interpretation of the statute, also suggested that his interpretation was consistent with constitutional requirements. Specifically, the statutory provision in question could not be reasonably construed, the judge said in his opinion. He also said that the statute was not a violation of the U.S. Constitution. The nominee relied primarily on the "plain text" of the statute. The majority construed that plaintiffs attempting to bring civil actions under other federal laws "seeking the same relief IDEA supplies" must exhaust certain procedures set forth in the IDEA "'to the same extent' as you must to bring a civil action under IDEA itself" The dissenting judge argued that the majority had "misread" the statute in question by viewing Section 1415( l ) of Title 20 of the United States Code as unambiguously imposing certain requirements. in support of a primarily text based interpretation, asserting that "[t]o the extent any ambiguity remains, we don't default to the most severe possible interpretation of the statute" The nominee opined that invoking the rule when construing ambiguous criminal statutes helps to ensure that individuals have "fair warning" when lawmakers want to impose criminal consequences to certain conduct. He also noted that the rule promotes separation-of-powers principles by ensuring that the legislature, and the public, have fair warning. may be brought under Section 924(c) of Title 18 of the United States Code against a defendant who fired a single shot that hit two separate victims. The total number of charges lodged against a criminal defendant under the statute should never "exceed the number of uses, carries, or possessions" Just as you can't throw more touchdowns during the fourth quarter than the total amount of times you have thrown a touchdown, you cannot use a gun to kill two people at the same time. filed a putative class action in state court alleging unlawful trade practices involving allegedly misleading website disclosures. When the defendant sought to remove the case to federal court pursuant to the federal Class Action Fairness Act, the district court refused to exercise jurisdiction. The district court found the defendant failed to meet its burden of showing that over $5 million was "in controversy," as required by the statute. On appeal, Judge Gorsuch authored a unanimous opinion based on a detailed construction of the statutory term " in controversy" "mass action" under the Class Action Fairness Act. The district court denied this request. In a unanimous opinion analyzing whether the Tenth Circuit had jurisdiction to hear an interlocutory appeal under the Act, Judge Gorsuch's analysis hinged largely on the plain language of the statute. "When we interpret a statute we begin, of course, with its plain terms," he said. "And here, as we've mentioned, the text of [the relevant provision of the Act] provides that a court of appeals 'may accept an appeal' from an order of remand" of appeals not [more] than 7 days after entry of the order.'" Noting that "[t]he statute doesn't place any other conditions on our discretion," the nominee allowed the interlocutory appeal. In Shook v. Board of County Commissioners of the County of El Paso, the district court denied the motion for class certification of county jail inmates with mental health needs. The district court concluded that the proposed class would be unmanageable, chiefly because of the difficulty of managing it. of fashioning relief that would be applicable to the class as a whole. On appeal, Judge Gorsuch affirmed this conclusion in a unanimous opinion based on a close examination of the "two independent but related requirements" of Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23. The nominee concluded that the rule "demands a certain cohesiveness among class members with respect to their injuries, the absence of which can preclude certification," as he found the rule did in Shook. Although he has few judicial opinions on the matter, Judge Scalia has also expressed clear opinions. action and provide for procedural devices, such as class action suits, broad enforcement of arbitration clauses, or other means. In Hammond v. Stamps.com, Inc. , for example, the plaintiff claimed it was a class action. In civil liability cases, Judge Gorsuch has shown a tendency to examine closely the federal statute or rule in question, especially in cases involving determinations of eligibility for class action status. But these views appear to be more nuanced when applied to the facts of particular cases. presided" on the Senate Judiciary Committee's "Questionnaire for Nominee to the Supreme Court" Two of the ten cases Judge Gorsuch selected were opinions that affirmed the dismissal of civil claims by the district court. In Cook v. Rockwell Int ernationa l Corp. , for example, the nominee lamented: It took a titanic fifteen years for the case to go to trial. The nominee lamented that the case took 15 years to get to the court because of the nature of the case. displaces state causes of action, such as tort claims. In determining whether federal law preempts common law tort claims, the nominee's approach is centrally grounded in the words of the federal statute at issue. In Cook v. Rockwell Int ernationa l Corp. , for instance, property owners filed a class action against the company. The judge's approach has resulted in judgments both in favor of and against civil defendants, as well as against the defendants in the case in question. sue businesses that may have harmed them. In other cases, Justice Scalia cast important votes in cases that more narrowly interpreted the scope of federal law to limit corporate defendants' potential civil liability. Given Justice Scalia's decisions, commentators have considered how Judge Gorsuch might affect the Roberts Court's perceived "warmth" toward businesses on civil liability matters if the nominee were to be confirmed to the Court. Should he be elevated to the High Court, Judge Gorsuch could also be influential in the area of enforcement of arbitration provisions. some commentators suggest that Judge Gorsuch would limit the exposure of civil defendants. Through his judicial and nonjudicial writings, Judge Gorsuch has expressed an interest in issues related to civil liability. This interest is evident in several pointed critiques that he has authored on what he perceives as the misuses or excesses of litigation. In addition, when asked to identify "the 10 most significant cases over which you have an opinion," Judge Gorsuch said he would like to see the case settled in a civil trial. elevated to the Supreme Court, involves the procedural and substantive limits that federal law imposes on the exposure of defendants to monetary liability in civil cases. This is because Justice Scalia, whom Judge Gorsuch could succeed on the Court, cast critical votes in several closely contested cases that read federal law relatively expansively to restrict the ability of plaintiffs to use class action litigation to facilitate civil recoveries. The case involves lawsuits resulting from allegedly faulty products, discriminatory practices, or fraudulent activities. The judge could succeed if he is confirmed. In 2005, the nominee, then in private practice, coauthored two articles critical of securities fraud class actions. While acknowledging "some of the social benefits" of class action lawsuits, Judge Gorsuch also described the "vast social costs" resulting from these types of suits. "Economic incentives unique to securities litigation encourage class action lawyers to bring meritless claims," he wrote. "These same incentives operate to encourage significant attorneys' fee awards even in cases where class members receive little meaningful compensation," he added. to habeas petitions lodged by state prisoners. Such themes are evident in his dissent from a denial of a request for a rehearing en banc in Williams v. Jones. In that case, the majority declined to review a panel opinion that required a district court to craft a remedy for what the panel determined to have been ineffective assistance of counsel during plea negotiations in a criminal case. In his dissent, Judge Gorsuch asserted that the panel's "holding represents a significant new federal intrusion into state judicial functions" conflicts with the decisions of a number of other courts, including the Utah Supreme Court. In another habeas case, Wood v. Milyard , while the nominee's unanimous opinion held that a state procedural default did not bar federal ha beas review, he noted that federal courts must respect state court rules when appropriate. "As a matter of comity and federalism, . . . we will usually hold our tongues about any potential federal law violation lurking in the background," he said. prudential standing in a challenge brought against a local government entity under the Supremacy Clause. In Kerr v. Hickenlooper, a suit brought by state legislators claiming that a voter initiative violated the Constitution's Guarantee Clause, the original three-judge panel rejected arguments that the court lacked jurisdiction over the case. Judge Gorsuch dissented from a subsequent denial of rehearing en banc, arguing that the case presented a nonjusticiable political question. He concluded that the Court lacked subject matter jurisdiction in the first place. Judge Neil Gorsuch has expressed a preference for state courts to decide novel matters of state law. In Pino v. United States, he laid out certain principles to guide the determination of when a state law question should be decided. "We are equally aware of our obligation to defend the law's promise of finality," he said. "I am keenly sensitive to our duty to provide appropriate respect for and deference to state proceedings," he added. "It is my hope that the American people will see this as a good thing," the judge said. should be decided when possible by state, not federal, courts. Judge Gorsuch's preference for leaving novel questions of state law to the state courts also informed a dissent he authored in a habeas case. In Wilson v. Workman , the nominee faulted the majority for "ventur[ing] a guess about the meaning ofState law" He asserted that "[a]sking the [state court] to interpret its own rule . . . would have had the benefit . . ." of 'help[ing to build a cooperative federalism' were unlawfully trying to displace tribal authority through such prosecutions. Judge Gorsuch acknowledged that the federal Anti-Injunction Act "usually precludes federal courts from enjoining ongoing state court proceedings" "Out of respect for comity and federalism," he relied upon "an important exception" He said federal courts can enjoin state proceedings when it's necessary "to protect or effectuate" a previous federal judgment. In reaching this conclusion, he emphasized comity, federalism and cooperative federalism. Gorsuch: Certification's useful role in promoting a cooperative federalism. A related aspect of federalism is the doctrine of state sovereign immunity. In Hill v. Kemp, he wrote a unanimous opinion reversing a district court's dismissal of certain counts against a state official. The Supreme Court has recognized underlies the Eleventh Amendment, and is a fundamental aspect of sovereignty retained by the states under the federal system established by the Constitution. It is a part of the reason for sending questions of state law to the state. raised in appropriate future cases, I believe we would do well to consider closely its invitation to restore the balance between state and federal courts. The nominee's respect for state court decisions and interpretations appears to be grounded in his support for the broader concept of a cooperative federalism. For we should be able to expect both that justice will be done in cases like this one and that it'll be done while exhibiting the sort of cooperative federalist that has traditionally defined our law, the nominee says in a statement. only appropriate, but also vital to a system of cooperative federalism. He has also recognized limits to such deference, particularly when the actions of a state or its subdivisions are in clear conflict with federal court judgments. For example, in Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah & Ouray Reservation v. Utah , the nominee wrote a unanimous opinion that granted an injunction preventing state and county officials from prosecuting Indian tribe members for crimes committed on tribal land. In that case, the tribe had prevailed in federal court four decades earlier on its claims that Utah and several local governments were in conflict. on Eleventh Amendment grounds. In reaching this outcome, the nominee reviewed extensively the Supreme Court's eleventh Amendment jurisprudence. Judge Gorsuch concluded that the case fell "within the scope of Ex parte Young and was not barred by the Eleventh amendment" He also noted that "the Supreme Court has in recent years added a new gloss on Young "s gloss on Hans "'s gloss on the Ele11 Amendment" He found the case could be decided on the sole question of whether the relief was prospective in nature. Gorsuch does not appear to have significantly addressed the merits of a takings claim in a judicial opinion. This is unsurprising, as the Tenth Circuit does not hear many takings claims. The Tucker Act vests the U.S. Court of Federal Claims (CFC) with jurisdiction over such claims when the plaintiff seeks more than $10,000 in compensation from the federal government. With limited exceptions, the CFC's jurisdiction overSuch claims is exclusive, with limited exceptions. and appeals from the CFC are heard by the Federal Circuit, not the Tenth Circuit. If Judge Gorsuch is elevated, he could very well hear takings issues on the Court's docket. However, there is currently an insufficient basis to evaluate his views regarding the scope of the Takings Clause, the judge said in a letter to the Senate Judiciary Committee. The letter was written by Judge Neil M. Altschuler, the former chief judge of the Federal Court of Appeals for the Tenth and Eleventh Circuits. The Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) might be read as favoring arbitration over litigation. In Howard v. Ferrellgas, Judge Gorsuch read the FAA to require a remand to the district court to determine whether the parties had opted for arbitration. In Ragab v. Howard, the nominee disagreed with the panel majority's conclusion that a collection of conflicting arbitration provisions in the parties' contracts was unenforceable. Like arbitration, preemption—the circumstance in which federal law preempts state laws that single out arbitration clauses for disfavored treatment—is possible. BP sought to remove the case to federal court as a state case. Judge found "federal jurisdiction here beyond doubt," thereby allowing the class action to proceed in federal court. BP Am erica , Inc. v. Oklahoma ex rel. Edmondson was a suit brought in state court alleging manipulations of propane gas prices in violation of state law. The case was settled out of court in 2010. The judge ruled that the case was a federal matter. The decision was appealed to the Supreme Court. under the federal Price-Anderson Act and state tort law against operators of a nuclear weapons manufacturing plant to recover for damages caused by releases of plutonium and other hazardous substances. After the federal claims failed, the district court disallowed the case to proceed on the state law claims, holding that they were preempted by federal law. Judge Gorsuch disagreed, saying: "Where does any of this language—expressly—preempt and preclude all state law tort recoveries for plaintiffs who plead but do not prove nuclear incidents? We just don't see it" Cosmetics Act (FDCA). This provision, however, has a complex history of statutory interpretation by the Supreme Court. Judge Gorsuch noted that one such case articulated the following test for preemption, stating: "[T]ort suits do not impose new 'requirements' on manufacturers and are not preempted so long as the duties they seek to impose 'parallel' duties found in the FDCA" But, Judge Gorsuch stated, "the Court's answer only invited the next question: when exactly does a state law duty 'par parallel' a federal law duty enough to evade preemption?" Amendment, noting that "gun possession is often lawful and sometimes even protected as a matter of constitutional right" Judge Gorsuch's opinions could, in part, be seen to reflect or even expand on the precedent of the Supreme Court's decision in Heller. In a few cases, such as Pope , the opinions cite to other judges who have taken a different view of Heller 's dictum, at least in particular contexts. But these citations may be intended to signal awareness of these judges' arguments, rather than agreement with them. in his judicial writings to date. Judge Gorsuch has touched upon the Second Amendment and the constitutionality of firearms regulations briefly in his written opinions while on the Tenth Circuit. However, none of these cases purported to explore the scope of the 2nd Amendment's protections or the Supreme Court's decisions in District of Columbia v. Heller and McDonald v. City of Chicago. These writings suggest that Judge Gorsuch views the2nd Amendment as generally protecting an individual right to bear arms, a position that could be seen as consistent with the originalist approach often ascribed to him. The longstanding Tenth Circuit precedent is that the government need only prove knowing possession of a firearm. In his dissent in Games-Perez, Judge Gorsuch opined that reading the mens rea element of a criminal statute as "leapfrogging over the first statutorily specified element and touching down only at the second listed element" "defies grammatical gravity and linguistic logic," among other or whether the government needs to prove only that the defendant knowingly possessed a firearm, he said. firearm during and in relation to crimes of violence more than the total number of times you have used a firearm. Previously, in dissenting from the denial of en banc review in United States v. Games-Perez , Judge Gorsuch had expressed similar concerns about reading the mens rea element of a criminal statute. According to Judge Gorsuch, such a reading "defies grammatical gravity and linguistic logic," he says. The judge's textualist approach is sometimes said to have led to "defendant-friendly" results. to firearms restrictions in which Justice Scalia notably participated during his time on the High Court. The most notable of these was arguably Judge Gorsuch's dissent from the Tenth Circuit's denial of en banc review in United States v. Games-Perez. At issue in that case was whether federal statutes penalizing the possession of firearms by felons require the government to prove that a defendant knew of both his own status as a felon and his possession of a firearm. The case was decided in favor of the defendant. opinion rejecting a necessity defense to a federal gun charge as a matter of law. In another case, he joined a unanimous opinion authored by another judge concluding that law enforcement did not violate the Fourth Amendment rights of a defendant carrying a concealed handgun. The law of the state in question exempted persons with valid licenses to carry concealed weapons, among others, from its general prohibition upon carrying loaded firearms in public. However, in the Tenth Circuit's view, the existence of this exemption did not negate it. law enforcement's reasonable suspicion, at the time when the defendant was detained, that the defendant's possession of the firearm was unlawful. With respect to Separation of Powers, the Tenth Circuit docket does not appear to have afforded Judge Gorsuch an opportunity to evaluate any rifts between the President and Congress involving the allocation of war powers or executive claims of exclusivity in the law. The Tenth Circuit does not seem to have given Judge Gorsuch a chance to evaluate the President's claim of exclusive war powers. Gorsuch wrote a notable dissent in United States v. Nicholson. The issue in Nicholson was whether a police officer, who mistakenly thought the defendant had violated a local traffic ordinance, could seize evidence from the defendant's car. A year and a half after the Tenth Circuit's opinion in Nicholson , the Supreme Court effectively sided with Judge Gorsuch's more flexible view of the exclusionary rule. The Supreme Court held in a different case that a mistake of law can "give rise to the reasonable suspicion necessary to uphold" a traffic stop under the Fourth Amendment. Gorsuch helped shape jurisprudence in ways that could be seen to favor criminal defendants. He participated in notable decisions regarding searches and seizures, the exclusionary rule, ineffective assistance of counsel, and various statutory criminal law matters. His views on the Confrontation Clause and the scope of self-incrimination rights under the Fifth Amendment are less clear because he has not written on them to a significant extent. On the whole, though, his opinions are seemingly shaped by his views regarding how legal texts, particularly the Constitution and statutes, are to be construed. The nominee has taken an originalist approach to construing the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures. In several opinions, Judge Gorsuch voiced sentiments similar to those of Justice Scalia about the need for the "rule of law" to be "a law of rules" The courts are exclusively responsible for defining the playing field on which criminal suspects and the government interact, he has said. He has described the "constant competition between constable and quarry" in his opinions. The nominee is expected to be confirmed to the Supreme Court later this year. the ordinance relied on by the police officer did not provide a legal basis for the stop. The majority decision held that a failure to understand the law by the "very person charged with enforcing it" was objectively unreasonable and warranted suppression of the evidence seized. Judge Gorsuch in dissent rejected the view that an officer's mistake of law " always violates the Fourth Amendment" Instead, he argued that, when the law at issue is "deeply ambiguous," the law should be treated as a reasonableness inquiry. Judge Gorsuch dissented from the majority's holding that federal agents did not abridge the defendant's Fourth Amendment rights when they approached the house where he was staying. In so doing, he noted that, at the time when the Fourth Amendment was drafted, "the common law permitted government agents to enter a home or its curtilage only with the owner's permission" He also observed that at common law, homeowners could generally revoke licenses to enter their property at their pleasure, and "state officials no less than private visitors could be liable for trespass" The government had obtained one of the defendant's messages from an Internet service provider and opened the message and its accompanying attachments. The government argued, among other things, that this search was permissible pursuant to the "private search doctrine" Judge Gorsuch wrote on behalf of a unanimous three-judge panel in holding that a government entity had conducted an impermissible search in United States v. Ackerman. In the second case involving the scope of the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures, Judge Scalia wrote for the unanimous panel. a person's effects that had previously been searched by a private third party. However, in his opinion, the nominee rejected this argument because the third party in Ackerman had not opened the email to view its contents. In so doing, the court noted that the "Fourth Amendment was no less protective of persons and property against governmental invasions than the common law was at the time of founding" Another area implicating the Fourth Amendment's protections against government invasions is the right to a private attorney. The nominee's dissent in a case on another often litigated issue in constitutional criminal law did not ultimately become the prevailing view at the High Court. In Williams v. Jones , Judge Gorsuch served on a panel reviewing the ineffective assistance claim of a criminal defendant. Three years after Williams , the Supreme Court, in a pair of 5-4 decisions for which Justice Scalia wrote dissenting opinions, held that the Sixth Amendment right to adequate assistance of counsel extends to the negotiation and consideration of plea bargains. Gorsuch's views on capital punishment may be particularly important insofar as he would, if confirmed, be replacing Justice Scalia, who believed the death penalty was fully consistent with the Eighth Amendment. With two Justices currently on the Court who have argued openly that the practice is unconstitutional in all its forms, Judge Gorsuch could be influential. Although the nominee has not written extensively onCapital punishment, he has authored or accessory liability. He appears willing to scrutinize state court decisions that appear to contravene existing constitutional protections for capital defendants if those protections are clearly articulated in Supreme Court decisions. jurors because of their alleged bias in favor of capital punishment. All three judges on the panel agreed that the prisoner's convictions should be affirmed. Judge Gorsuch disagreed with the other two judges on a panel on the question of whether the state court of appeals had neglected to apply controlling Supreme Court precedent properly in assessing the petitioner's claim of juror bias during sentencing. He argued that the court should defer to the state appeals court's statements in its opinion, which indicated that the state trial court had applied the correct standard. Judge Gorsuch authored a dissent arguing that a state court's decision to exclude evidence in accordance with state evidentiary rules amounted to an adjudication on the merits. A further example of his tendency to defer to the states on capital punishment issues is his opinion in Eizember v. Trammel, in which the court reviewed the convictions and death sentence of a man who had murdered a married couple and committed various other crimes. The prisoner argued that the state trial court should have excluded evidence in the case. death pursuant to a judgment of a state court may challenge their convictions and sentences in federal court. Such prisoners may file a petition seeking a writ of habeas corpus. The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA) requires federal courts to accord a large degree of deference to state court decisions when reviewing a prisoner's conviction or sentence. This deferential standard of review, which is, generally, a judicial determination as to whether the prisoner should receive a new trial, new sentence, or be released. Gorsuch has authored or joined majority opinions denying such relief in a number of cases. In a few cases, the judge has dissented from majority opinions granting such relief, arguing that the court should have accorded more deference to the state court's decision to reject the inmate's challenges to the death penalty.is designed to avoid friction between the federal government and the states, typically makes it difficult for an inmate to prevail in a federal habeas case. Like Justice Scalia, he rarely voted to grant petitioners' applications for federal ha beas relief in death penalty cases. In Wilson v. Workman, the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals rejected two death row inmates' claims of ineffective assistance of counsel. The Tenth Circuit, sitting en banc, held that the deferential standard of review of state court decisions under AEDPA does not apply when the state court fails to consider material evidence. The state court has not adjudicated the claim "on the merits" under AedPA. His sentence or conviction. He was sentenced to death by lethal injection. He is currently on death row. In December 2016, the Supreme Court split 4-4 over whether to stay (i.e., suspend pending further review) the execution of an Alabama man who had challenged the state's method of administering the death penalty. The tie vote resulted in the denial of the inmate's application for a stay and left in place a decision by the Eleventh Circuit that had rejected as untimely and unmeritorious the prisoner's Eighth Amendment challenge to the drug protocol that the State of Alabama uses. of Lockett v. Fallin , Judge Gorsuch joined the majority opinion affirming the dismissal of an Eighth Amendment claim brought by an executed prisoner's estate. The court, relying on recent guidance from the Supreme Court, held that an accidental and "isolated mishap" that occurs during an execution does not violate the Eighth Amendment even if it causes some pain. The nominee's views on the death penalty may also find expression in opinions he has authored or joined reviewing federal district court decisions on habeas corpus petitions. Alabama used in its lethal injections. Judge Gorsuch's votes in support of two Tenth Circuit opinions rejecting similar challenges to the method in which a state carried out executions suggests that, if confirmed, he might provide a fifth vote against such challenges. In Warner v. Gross , Judge Gorsuch joined the majority opinion holding that the use of the drug midazolam in executions by lethal injection was unlikely to violate the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment. The Supreme Court later affirmed that decision by a vote of 5-4. Trammel , Judge Gorsuch agreed that the court should deny the petitioner's claim for relief. But he expressed concerns with the state court's apparent willingness to impose capital punishment on an accomplice. The judge wrote that the Eighth Amendment phrase "cruel and unusual punishment" would likely bar such a concept of punishment. He wrote that such a punishment would likely be illegal under the First Amendment's Eighth Amendment clause, which protects the right to a fair trial and the presumption of innocence in a criminal case. Gorsuch's writings on fundamental rights and substantive due process are found not in his court opinions, but in his outside work. He wrote a book in 2006 entitled The Future of Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia. In assessing the philosophical arguments related to assisted suicide and euthanasia, the nominee addressed key legal doctrines implicating the right to die. The book raises more questions about the underlying legal issues than it attempts to resolve definitively, writes Julian Zelizer, a former Supreme Court justice. better than that" and "the law demands more than that." In fact, much of the book has little to do with the law. At its heart, the book explores the various ethical arguments regarding assisted suicide and euthanasia. Judge Gorsuch argues that "the intentional taking of a human life by private persons is always wrong" The book does not address "publicly authorized forms of killing like capital punishment and war," nor does it address assisted suicide or euthanasia as a medical procedure. It ultimately lodging an argument against their legalization "based on secular moral theory" v. Glucksberg and Vacco v. Quill, that collectively upheld state laws that outlawed assisted suicide against substantive due process and equal protection challenges. Judge Gorsuch devotes a chapter to questions related to determining whether a right to assisted suicide can be justified by looking at past historical practices. He notes that the test is the subject of "considerable methodological disputes," including "what 'level' of historical abstraction" is needed, "whose history" should be evaluated and "how far back" in history the test should look. judgment" approach whereby "moral reasoning" and "critical discourse"dictate what constitutes a fundamental right. In recent years, a divided Court appears to have moved toward such an approach. Judge Gorsuch neither endorses nor rejects the reasoned judgment approach, opting instead to ask open questions that "one might" ask about the efficacy of such a method of interpretation. Nonetheless, the book does question the reach of Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey , which could be seen to be based on the "reasoned judgment" approach. Wade 's central holding respecting the right to an abortion, grounded the decision partly on the moral argument that "choices central to personal dignity and autonomy" "are central to the liberty protected by the Fourteenth Amendment" The Casey plurality also concluded that the doctrine of stare decisis—or respect for long settled law, required upholding Roe. Relying on this second holding to respond to autonomy based arguments for a right to assisted suicide, Judge Gorsuch contended that Casey should be viewed as based on its "narrowest rationale" In Michael H. v. Gerald D. , Justice O'Connor's concurring opinion, joined by Justice Kennedy, had rejected the conclusion in Justice Scalia's plurality opinion that courts should look to the "most specific" level at which a relevant tradition protecting, or denying protection to, the asserted right can be identified. Noting the distinction between the history of the law on assisted suicide and the laws on suicide more generally, Judge Gorsuch questioned "whether Justices O’Connor and Kennedy meant to suggest in Michael. H. V. that a court actually may disregard" the history. Atheists expressed skepticism regarding interpretations of the First Amendment that discourage accommodation for religious views. He appears to favor an approach that is more restrained in using the power of judicial review in Establishment Clause cases. In two cases subsequently reviewed by the Supreme Court, the nominee authored or joined opinions involving challenges under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) He did discuss the substantive claims in broader terms than the majority opinion, suggesting that the nominee may have a clear preference for accommodation in free exercise disputes. If confirmed to the Supreme Court, Judge Gorsuch could have a significant influence on the jurisprudence regarding freedom of religion. In recent years, the Court has taken up a number of religious freedom cases. In contrast to other areas of law, where Judge Gorsuch's views remain uncertain, freedom of Religion is a subject on which the nominee has expressed fairly clear views, writes Julian Zelizer. The Supreme Court has, at times, read the First Amendment to bar certain government actions that endorse religion. subterfuge to avoid laws they'd prefer to ignore. Judge Gorsuch is apt to interpret statutory free exercise laws, much like the Establishment Clause, to embrace the role of religion in society. But there are limits to how far free exercise can go, he says. The Supreme Court should be careful not to over-interpret RFRA, he writes. The court should also be wary of the effect of RFRA on religious freedom, he adds. "There are limits" to free exercise, the court should be aware of. a sufficiently compelling interest in imposing a substantial burden on the religious exercise of an inmate who was an enrolled member of the Northern Arapaho Tribe. In so doing, the nominee articulated two relatively pro-plaintiff interpretations of free exercise law. Similarly, in Abdulhaseeb v. Calbone , Judge Gorsuch joined the court in determining a claimant's sincerity. He rejected a conception of the compelling interest inquiry that would allow the government to rely on abstract interests to satisfy its burden under RLUIPA. the majority opinion and authored a concurring opinion reinstating several RLUIPA claims based on an Oklahoma prison's denial of an Islamic prisoner's request for a halal certified diet. In his concurrence, the nominee emphasized that the inmate's charge was that he was denied "all means of accessing food [that] he can eat consistent with his . . . sincerely held religious beliefs" The claim that "lies at [the] heart" of a statutory free exercise claim, he said, is that the prison "effectively forcing him to choose between remaining pious or starving" Gorsuch has emphasized the importance of accommodating religious beliefs in other statutory free exercise challenges. For instance, in Yellowbear v. Lambert , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of a three-judge panel, held that a Wyoming prison lacked a right to practice its religion. The close division of the current Court on free exercise matters may reflect the close division on the issue. The Supreme Court is expected to hear the case in the next few weeks. The case will be heard in the Supreme Court's San Francisco branch. Gorsuch's concurrence in Abdulhaseeb rejected the prisoner's other claims, including the claim that the prison had violated his rights under RLUIPA merely by placing "jell-o and pudding" on the cafeteria tray. For a plaintiff "to win" under the law "takes no small effort," he said. Such laws do "not offer refuge to canny operators who seek through through," he added. The Supreme Court is expected to hear the case in the coming weeks. causes the death of a human embryo." The majority of the Tenth Circuit concluded that the ACA contraceptive coverage requirement likely created a substantial burden on the organization's free exercise rights. The Tenth Circuit deferred to the plaintiff's conception of its religious beliefs, and, viewing the dilemma posed by the contraceptive policy as a "Hobson's choice" in which the corporations and its owners could pay substantial fines for violating the requirement or "compromise their religious beliefs," concluded the policy amounted to a burden. describing the majority approach as "dangerous . . . to religious liberty" because it is "not the job of the judiciary to tell people what their religious beliefs are" On appeal, the High Court agreed to hear multiple lower court decisions on this issue. In the consolidated case, Zubik v. Burwell , ordered the respective circuit courts to reconsider the cases after affording the parties time to reach a compromise that would provide contraceptive coverage without imposing the alleged burden on the challenging entities. "override other legal mandates, including its own statutes, if and when they encroach on religious liberty," he wrote. Two years later, Judge Gorsuch joined an opinion in Little Sisters of the Poor v. Burwell that repeated many of the themes of his Hobby Lobby concurrence. The central issue was whether allowing religious entities that objected to the ACA requirement to fill out a form that would functionally require a third-party insurer to provide the coverage violates the free speech rights of religious groups. Judge Harris Hartz, joined by four other judges, dissented from the decision not to rehear a case dismissing a challenge to this government accommodation policy. Hartz's opinion criticized the panel's refusal "to acknowledge that [the plaintiff's] religious belief is that execution of the [accommodation] documents is sinful" In so doing, the dissent in Little Sisters of the Poor can be seen to have repeated many of the themes from Judge Gorsuch's Hobby Lobby concurrence by Judge Hartz. Care Act (ACA) RFRA provides that federal laws that substantially burden a person's exercise of religion are permissible only if they are the least restrictive means of furthering a compelling governmental interest. In the 2013 en banc decision in Hobby Lobby v. Sebelius , Judge Gorsuch joined the lead opinion of Judge Timothy Tymkovich and wrote a separate concurrence. In Hobby Lobby , two closely held corporations, whose owners chose to "run their business to reflect their religious values," challenged the contraceptive requirement. Gorsuch emphasized that it made little difference that the burden on the plaintiffs in Hobby Lobby did not stem from the government affirmatively requiring their use of a "particular drug or device" This was because the plaintiffs had argued that the government imposed a religious burden by requiring their "personal involvement in facilitating . . . [the destruction of] a fertilized human egg that their religious faith holds impermissible," he said. As a result, Judge Gorsuch's Hobby Lobby concurrence viewed RFRA as a "tie-breaker" that Congress designed to. Gorsuch joined the majority opinion that concluded that the "logic" of Citizens United v. FEC "compelled the conclusion that the First Amendment also protects a corporation's religious expressions" A lower court's reliance on Supreme Court precedent may not necessarily signal agreement with that precedent, as noted by one of the concurring opinions in Hobby Lobby , the judge said. The opinion was part of the dissent in Sebelius.v. Hobby Lobby, a case that the Supreme Court ruled in favor of Hobby Lobby. Judge Gorsuch dissented from the denial of a request for rehearing in a case where the panel had previously enjoined a display of the Ten Commandments on a courthouse lawn. In his dissent, the nominee criticized the Tenth Circuit's formulation of the reasonable observer test, describing the observer utilized by the panel decision as an " unreasonable one" who "gets things wrong" He noted a number of perceived errors made by the "unreasonable observer," which included confusing the donor's intent with the government's message. Patrol troopers violated the Establishment Clause. Judge Gorsuch again raised concerns about the Tenth Circuit's interpretation of Justice O'Connor's test. In particular, the dissent criticized what the nominee viewed as the observer's (1) "biased presumption that the Utah roadside crosses are unconstitutional"; (2) "internal bias" that disregarded "secularizing details" about the cross display; and (3) "selective and feeble eyesight," which resulted in misperceptions about the nature of theCross display. endorsement of religion, the Court has in the recent past adopted Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's "reasonable observer test" The test looks to whether an "objective observer," acquainted with the background of the challenged government action, would perceive it as a government endorsement of religion. Judge Gorsuch has, in two dissents, criticized what he viewed as overly expansive interpretations of the reasonable observer test on the grounds that these interpretations needlessly eliminate certain religious symbols and traditions from the public sphere. Gorsuch's dissent in American Atheists criticized the concept of the reasonable observer. He said it could be used to strike down laws and policies a conjured observer could mistakenly think respect an establishment of religion. He also said the test differs from other formulations the Court has used in the Establishment Clause context in that it can be used "to strike down law and policies ... a reasonably biased, impaired, and distracted viewer might confuse them for an endorsement of religion" The dissent was published in the online edition of American Atheist. whether the endorsement test even applies to the dispute. Judge Gorsuch's dissent is reminiscent of recent Supreme Court jurisprudence, where a majority of the Justices, including Justice Scalia, appeared to move to looking to historical practices and understandings to resolve Establishment Clause disputes. Nearly two years after Green , Judge Gorsuch similarly dissented from an order denying en banc rehearing in American Atheists, Inc. v. Davenport. In that case, the panel had relied on the reasonable observer test in holding that the display of twelve-foot high crosses on public lands to memorialize fallen Utah Highway was OK. Gorsuch's respect for the decisions, interpretations, and rules of state courts is evident in the majority and concurring opinions in Browder v. City of Albuquerque. This case involved a claim against an off-duty police officer who killed one person and injured another while speeding through a red light. Although Judge Gorsuch affirmed the district court's denial of qualified immunity for the police officer in his majority opinion, he wrote separately to explain his views on when federal courts should abstain, for reasons of federalism, from deciding cases. concluded that it was inappropriate to resolve the "complex" Fourteenth Amendment "questions surrounding medical records," especially in the context of a qualified immunity challenge. The second opinion—perhaps the most notable substantive due process opinion authored by Judge Gorsuch—is Browder v. City of Albuquerque. This 2015 opinion held that the plaintiffs' substantive due Process rights had been violated in thecontext of a lawsuit arising from a "terrible crash" that resulted when a police officer raced through the street. A three-judge panel upheld a district court order that declined to dismiss the substantive due process claims brought against the officer by the victims of the crash. In so holding, Judge Gorsuch broadly discussed the substantivedue process doctrine. Describing the doctrine as having a "paradoxical name" and being a "murky area" of law, he noted the view that the doctrine either misplaces the source of due process or misleads the public.city streets of Albuquerque in his police cruiser after finishing his shift. One of the victims died and the other suffered serious injuries. Justice Scalia's legacy previously appeared in several of Judge Gorsuch's opinions on the Tenth Circuit. Notably, in a number of cases, the nominee rejected more flexible approaches to interpreting the Constitution in favor of originalism. One such case is Cordova v. City of Albuquerque , wherein the Tenth circuit dismissed a lawsuit alleging that attorneys for the city of Albuquerque had maliciously prosecuted the plaintiff in violation of the Fourth Amendment. In this case, Judge Gorsuch concurred in the judgment, grounding his opinion in originalism and writing that the City of Albuquerque , Judge Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion. This opinion, much like Strickland , engaged in a "thorough review of the record" And Orr is not the only case in which Judge Gorsuch has ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in a statutory civil rights case. It could suggest that the ultimate outcomes of particular cases are driven by Judge Gorsuch's general judicial philosophy as well as his rulings in Orr and other similar cases. It is not clear whether the Supreme Court will take up the case. that the deputies were not entitled to qualified immunity because the law at the time of the incident clearly established that the conduct alleged was constitutionally excessive. In reaching this conclusion, the nominee proceeded through an analysis of each of the Graham factors. Similarly, but resulting in a contrary outcome, Judge Gorsuch authored the majority opinion in Wilson v. City of Lafayette , finding qualified immunity protected an officer who used a taser on an individual fleeing arrest, resulting in the suspect's death. In doing so, the nominees recited and analyzed each of those factors. Gorsuch: "No one questions that the use of a taser, especially if one probe hits the head, amounts to a significant physical intrusion requiring a correspondingly significant justification" The nominee found the "physical intrusion" in Wilson was not clearly established to be excessive in light of the other Graham factors, including the arrestee actively resisting arrest. In Fisher v. City of Las Cruces, the majority found that a material factual dispute existed as to whether the plaintiff's injuries, which the plaintiff claimed, were excessive. Supreme Court precedent appears to be the exclusive focus in his excessive force opinions. In such cases, the nominee has relied on what he views as the "relatively exacting 'objective reasonableness standard' articulated in Graham v. Connor" The standard involves an examination of "three, non-exclusive factors: '[1] the severity of the crime at issue, [2] whether the suspect poses a threat, and [3] the level of force used to make the arrest" an immediate threat to the safety of the officers or others, and [3] whether he is actively resisting arrest or attempting to evade arrest by flight.'" Application of this test has led Judge Gorsuch to find both excessive force and no excessive force, depending upon his analysis of the facts of individual cases. For instance, in Herrera v. Bernalillo County Board of County Commissioners , a case where three sheriff's deputies tackled a plaintiff who was not resisting arrest, resulting in injuries to his knee, Judge Gorsuch authored a unanimous opinion affirming the district court's holding. he sustained while being handcuffed after he had shot himself, were sufficient for an excessive force claim. Judge Gorsuch concurred with the majority's use of the Graham factors and its conclusion that the factors suggested the officers may not have acted reasonably. But he faulted the majority for "tak[ing] a detour, asking whether, in addition to satisfying all three Graham factors, Mr. Fisher has also shown that he suffered a 'non- de minimis injury'" Such an inquiry had previously been found to be required only in. noted that the "act of contributing to political campaigns implicates a 'basic constitutional freedom," one lying "at the foundation of a free society" The nominee then observed that despite the First Amendment interests in campaign contributions, the Supreme Court "has yet to apply strict scrutiny to contribution limit challenges" While Judge Gorsuch's concurrence in Riddle does not go so far as to argue explicitly for subjecting contribution limits to strict scrutiny, it does cite to Justices who have made such an argument. disagreement between the members of the Court in Citizens United was more complex than whether the First Amendment protects a corporation's speech. In other words, Judge Gorsuch's vote in the 2013 en banc case may have limited significance with respect to his broader views on the constitutionality of campaign finance laws. Riddle v. Hickenlooper, a 2014 case that invalidated a Colorado law, may offer more insights as to his views on First Amendment and campaign finance regulation. The case involved whether the "asserted inclinations and advantages of corporations in corrupting officeholders" justified restricting corporate campaign expenditures. allowing major party candidates to accept twice as much in contributions per individual as independent and minor party candidates. Judge Gorsuch agreed with the majority that the Colorado law violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. He attempted to allay fears that the ruling "imperiled" any attempts to regulate campaign contributions, citing federal law as a nondiscriminatory model available to the State of Colorado. In so concluding, however, the concurrence broadly concluded that the law was unconstitutional. Judge says a prisoner who "merely conspired with" the Aryan Brotherhood could not sustain a defamation lawsuit. The First Amendment requires a plaintiff pursuing a defamation claim to prove the underlying falsehood of the statement at issue, he says. Judge Gorsuch joined a panel opinion in Cory v. Allstate Insurance , which dismissed a defamation suit against the insurance company. The decision held that the plaintiff had failed to show the History Channel's statement had a significant impact on his reputation, the judge says. Gorsuch's opinions have recognized limits to the First Amendment's speech protections. He joined opinions that dismissed privacy tort claims on First Amendment grounds. The nominee should not be viewed as a free speech absolutist, writes Julian Zelizer. He says the underlying reported events involved protected speech on matters of public concern. For more information, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @cnnstl and @julian Zelizer on Facebook. Judge Neil Gorsuch has written or joined a number of opinions that view the First Amendment as an important restriction on government activity. In Van Deelan v. Johnson, he reversed a district court's dismissal of a claim that several county officials had violated the plaintiff's First Amendment rights. In Bustos v. A&E Television, he has promoted the rights of the press at the expense of plaintiffs in certain state tort actions. The decision and his reluctance to distinguish between types of speech protected by the Constitution may align him with the majority of the Roberts Court. , Judge Gorsuch wrote broadly about the underlying dangers of suppression of speech by government officials. When public officials feel free to wield the powers of their office as weapons against those who question their decisions, they do damage not merely to the citizen in their sights but also to the First Amendment liberties and the promise of equal treatment essential to the continuity of our democratic enterprise, he wrote. With this backdrop, the nominee rejected the county's argument that the plaintiff's tax assessment challenges did not amount to "constitutionally protected activity" the First Amendment precludes defamation actions aimed at parody, even when involving a private figure on a matter of private concern. In the context of public employee speech, the nominee has authored several opinions limiting or dismissing First Amendment lawsuits brought by government employees against their employers. The speech occurred pursuant to the employees' official duties and, therefore, could be regulated by the government. With regard to challenges to zoning ordinances, he authored a concurring opinion that raised the question of whether constitutionalizing the protections for such parodies was necessary or wise. Gorsuch's work on the Tenth Circuit has broached the issue of campaign finance regulation and the First Amendment. The nominee has authored or joined a handful of opinions touching on free speech issues. Given this, if confirmed by the Senate, Judge Gorsuch could have a significant influence on the future direction of free speech law. The Supreme Court has invalidated a number of federal and state election laws at the margins. For example, in the en banc ruling in Hobby Lobby, the court invalidated the law. Justice Scalia was a vocal critic of the substantive due process doctrine. While serving on the Tenth Circuit, Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined a few opinions. The writings of a nominee to the Supreme Court—especially those authored before the nominee became a judge—may not fully represent the nominee's current views, writes Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: Judge Gorsuch's nonjudicial writings on substantive due due process suggest that the nominee is unlikely to interpret the substantive component of the Due Process Clause expansively. fundamental rights in the Due Process Clause or has no basis whatsoever in the Constitution. However, acknowledging that the Supreme Court has established the Dueprocess Clause as the "home" for certain fundamental unenumerated rights, the Browder majority continued by explaining that the "doctrine should be applied and expanded sparingly" In addition to noting these limits on the doctrine in the majority opinion, Judge Gorsuch authored a separate opinion in Browder to discuss an argument forfeited by the defendant that would further limit substantive due process claims in federal court. Judge Gorsuch appears to be somewhat skeptical of more expansive views of the historical test to determine what constitutes a fundamental right. Viewing the central case cited by Justice O'Connor's Michael H. concurrence, Eisenstadt v. Baird, as "an equal protection decision," rather than a due process one. In addition to examining thehistorical test for determining which liberty interests are protected by the Due Process Clause, Judge Gorsuch's book also examines what he calls the "reasoned" test. New rights based on broad libertarian concepts like individual autonomy could "prove too much," he says. In this sense, paralleling Chief Justice Roberts's reasoning with regard to the scope of substantive due process protections, the views may question broader conceptions of the Due Process Clause. There are, however, limits on what can be gleaned from Judge Gorsuch's book with respect to his broader views on unenumerated, he writes. The views in his 2006 book are based on abstract notions of morality. noting the dangers of '"unchecked disregard of the restrictions' imposed by the Constitution." Judge Gorsuch's Gutierrez-Brizuela concurrence may suggest that if he is elevated to the High Court, he may embrace a more formalist approach to separation-of-powers questions. The Supreme Court has been divided in recent years in cases involving the substantive component of the Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. The source for various unenumerated rights that have been recognized by the Court as constitutionally protected. case to reach a jury. No doubt a testament to contemporary civil litigation practices that ensure before any trial is held every stone will be overturned in discovery. Somehow, though, this case managed to survive the usually lethal gauntlet of pretrial proceedings and stagger its way to trial. From this sentiment, it might be surmised that Judge Gorsuch may be particularly receptive to curtailing the costly litigation process through strict readings of statutes that create private rights of private property. The case is still pending. rights adequately: To entertain cases like this in federal court as a matter of routine risks inviting precisely the sort of regime the Supreme Court has long warned against. "Make of the Fourteenth Amendment a font of tort law" needlessly superimposed on perfectly adequate existing state tort law systems, he says. "When the issue is not properly raised by the parties in Browder , Judge Gorsuch opined in his concurrence that "when the issue was not raised, the court should have ruled" in a non-Article III bankruptcy court without the consent of the parties. Judge Gorsuch described the purpose of Article III of the Constitution as crafted by the Framers to be "the cure for their complaint [against the crown]." The nominee also exhibited some doubt regarding the continued viability of the longstanding distinction between public rights and private rights as a distinction between private rights and public rights in a bankruptcy case. "The federal government will never be allowed to take the people's lives, liberties, or property without a decision maker insulated from the pressures other branches may try to bring to bear," he said. an independent right of the people essential to the preservation of all other rights later enumerated in the Constitution and its amendments. According to Judge Gorsuch, the combination of legislative and judicial functions poses a grave threat to liberty, fair notice, and equal protection. [O]ur whole legal system is predicated on the notion that good borders make for good government, that dividing government into separate pieces bounded both in their powers and geographic reach is of irreplaceable value when it comes to securing the liberty of thepeople. the decisions on statutory civil rights in which the nominee participated involved unanimous rulings to dismiss a particular case. In 2009 in Strickland v. United Parcel Service, Inc. , Judge Gorsuch agreed with two colleagues that the plaintiff should be able to proceed to trial on a FMLA retaliation claim, but differed from his colleagues as to the plaintiff's Title VII claim. In addition, litigation involving statutory civil civil rights claims often turns on the facts of a specific case, as opposed to differences in opinions about the law. case based on the factual record before the court. While the other two judges voted to reverse the district court's grant of summary judgment to the defendant on the Title VII claim, Judge Gorsuch would have affirmed the lower court's decision. In particular, he construed two key depositions relied on by the plaintiff as simply showing that the plaintiff's supervisor "harassed male employees in very much the same manner he harassed Ms. Strickland" In another fact-intensive civil rights case resulting in a different outcome—a ruling for the plaintiffs— Orr v. Orr. Judge Gorsuch also looked to the "larger statutory structure" and the statute's legislative history to buttress his conclusion. Caplinger v. Medtronic, Inc. affirmed the district court's dismissal of the complaint as preempted by federal law based on a reading of an express preemption clause within the Medical Device Amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Medical Devices Act of 1998. The case involved a lawsuit alleging the defendant had promoted an "off label" use of a medical device that resulted in the plaintiff's injuries. to judicial exposition." Furthermore, he observed, "the Supreme Court has twice revisited and cut back the scope of its initial decision." Left to reconcile competing statutory interpretations by the High Court, Judge Gorsuch asked: "How are we supposed to apply all these competing instructions? It's no easy task" Ultimately, the court held that the state law claims were preempted because the plaintiff failed to identify a parallel federal requirement based on off-label promotion of a medical device. The nominee applied these principles while referring back to the statute's plain text throughout his analysis. In 2011 case, Kerns v. Bader, Judge Gorsuch dismissed the substantive due process claims brought by a plaintiff. Noting that the government's "mere collection of information" without any further public dissemination of it is a violation of due process. Judge has never squarely ruled on the right to an abortion or to marry, but his opinions do provide some insights into his views on substantive due Process rights. He has written on behalf of a divided panel in the case, in which a county sheriff had violated the plaintiff's rights to informational privacy. that information does not implicate rights to informational privacy, Judge Gorsuch dismissed the claim on qualified immunity grounds. The dissent, however, called the majority's conclusion on the privacy issue "dismaying" The dissent argued that it was "patently clear" that "individuals have a constitutional right to have their medical records kept private from law enforcement officers pursuing general investigative ends and acting in the absence of any authority to breach that privacy" Nonetheless, while acknowledging the dissent's eloquence, Judge Scalia said, "I don't think there's any reason to think that this case would go the other way" Gorsuch dissented from the denial of a petition for en banc rehearing. In so doing, he contended that the underlying panel decision interpreted the First Amendment too broadly. In a case raising issues similar to those in a case presently before the Court, Judge Gorsuch joined an opinion holding that a Utah law requiring registered sex workers to register was unconstitutional. He said it made it harder to regulate the secondary effects of adult businesses. The case is Doe v. Shurtleff, which is now before the Supreme Court. In United States v. Baldwin , he spent a portion of his majority opinion criticizing the proliferation of criminal prohibitions in the Code of Federal Regulations. After a panel of judges affirmed a conviction for failure to register as a sex offender, he dissented from the denial of a rehearing en banc based on his view that Congress, in delegating to the Attorney General the authority to define sex offenders, was overstepping its authority. He said Congress should not have delegated the authority.to the executive branch to define. sex offenders. Gorsuch has authored or otherwise participated in relatively few opinions addressing claims that a government enactment, policy, or practice has deprived persons of equal protection of the law. There is one opinion, Secsys LLC v. Vigil, authored by Judge Gorsuch for a unanimous panel of the Tenth Circuit. This opinion characterizes equal protection as "the law's keystone" and explores the differences between intentional and non-intentional discrimination. It could suggest that Judge Gorsuch believes that the Constitution's equal protection principles play a crucial role in prohibiting certain government discrimination based on race, gender and disability. on race or sex, but may be more skeptical of interpreting the Equal Protection Clause expansively to shield against previously unrecognized forms of discrimination. Judge Gorsuch also joined the unanimous decision by a panel of the Tenth Circuit in 2015 in Druley v. Patton. In 2009, in 2009, Judge Gorsuch joined a unanimous decision  in a case involving a transgendered prisoner in an all-male facility. In that case, the court ruled that the prisoner was not entitled to wear female undergarments because she was housed in a male facility. more federal civil rights statutes. Such statutes include Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended. It appears that his jurisprudence is largely a product of his preferences for textualism and rules based adjudication, as opposed to a preference to rule for a particular side. However, it should be noted that some commentators have criticized certain rulings by Judge Neil Neil Gorsuch in the Supreme Court case "Gorsuch v. United States" The case is expected to be heard in the fall. to which we may ascribe whatever meaning springs to mind," Judge Gorsuch wrote. He looked to the "language of the Act itself," the Act's structure, and key canons of statutory construction. In another decision, he said a student who had previously settled a lawsuit involving alleged violations of the IDEA was barred from "seeking the same relief" under the ADA, the Rehabilitation Act, and 42 U.S.C. He wrote for the majority in holding that the student was not entitled to same relief. In Almond v. Unified School District #501, the nominee employed a textualist approach in one of the first opinions interpreting the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009. Rejecting the view that the phrase "discrimination in compensation" was used in the Act as "some Rorschach inkblot," he concluded that the Act's expanded accrual period for "discrimination" claims applied only to "unequal pay for equal work" claims, not to all claims of discriminatory compensation. also objected that the outcome under the majority's reading ran contrary to Congress's intent by "harm[ing] the interests of the children that IDEA was intended to protect" However, in perhaps a reflection on how his broader views on the role of the judge influence his civil rights jurisprudence, Judge Gorsuch's opinion took a different view of this argument. He opined that the court would be substituting its view of desirable social policy for that of Congress if it were to adopt the plaintiff's proposed interpretation. to a substantial burden. On appeal to the Supreme Court, a five-Justice majority (including Justice Scalia) largely agreed with the Tenth Circuit's assessment and affirmed the lower court. Judge Tymkovich's opinion concluded that the existence of a wide range of exemptions to the requirement undermined the government's justifications for the policy and demonstrated that the policy was not the least restrictive means of achieving these goals. Judge Gorsuch's concurring opinion in Hobby Lobby was centrally focused on procedural matters tangential to the case. write on the constitutional limits on affirmative action or the equal protection rights of sexual minorities. Most of the civil rights decisions in which the nominee has participated have centered upon statutory civil rights claims. The nominee's opinions in these cases to date have resulted in a variety of outcomes, writes Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: Based on these decisions, an argument could be made that Judge Gorsuch's views on statutory civil Rights reflect his textualist approach to construing statutes, instead of a more results-driven judicial philosophy. Law in which Judge Gorsuch could be influential if he were to be elevated to the Supreme Court. Justice Scalia's views regarding the scope of constitutional and statutory civil rights protections were established in a number of judicial opinions. However, unlike Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch's views on constitutional civil rights questions are less well known because he has had relatively few occasions to address such questions directly in cases before the Tenth Circuit. He has not, for example, had occasion to address affirmative action and issues related to sexual orientation. scrutiny is required under the Equal Protection Clause. Because of this, in the panel's view, the state officials' decisions were subject to the less stringent "rational basis review," which the decisions were able to withstand. Similarly, in Kastl , the panel noted, in a short three-page order, that the plaintiff had failed to "put forward sufficient evidence demonstrating that [the school's actions were] motivated by her gender" This, in their view, caused her claims to fail. During his tenure on the Tenth Circuit, Judge Gorsuch has addressed issues of federalism and the scope of congressional power vis-à-vis the states only in a limited number of cases. He authored or joined a host of key opinions delineating the limits of federal power. In many key areas of the law related to issues ofFederalism, he has written or joined key opinions. He has called the division of power between the states and the national government "one of the Constitution's structural protections of liberty" governing principle for determining the types of claims Article I courts (like bankruptcy courts) can hear. Judge Gorsuch has repeatedly stressed that he believes that the division of legislative and judicial powers is not a mere "formality dictated by the Constitution" Rather, he views the separation of powers as essential to the preservation of liberty. To the founders, the legislative andjudicial powers were distinct by nature and their separation was among the most important liberty-protecting devices of the constitutional design, he says. conduct of foreign affairs, for example. But a review of his written opinions suggests misgivings when Congress assigns legislative or judicial responsibilities to be carried out by the executive branch. His writings indicate he is a proponent of reinvigorating the non-delegation doctrine to police overly broad statutory delegations of legislative functions to the other branches. Judge Gorsuch has emphasized the principle of individual liberty in applying his formalist approach to a number of cases implicating the separation of powers, especially challenges to criminal laws. Gorsuch: "I would have thought powerful and centralized authorities like today's administrative agencies would have warranted less deference from other branches, not more" He says courts should examine the law's meaning de novo, or without deference to the agency's view. "This allows regulated parties to rely on consistent agency interpretations while simultaneously allowing courts to operate properly within the Constitution's framework," he says. He says Scalia's views contrast with those of Justice Scalia, who, for much of his career, was critical of agency deference. If elevated to the Supreme Court, Judge Gorsuch could be expected to reject "functionalist" approaches that weigh the extent to which a challenged law or action upsets the equilibrium of powers the Framers hoped to achieve. His formalist approach seems to guide his views on both the limited and exclusive nature of judicial power, which are informed by the structure of the Constitution. For example, he wrote the panel opinion in Loveridge v. Hall overturning a district court decision allowing malpractice and breach of fiduciary duty claims to be resolved. Gorsuch: "Powerful and centralized authorities like today's administrative agencies . . . warrant less deference from other branches, not more" He cites to Justice Felix Frankfurter's concurrence in Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer. He dismissed more functionalist arguments in favor of a "titanic administrative state," he says. "Maybe the time has come to face the behemoth," he adds. "It's time to face it" for the first time. judiciary to legislate: Not incidentally, vague laws also pose a danger to separation of powers. "If the legislature could set a net large enough to catch all possible offenders, and leave it to the courts to step inside and say who could be rightfully detained, and who should be set at large[, t]his would, to some extent, substitute the judicial for the legislative department of government," he writes. His writings from the bench suggest he prefers to apply what scholars frequently term a "formalist" approach. The rule of lenity "insists that courts side with the defendant "when the ordinary canons of statutory construction have revealed no satisfactory construction" Judge Gorsuch could serve as a critical vote on such matters if confirmed to the Court. The Supreme Court has been closely divided on various aspects of environmental law in recent years. If confirmed, Judge Gorsuch would join Justice Scalia on the Supreme Court's conservative wing. He would replace Justice Antonin Scalia, who died in 2013. The Senate is expected to vote on his confirmation in the coming weeks. time on the bench, was viewed by scholars as a defender of Chevron deference. The doctrine, for Justice Scalia, operated as a clear background rule from which Congress could legislate. Judge Gorsuch's opinions can be read to suggest that he might favor eliminating the doctrine, or at least cabining its application as he did in the majority opinion in Gutierrez-Brizuela and in another case discussed below, De Niz Robles v. Lynch. As a result, if he were to succeed Justice Scalia,. the nominee's opinions in De Nz Robles and Gutierrez-brizuela could suggest thathe might favor a Chevron-free court. offenders to provide the government with their usernames and online identifiers for certain websites was a permissible content-neutral regulation of speech. Justice Scalia's written work and public speeches reflected distinct attitudes toward the use of contemporary foreign law and practice to inform understanding of the U.S. Constitution and federal statutes. In contrast, due in part to the nature of the Tenth Circuit's docket, Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence offers comparatively little guidance as to his likely approach on such matters if appointed to the Supreme Court. The report highlights areas where Judge Gorsuch has expressed views on the law that may contrast with those of some of his colleagues. It is unclear to what degree the nominee's conclusions reflect his own approach to federalism questions, or what he perceives as adherence to Supreme Court precedent. The nominee has expressed clear views in support of abstention, the concept of a cooperative federalism, and the practice of federal courts certifying some questions of state laws to state courts. In general, however, in cases implicating federalism concerns, the nominee has exhibited respect for state court decisions. focuses on those areas of law where Justice Scalia can be seen to have influenced the Court's approach to particular issues or provided a fifth and deciding vote. The report begins by discussing the nominee's views on two cross-cutting issues—the role of the judiciary and statutory interpretation. It then addresses fourteen separate areas oflaw, arranged in alphabetical order, from "administrative law" to "takings" Within each section, the report reviews whether and how Judge Gorsuch has addressed particular issues in opinions he authored or joined. The report analyzes majority, concurring, and dissenting opinions, including decisions that Judge Gorsuch participated in while serving by designation on another federal court of appeals. The report also notes Judge Gorsuch's nonjudicial writings, many of which address assisted suicide and euthanasia. While the report discusses numerous cases and votes involving Judge Gorsuch, it focuses particularly on cases in which the sitting panel was divided, as these cases arguably best showcase the judge's opinions. The full report can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/politics/judge-gorsuch-report-2013-01-30. panel of the Tenth Circuit in Lexington Insurance Co. v. Precision Drilling Co., L.P. Judge Gorsuch contrasted canons that he viewed as "finely honed and consistent with the judicial function" with the so called "absurdity canon" This canon is generally said to allow judges to "override even unambiguous statutory texts . . . in order to avoid putatively absurd consequences in their application" Judge Gorsuch expressed concern that broad application of this canon could be dangerous. enable judges to disregard clear statutory text in favor of the jurists' perceived view of Congress's purpose in enacting the statute. Judge Gorsuch's Lexington Insurance opinion can be seen to reflect broader concerns about interpretations of statutory text based on extrinsic evidence of congressional purpose. However, the nominee's discussion of these concerns in Lexington Insurance is arguably notable for its relative length, particularly given that the sole legal authority cited by Judge Gorsuch as supporting purpose-based applications of the absurdity doctrine is an 1892 Supreme Court decision. with the Court in more recent years. The two other judges on the panel would not have reached the questions regarding the absurdity doctrine, concluding instead that the plaintiff had waived the argument. Unlike Justice Scalia, who generally viewed the use of legislative history materials as illegitimate even in support of text-based arguments, Judge Gorsuch has cited them in certain cases. Such citations may be based, in part, on his view that Supreme Court precedent directed lower court judges to consider legislative history. materials in those instances. He has elsewhere expressed concerns about theUse of legislative. history materials similar to those voiced by Justice Scalia. in that such materials are not subject to the same bicameralism and presentment requirements as statutes because they are not passed by both chambers of Congress and signed by the President. Judge Gorsuch has similarly expressed concerns, akin to those voiced by Justice Scalia, about invocations of alleged congressional or statutory purposes that are untethered from or contrary to the express statutory text. Some of these concerns are seemingly practical ones, grounded in the difficulty of determining which of various possible purposes that could be attributed to a particular statutory text embody the shared intent of a legislature. nominee once going so far as to diagram part of a sentence in a written opinion. Judge Gorsuch can be seen to resemble Justice Scalia in invoking the "rule of lenity" when construing language that is seen to be ambiguous in favor of criminal defendants. On the other hand, the nominee's recently expressed concerns about " Chevron deference" —judicial deference to the reasonable interpretations by executive branch agencies of ambiguous or silent statutes –distinguish him from Justice Scalia. These last two facets of Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence are discussed in more detail later in this report. that Justice Scalia did. This approach—known as textualism —looks to the statutory text, context, and structure when construing laws. Textualism's focus on the wording of the statute is widely shared among contemporary jurists and commentators. But its rejection of extrinsic sources of meaning has been the subject of debate, as have textualist views about judges' proper role in establishing the meaning of statutory text. The nominee has also invoked a number of canons—or general principles—of statutory interpretation when constuing text that is seen to be ambiguous. and is less frequent than the rate at which Justice Scalia dissented when he served as an appellate judge on the D.C. Circuit. On the other hand, there may be limits to what can be gleaned from this data. The choice to write separately is one that stems from various factors, and may simply depend on the personality and preferences of an individual judge, or the nature of the dispute before the court. For instance, the fact that Judge Gorsuch's majority opinions garnered relatively few dissents may be a product of the cases. In contrast to Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch's writings have generally espoused a more minimalist role for courts. While the nominee has not been immune from criticism that particular majority opinions he wrote swept too broadly. For example, he noted in a 2012 dissent that "[c]aution is always warranted when venturing down the road of judicial overreach" The Supreme Court is expected to vote on the nominee in the next few weeks. For more information, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. of appeals are decided without dissent. The overwhelming majority of opinions issued by the Tenth Circuit are unanimous. The bulk of the opinions that Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined may not be particularly insightful with regard to his views on specific areas of law. Even in closely contested cases where unanimity where possible, the majority tends to be right, the authors say. The relative infrequency with which fellow judges dissented or otherwise wrote separately from Judge Gorsuch's majority opinions may suggest the nominee places a high value on reaching consensus in the opinions he writes. of law, his opinions at times evidence concern about judges "reshap[ing] the law as they wish it to be" by failing to "attach power to precedent" Of the approximately 180 published majority opinions authored by the nominee, only one has been reviewed in a formal opinion by the Supreme Court. One opinion that Judge Gorsuch joined, Direct Marketing Ass'n v. Brohl , was reversed by the Court in a substantive opinion. The Supreme Court in recent years has reversed the lower courts in roughly seventy percent of all cases it heard. Many commentators opined that Judge Gorsuch would, if confirmed, follow in Justice Scalia's footsteps as an originalist. On the other hand, during Judge Gorsuch's confirmation hearings for his seat on the Tenth Circuit in 2006, the nominee explicitly rejected the view that he had any particular "philosophy" toward judging. He noted that he "resist[ed]" being "pigeon-hole[d]" because "people do unexpected things and pigeon holes ignore gray areas in the law, of which there are many" Justice Scalia and Judge Gorsuch reject results-oriented judging. Both have emphasized that judges must render decisions that do not necessarily conform to their personal preferences. Scalia often pointed to his vote to strike down a law prohibiting flag burning as an example of how his judicial philosophy could yield results that did not align with his own inclinations. Similarly, in a 2016 dissent, Judge Gorsuch emphasized that the role of the judge is to "apply, not rewrite, the law enacted by the people's representatives," noting that a judge's role is to apply the law. Judge Gorsuch's approach to judging can be seen to differ in tone and tenor from that of Justice Scalia. The nominee may be more focused on collegiality and consensus-building than the Justice he could replace. During his career on the High Court, Justice Scalia frequently authored fairly broad and uncompromising opinions that did not garner the votes of a majority of the Court. In contrast, Judge Gorsuch's judicial record may reflect comments he made during his confirmation hearing for his Tenth Circuit appointment, wherein he noted the importance of "trying to reach consensus" Gorsuch has noted a wide range of jurists with varying judicial philosophies. He has openly praised Justice Scalia's general influence, calling the late Justice a "lion of the law" However, the nominee also noted the influence of "three significant but quite different judges" who "brought him up in the law," Judge David Sentelle and Justices Byron White and Anthony Kennedy. This statement has prompted some commentators to compare the nominee to those jurists, as well. The judicial and judicial philosophy of the Supreme Court is very different. Judge Gorsuch's judicial opinions and scholarly writings suggest that he could be seen to share many of Justice Scalia's views toward judging. In a lecture delivered in April 2016 at Case Western Reserve University School of Law, Judge Gorsuch commended the late Justice's approach to judging. Rejecting the view of the judge as a "pragmatic social-welfare maximizer," Judge Gorsuch argued for a more limited role for judges in the American political system. The themes highlighted in his 2016 lecture on.nonjudicial writings of Judge Gorsuch may provide another—perhaps richer and more nuanced—basis for evaluating how his approach to Judging compares to that of Justice. Scalia. Judge Gorsuch has declared that the proper role of a court is to interpret the law and not to "substitute" the court's "views of optimal policy" for Congress's judgment. A number of the nominee's opinions have noted his personal sympathies for particular parties in the case, but distinguished these sympathies from what he viewed the law to require. As a result, if Judge Gorsuch were to serve on the Supreme Court, his views on the role of the judiciary would likely change. Many commentators have likened the nominee to Justice Scalia. During the nearly thirty years that Justice Scalia served on the Supreme Court, the late Justice was a well-known proponent of originalism, textualism, and the view that clear rules should guide the work of the lower courts. Accordingly, Justice Scalia vigorously dissented from opinions that, in his view, failed to construe legal texts in a clear and fair way. The Supreme Court has the.opportunity to address certain topics, such as international law and foreign. affairs, terrorism and national security. judging, the findings in Table 1 and Table 2 may be noteworthy. Professor Michael McConnell of Stanford University described Judge Gorsuch as "unfailingly cordial and collegial" Another former colleague, Robert Henry, now the President of Oklahoma City University, described Judge Neil Gorsuch's "judicial temperament" as "superb" Judge Gorsuch's approach to judging may also differ in substance from that of Justice Scalia. In contrast to the oft quoted "common ground," Judge Gorsuch aims to "find[] common ground" while being "scrupulously respectful" might be affected if he were to succeed Justice Scalia. For various reasons, it is difficult to predict accurately an individual's likely contributions to the Court based on their prior experience. A section of this report titled Predicting Nominees' Future Decisions on the Court provides a broad context and framework for evaluating how determinative a judge's prior record may be in predicting future votes on the Supreme Court. Because Judge Gorsuch would succeed Justice Antonin Scalia on the High Court, this report is focused on his potential impact on the court. President Donald J. Trump announced the nomination of Judge Neil M. Gorsuch of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit (Tenth Circuit) to fill the vacancy on the Supreme Court of the United States created by the 2016 death of Justice Antonin Scalia. Judge Gorsuch was appointed to the Tenth circuit by President George W. Bush in 2006. Immediately prior to his appointment to the bench, the nominee served as the Principal Deputy to the Associate Attorney General, the third-ranking official at the Department of Justice. Judge Gorsuch began his legal career clerking for federal judges. He first served as a law clerk to Judge David B. Sentelle of the D.C. Circuit. Later, he served two Supreme Court Justices, newly retired Justice Byron White and Justice Anthony Kennedy, during the October 1993 term. This report provides an overview of Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence and discusses how the Supreme Court will rule on his nomination in the future. It also discusses how his nomination will affect the federal judiciary. decade of service on the Tenth Circuit. A separate report, CRS Report R44772, Majority, Concurring, and Dissenting Opinions by Judge Neil M. Gorsuch , lists and briefly describes each opinion authored by Judge Gorsuch during his tenure on the federal bench. Other CRS products discuss various issues related to the vacancy on the Court. For an overview of available products, see CRS Legal Sidebar WSLG1526, Supreme Court Nomination: CRS Products. work on the High Court is a task fraught with uncertainty. Justice Felix Frankfurter disappointed some early supporters by becoming a voice for judicial restraint and caution. Justice Harry Blackmun was originally considered by President Richard Nixon for the Supreme Court. He was later appointed to the Court by President Ronald Reagan in 1986. He served on the Eighth Circuit for a little over a decade prior to his appointment to the court in 1970. The Supreme Court is the highest court in the U.S. and has the power to overturn lower court decisions. Justice Blackmun authored the majority opinion in Roe v. Wade recognizing a constitutional right to terminate a pregnancy. He was generally considered one of the more liberal voices on the Court when he retired in 1994. The difficulty in attempting to predict how a nominee will approach the job of being a Justice remains even when the nominee has had a lengthy federal judicial career prior to nomination. He viewed the judge's role as interpreting the law, rather than making new law. He considered himself to be a "strict constructionist" In Energy and Environmental Legal Institute v. Epel , Judge Gorsuch reviewed a dormant Commerce Clause challenge to Colorado's renewable energy standard. Justices Scalia and Thomas had opposed the dormant commerce clause doctrine because they believed it lacked a firm basis in the text and structure of the Constitution. Judge Gorsuch ultimately upheld a state law that required electricity generators to ensure that twenty percent of electricity sold to state consumers comes from renewable sources. He acknowledged, however, that the Tenth Circuit was bound by Supreme Court precedent on judicial free trade policy. Justice Scalia viewed federalism as the legal of federal powers granted by the Constitution. In this area, the nominee's clear views appear to align closely with those of Justice Scalia. While Judge Gorsuch's distinct views on the dormant Commerce Clause seem clear, his limited cases make it difficult to conclude with certainty that he would be as receptive to federalism based arguments as was Scalia. What is apparent, however, is his clear interest in upholding the "essential principles of federal-state comity" in this area. The Commerce Clause is found in Article I of the Constitution. It grants Congress the authority to adopt laws regulating interstate commerce. In dormant commerce clause cases, Article III courts have satisfied dormant Commerce Clause concerns. In concurring, Judge Gorsuch summarized his views on the dormant Commerce clause in a statement reminiscent of those of Justice Scalia: At the center of this appeal is a claim about the power of precedent. In fact, the whole field in which we are asked to operate today—dormant commerce clause doctrine—might be said to be an artifact of judicial precedent. Supreme Court nominee describes dormant Commerce Clause jurisprudence. The doctrine is "a long and evolving history of almost common-law-like judicial decision making," he says. The Supreme Court has read the clause as embodying a sort of "common-law" rule, he adds. But the doctrine is more than that, the nominee says, and it can be used to challenge state laws. It's a "pocket of federal jurisPrudence characterized by a long and evolveable history," he writes. sold to state consumers came from renewable resources. This conclusion was based on a strict reading of one line of dormant Commerce Clause cases. The state law at issue "doesn't share any of the three essential characteristics that mark those cases," the judge said. It isn't a price control statute, it doesn't link prices paid in Colorado with those paid in the U.S., and it isn't linked to the cost of electricity in the state, he said. The case is still pending. out of state, and it does not discriminate against out-of-staters," he writes. Although it is difficult to divine broad conclusions from this one case, Judge Gorsuch's opinion suggests a skeptical reading of the dormant Commerce Clause and an interest in cabining the doctrine to the facts of previous cases. These views were also apparent in the concurring opinion Judge Gorsuch authored in Direct Marketing Association v. Brohl, which held that a state law imposing a notice and reporting obligation on out- of-state retailers did not discriminate. consistent with the circumstances surrounding the issuance of the order and the agency's subsequent conduct. Environmental cases may also implicate other constitutional issues, including the relationship between federal and state authorities. One question that may arise is whether the Constitution's Commerce Clause should render invalid certain state environmental laws. The Supreme Court, in a series of decisions, has held that the Commerce Clause represents not only a grant of authority to Congress, but also a prohibition on states "imposing excessive burdens on interstate commerce without congressional approval" was unclear, Judge Gorsuch appears to have cabined the circumstance in which these doctrines apply. In De Niz Robles , a precursor to the Tenth Circuit's opinion in Gutierrez-Brizuela , Judge Gorsuch, writing for a unanimous panel, rejected the retroactive application of an agency's adjudication that upset the affected party's reliance interests. In other words, at least in the Tenth circuit, De Nize Robles did not read Brand X to apply when an agency seeks to apply its interpretation retroactively. Gorsuch grounded his decision in principles of separation of powers, due process, and equal protection. He noted the presumptive prospective effect of legislation compared with the retroactive effect of a judicial decision. The more an agency's decision resembles that of a judge, the stronger the case for retroactive application of the decision. But the more the decision resembles legislation, the less likely such a decision should be granted retroactive force, he said. Given this guidepost, De Niz Robles concluded. judicial decisions where statutory ambiguity is identified. In De Niz Robles v. Lynch , Judge Gorsuch established for the majority that there is a presumption of prospectivity to agency exercises of delegated legislative authority unless Congress has clearly authorized retroactivity. In reaching this conclusion, Judge Gorsuch let it be known that, if not bound by Supreme Court precedent, the court would have thought it improbable that the Framers had envisioned that an executive branch agency could ever overrule a federal court in the first place. Gorsuch has taken a narrow view of the situations in which Chevron deference is due. The nominee has also raised "questions like whether and how people can be fairly expected to keep pace with and conform their conduct to all this churning and changing 'law" In perhaps the most discussed of Judge Gorsuch's opinions, Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch, he wrote for a unanimous majority. The Supreme Court will vote on whether to confirm the nominee to the high court. that when an agency issues an interpretation of an ambiguous statutory provision under Chevron via an adjudication that displaces a contrary judicial decision, it is operating like legislators setting new policies. Per the 2015 ruling, such decisions should presumptively apply only prospectively. Beyond Judge Gorsuch's two major rulings in Gutierrez-Brizuela and De Niz Robles , he has tended to be more skeptical of deferring to agencies on legal questions. For example, in TransAm Trucking, Inc. v. Department of Labor , the panel majority upheld a determination by the Department ofLabor that a truck driver was terminated in violation of the law. question, the Board of Immigration Appeals again applied its own reinterpretation of the immigration statutes retroactively. Judge Gorsuch, writing for the majority in Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch , held the retroactive application invalid. He also penned a solo concurrence to take note of the "elephant in the room": [T]he fact is Chevron and Brand X permit executive bureaucracies to swallow huge amounts of core judicial and legislative power, he wrote. He wrote that to do otherwise would raise due process and equal protection concerns. Under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), a reviewing court must set aside agency action that is "not in accordance with law" Pursuant to the framework established by the Supreme Court in Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., a court will generally defer to an agency's interpretation of a statute that is seen to be silent or ambiguous on a particular issue. In National Cable & Telecommunications Ass'n v. Brand X Internet Services , the Supreme. Court ruled in favor of the cable company. narrowing of the scope of Chevron deference in future cases. Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion in that case, objecting to the majority's decision on pragmatic and constitutional grounds. Judge Gorsuch's opposition to the doctrine of Brand X on separation-of-powers grounds, on the other hand, finds harmony with Justice Scalia's view on the matter. But Judge Gorsuch acknowledged that as a federal appeals court judge, he was not in a position to overrule cases like Chevron and Brand X. panel that declined to defer to an agency's determination under Chevron and Brand X , the nominee wrote a separate concurring opinion calling into the question the wisdom and constitutionality of the doctrines created by both cases. Emphasizing the concept of separated powers envisioned by the Founders, Judge Gorsuch's opinion distinguished between the elected legislature's task of setting policy prospectively and the judiciary's duty of neutrally interpreting the law in retroactively adjudicating disputes. For the nominee, the constitutional remedy when the political branches disagree with the judiciary’s interpretation of the law is legislation. Gorsuch has also taken exception to the executive branch engaging in activities he regards as judicial functions. In a pair of cases interpreting two statutory provisions, one permitting the Attorney General to grant relief from removal to aliens and the other prohibiting it, he applied—but objected to—the Supreme Court's precedent in Chevron and Brand X. These two cases, which are discussed in more detail above, generally permit agency decisions to override, he says. The Supreme Court has ruled that agency decisions can be overruled. of federal agencies, Chevron deference, in Judge Gorsuch's view, operates as an "abdication" of the courts' duty to say what the law is. His concurrence notes that this practice implicates Due Process and Equal Protection concerns with "the political branches intruding on judicial functions" Judge Gorsuch raised concerns that, under Chevron , regulated entities are not given fair notice as to what the Law requires. He also questioned the propriety of consolidating power in the hands of a single branch of government. Court interpreted Chevro n to extend to an agency's interpretation of a silent or ambiguous statute even if a court had previously interpreted the statute in question. As a statistical matter, under the Chevron doctrine, courts have often deferred to an agencies interpretation of its own statutory authority. In engaging in substantive review of agency actions, Judge Gorsuch has questioned the size and power of the modern administrative state. He has declared that the number of regulations issued by agencies has "grown so exuberantly it's hard to keep up" that, in contrast to the majority's reasoning, the absence of a statutory definition did not create ambiguity. Instead, Judge Gorsuch thought the statute was clear and unambiguous, and therefore would have ruled against the agency's interpretation at Chevron 's first step. Discretionary and Factual Review. In contrast to his views on the doctrine of judicial deference to agency statutory interpretations, Judge. Gorsuch does not appear to have expressed strong objections to the mechanics of discretionary or factual review, a second major area of substantive administrative law. Gorsuch joined a majority opinion determining that an environmental group had standing to challenge the Bureau of Land Management's interpretation of its own prior order. The majority opinion concluded that the environmental group would suffer injury from the company beginning mining operations in Utah's Lila Canyon. Judge Gorsuch has also authored or joined other majority opinions in a number of other cases touching upon environmental issues in which the . interpretative reversals" were deference to the agency's interpretation. The court, citing Tenth Circuit precedent, determined that it owed deference. Gorsuch's reluctance to defer to agency legal interpretations, if applied consistently, could also lead to a lack of deference to agency interpretations of environmental statutes. Applying binding precedent, Judge Gorsuch has shown somedeference to agencies' interpretations of their own environmental regulations. One commentator has suggested that judicial scrutiny of agency decisions that determine whether operation of a certain type of facility is subject to Clean Water Act requirements, would not necessarily result in a legal outcome that was less protective of the environment. as in 2015 when EPA and the Army Corps of Engineers promulgated a rule defining the scope of waters protected under the Clean Water Act. Judge Gorsuch has broadly expressed skepticism regarding the extent to which judges should defer to an administrative agency's reasonable interpretation of silent or ambiguous language in a statute it administers. If Judge Gorsuch's views on Chevron deference were to prevail at the Court, there is some debate on what impact this would have for environmental law. On one hand, some commentators have suggested that a judge's refusal to defer could have a significant impact on the law. dissent in Backcountry argued that the environmental groups should not have been allowed to intervene in the case. The opinion also implied that he might have voted in favor of the groups joining the litigation if the government had abandoned its efforts to enforce the law at issue. Once a plaintiff in an environmental case has satisfied any jurisdictional and procedural requirements to bringing a lawsuit, a court might review the substance of the federal agency action at Issue. Sometimes, an action by an environmental agency may be based on that agency's interpretation of a statute that it administers. The court upheld the reinterpretation, which subjected the wastes to more stringent management requirements. The court held that EPA was not required to provide notice and comment to change a "tentative" interpretation of its own rules. Although the decision upheld EPA's change in its interpretation, the court showed some skepticism toward "agency . . . rulemaking procedures" The court also said the agency's original interpretation of the regulations was not made in accordance with the APA's notice and commented procedures. him, Judge Gorsuch has articulated distinct views that may signal how he would approach administrative law matters if he were elevated to the Supreme Court. A central threshold issue in administrative law cases is whether a challenged agency action is suitable for judicial review in the first place, including whether a court has jurisdiction over the case. While this inquiry is often dependent on the facts of a given case, a few trends can arguably be discerned from the various cases raising justiciability issues in which Judge Gorsuch presided. challenge to a federal agency policy and outside of that context, the nominee sided with the majority of the appellate panel in most cases where access to judicial relief was litigated. In the few judicial access cases in which Judge Gorsuch wrote a separate opinion, he has tended to do so on the basis that the court lacked jurisdiction over the suit. For example, in Wilderness Society v. Kane County , a majority in the en banc panel held that the plaintiffs lacked jurisdiction in the case. He has not demonstrated a proclivity towards a notably expansive or restrictive view of jurisdictional issues. court determined that an environmental group or regulated business had standing to sue. The limited number of cases on standing in the environmental context makes it difficult to discern any broad tendencies of Judge Gorsuch on the subject. In 2013, he dissented from a majority opinion holding that environmental groups were entitled to intervene as of right. He wrote that "Judges owe the same obligation of fidelity to the record and the law in all cases and to all persons appearing before them—regardless of who the litigant is" The outcome of an environmental case often depends on the court's resolution of threshold procedural issues. To proceed to the merits, a plaintiff will need to establish standing, a procedural threshold that has, at times, impeded environmental litigation. Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined opinions in a few cases involving whether an environmental group or regulated business had the right to bring or join a lawsuit challenging federal agency action. But there is no discernible trend in his environmental standing jurisprudence, he says. Gorsuch's en banc opinion rejected the government's invitation to interpret the operative statutory language according to an older, multi-factor test. In Hydro Resources, Inc. v. EPA, he concluded that the EPA had incorrectly determined that certain property was "Indian land," requiring its owner to obtain a mining permit from the agency. In so holding, the nominee adopted what he characterized as a "simple and predictable" two-part test for determining what constitutes Indian land, he says. temporary U.S. Forest Service order that allowed motorcycles—but prohibited all-terrain vehicles (ATVs)—on certain forest trails. Judge Gorsuch, writing for a unanimous court, determined that the appellants lacked a genuine stake in the outcome of the proceedings. In dismissing the case, the nominee wrote that a victory for the appellant "would seem to do nothing to help—and perhaps much to hurt—[their] cause," which was to reduce vehicles on forest trail. The majority reasoned that the groups had a right to intervene because the Forest Service might not adequately represent their interests if, for example, the agency shifted policy positions in favor of the industry group plaintiff during the litigation. Judge Gorsuch dissented, arguing that the environmental groups were already adequately represented by the government, and that a shift in Forest Service's position was "speculative" Although his dissent was significant, he was not the only member of the court to dissent in the case. The case involved a lawsuit challenging a Forest Service plan that allowed for limited off-highway vehicle use. of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act. At issue was whether the truck driver engaged in protected activity under the Act by "refus[ing] to operate a vehicle" due to safety concerns. The court deferred under Chevron to the Department's determination that the driver's decision to drive his truck away from his trailer in freezing conditions qualified as protected activity. Judge Gorsuch wrote a dissenting opinion, arguing that the statute's meaning was plain and that he rejected extending Chevron deference to the agency's interpretation.

ROUGE-1: 80.02, ROUGE-2: 74.25, ROUGE-L: 20.99
BERTScore: 56.58

==============================================
==================== [27/100] ====================
Summary:
require agencies to tailor their regulations to impose the least burden on society and to select approaches that maximize net benefits. Researchers have projected that more than half of Americans will be obese by 2030. Increases in weight are linked to increased risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, osteoarthritis, and several forms of cancer. It has been documented that obesity leads to decreased productivity, in terms of increased absenteeism as well as what researchers deem "presenteeism" (decreased outputs while at work) Obesity accounts for approximately 1% to 10% of a country's total health care costs. Obese individuals have medical costs that are 30% higher than individuals of normal weight. A recent study estimated that the annual medical cost of obesity was as high as $78.5 billion in 1998. Of that amount, about 10% was spent on medical care for the obese, according to the study. The study was conducted by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. roughly half of the cost was financed by Medicare and Medicaid. The authors estimated that cost may have risen to as much as $147 billion in 2008. The true cost and savings from any obesity prevention policy is challenging to determine. Researchers cannot isolate the effect of one specific policy relative to other interventions. In order to determine the effectiveness of an intervention such as menu labeling, researchers and policy makers may review the impact of these policies on individuals' behavior and monitor changes in the obesity rate over time. the proposed rule implementing this provision. The report also identifies issues that have generated industry and congressional interest regarding the FDA's interpretation of this provision in the proposed rule. Obesity rates have risen substantially in recent decades, from 13% of the adult population in the 1960s to 36% in 2009-2010. The basic cause of weight gain is an excess of energy intake over energy expenditure. At the population level, this has been reflected in indicators of decreased physical activity and increased calorie consumption. In adults, obesity is associated with a number of health problems. taking into account other factors that may also account for those changes, including the time needed for weight loss and obesity prevention programs to yield an effect, particularly on chronic disease costs. Taking into account the time it takes for weight-loss and obesity-prevention programs to pay off, such as the cost of those programs to start and maintain a healthy body mass index (BMI) and the amount of time needed to get to a healthy weight. The cost of obesity-related illnesses can also be influenced by a number of factors, including age, race and gender. The FDA's final determination on these definitions and the timeline for compliance and enforcement activities will affect the regulation's scope and cost. Faced with the possibility of budget cuts, it is unclear if the FDA will have the funding to enforce a strict interpretation of the accuracy of calorie and other nutrition information. However, the eventual public health benefit to fully comply is likely to outweigh the cost of implementing this rule. The cost and burden imposed on businesses implementing the rule is also likely to be a concern. FDA estimates initial cost of compliance at $315 million and ongoing annual cost of the provision at $44 million. Industry estimates the cost will exceed $1 billion in the first year. FDA also notes that the.society may also be weighed; quantification of this benefit can be challenging. The FDA's PRIA points to three elements of cost for this rule: (1) collecting and managing nutritional analysis records; (2) revising or replacing existing menus and menu boards; and (3) employee training. In the proposed rule, the FDA provides a six-month window for restaurants and SRFE to comply. Industry representatives have requested a longer timeline of one year for full compliance. Failure to comply with the regulations, once finalized, will render the food misbranded. If the language regarding the 80-120 rule is included in the finalrule, the accuracy of restaurant calorie information would be determined using the same standards as packaged foods. The restaurant industry has argued that the six- months window for compliance is not enough time for their constituents. FDA estimated that 27% of chain restaurants have already obtained nutrition information to comply with those state and local regulations. The Office of Management (OMB) is to review the regulations promulgated under the law to ensure, among other considerations, that they are consistent with Executive Orders 12866 and 13563, which require agencies to promulgate rules only after determining that the benefits of a regulation justify its costs, according to a report by the Center for Restaurant and Hospitality Innovation (CRH) elect to be subject to the requirements of the law, set an effective date, and outlined enforcement mechanisms for establishments that fail to comply. The proposed rule was available for public comment through July 5, 2011, and a final rule is expected by the end of 2012. The following sections describe the components of the proposed rule that have invoked concern or debate, and the policy implications of the rulemaking process. The report also provides a discussion of the issues that have been raised in the public comment period. At issue is the scope of covered establishments. Some have argued that Option 1 is too broad and that grocery and convenience stores should not be covered by the rule. The state and local menu labeling regulations that have been enacted in the United States generally do not apply to grocery stores. Some Members of Congress have proposed legislation directing the FDA to narrowly interpret the law by excluding primarily retail entities, because the perceived burden of including those entities outweighs the perceived potential benefits. The original sponsors of the bill disagree. of floor space devoted to food and regardless of whether food sales constitute a large or small portion of the establishments' total business. This would include food outlets such as movie theaters, bowling alleys, and other entertainment venues, as well as grocery and convenience stores. Those who argue for the narrower version, including industry groups such as the Food Marketing Institute, feel that the FDA has overstepped its statutory authority. They feel that grocery stores should not be included in the rule for a number of reasons, including disproportionate burden on grocery stores. exempt movie theaters, amusement parks, general merchandise stores with in-house concession stands, hotels, and transportation carriers such as trains and airplanes. The alternate definition (see Option 2 in Table 1 ) would also generally exempt these entities, as well as grocery and convenience stores. Other restaurants and SRFE that are not regulated under the proposed definitions may voluntarily register with an "authorized official" to be subject to the requirements of this regulation and would also be considered "covered establishments," according to the proposed rule. as movie theaters, bowling alleys, bookstore cafes, and all establishments that sell restaurant-like food to consumers. Some Members of Congress, with support from the grocery industry, have expressed concern over Option 1. Some have introduced legislation that would define SRFE as establishments that derive more than 50% of their revenue from restaurant-type food, similar to the proposed Option 2 in Table 1. Members ofCongress who advocate for a broader definition of SRFE note that Congress intended the law to apply to "restaurants as well as other retail food establishments" proposed rule on nutrition labeling in restaurants and similar retail food establishments provided background information on food consumption outside the home. It also listed the requirements of Section 4205 of the ACA, and the proposed rule included definitions for a number of terms that were not defined in the law. While some definitions are clear and straightforward, others have generated debate, including the FDA's determination of the scope of covered establishments and variation among establishments. All of these factors could influence the impact on affected restaurants and SRFE. Under the ACA, covered establishments are required to provide calorie and nutrition information for "food that is a standard menu item" These items include combination meals, variable menu items, self-service food, and food on display. Under the amended law, restaurants and SRFE on all restaurant and drive-thru menu boards. Under ACA Section 4205, now FFDCA Section 403(q)(5)(H), foods that do not require labeling are custom orders, which are prepared in a specific manner at the customer's request. of the FFDCA (to provide the FDA with the authority to require and regulate nutrition labeling), and added a new Section 403A (to preempt state and local nutrition labeling regulations) This section provides an overview of the statutory authorities of the FDA that are relevant to this issue, and how those authorities were amended by the ACA. The FDA is authorized to create nutrition is ready for human consumption, which is the type described in (1) and "which is offered for sale to consumers" The 1938 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) granted FDA the authority to regulate food products and their ingredients. FDA's authority over nutrition labeling of those products was created by the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act (NLEA), which amended Section 403 upon regulators' request. The FFDCA requires all food regulated by the FDA to bear labeling with the serving size, total calories per serving, and the amount of various nutrients. It also provides the Secretary the Authority to remove or otherwise change nutrient information requirements by regulation. the layout and design of the label to assist consumers. The FFDCA has provisions regarding its preemption of state and local nutrition labeling laws. Infant formula and medical foods, which are subject to other labeling requirements, are exempt from the nutrition labeling requirements. Foods in packaging that is too small to comply with the required information, food that contains insignificant amounts of all the nutrients required to be listed, and foods offered by an individual who has grossed less than $500,000 from food sales are exempt. labeling requirements for most foods, and to regulate nutrient content claims and health claims on food labels. There are a number of conditions under which a food would be deemed misbranded, including if its label is "false or misleading" The FDA generally does not have the authority to order a recall of a misbranded food. Rather, the agency relies on food companies to voluntarily recall adulterated, misbranded or otherwise unsafe products, either on their own or on the FDA's behalf. The FDA has proposed to refrain from enforcement until it has completed rulemaking. not always pre-portioned (e.g., deli items), which means that these items will not be served in standardized portions. Some feel that these should be labeled as per portion, rather than whole item. Pizza companies have argued against "whole pie" labeling, because they feel it is not an accurate representation of what an individual would typically eat in one sitting. FDA does not have mandatory recall authority for food that is deemed misbranded due to nutrition labeling. Although the FDA does. other health problems, including diabetes and high blood pressure. These health issues disproportionately affect low-income individuals and certain minorities. The federal government has sought to address these health concerns using a variety of approaches, including programs (e.g., the "Let's Move" campaign) and legislation. At the state and local level, lawmakers have also proposed a variety. of approaches,. including taxation and prohibition of high-calorie items, and requiring calorie labeling of restaurant food. The number of calories consumed by individuals in the United. The number of overall calories consumed has increased from a daily average of 1,875 calories during 1977-1978 to 2,067 calories during 2005-2008. 32% of Americans' calorie intake from 2005- 2008 came from foods consumed outside the home, including foods consumed in restaurants and school cafeterias. Consumers tend to underestimate the number of calories in restaurant meals. In one study, lunchtime customers at a fast food restaurant underestimated the calorie content of their meal. In another study, fast food customers underestimated the calories in their lunchtime meal. Public health stakeholders have successfully advocated for policies on restaurant menu nutrition labeling at the state and local level. Section 4205 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) amended the FDA's nutrition labeling requirements in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) The ACA provision required nutrition labeling for foods sold in chain restaurants and vending machines. Both were previously exempt from the FDA’s nutrition labeling authority. This report provides a discussion of the role of nutrition labeling in combating obesity. The FDA published the preliminary regulatory impact analyses (PRIA) for restaurant nutrition labeling and vending machine calorie labeling in March 2011. The PRIA for restaurant menu labeling analyzed the possible regulatory and economic impact of Section 4205 and proposed options for approaches to the regulations. The proposed rules generated hundreds of comments from industry, Members of Congress, and the public. Introductory material for the proposed rules can be found on the FDA's website at: http://www.fda.gov/menulabeling. Association, the American Medical Association, and others. Menu labeling laws have been enacted in New York City, California, and several other jurisdictions. For the restaurant industry, state and local regulations have resulted in variable and sometimes conflicting requirements. The restaurant industry has made it clear that complying with varying local laws and regulations is more burdensome than complying with uniform national standards would be. New research on nutrition labeling of menus and menu boards suggests this approach may be successful. The research was conducted by the University of California, San Francisco. Long-term impact of state and local menu labeling regulations on population level obesity rates has not been widely studied. One question for policymakers is whether the inclusion of supermarkets and convenience stores is instrumental to the effectiveness of the menu labeling law. In anticipation of the final rule, some establishments have moved forward with menu labeling. McDonald's, the largest fast food company in the United States, announced in September 2012 that it would list calorie information on its menu. The National Restaurant Association supported inclusion of a restaurant menu labeling provision in the ACA. their lunch by 23%. Calorie labeling on menus has been adopted as one approach to making consumers aware of the amount of calories they are consuming. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have deemed menu labeling a "winnable battle," and the approach is supported by the American Heart Association. In one study, consumers were less likely to choose higher-calorie items when provided with calorie information on the restaurant menu. Restaurant menu labeling as a policy option for obesity prevention has garnered broad support from the public health community. In one study in New York City, one in six fast food consumers reported using the posted calorie information. In King County, Washington, researchers found that the nutrition labeling law affected restaurants' behavior as well. However, because these laws and regulations are fairly recent, the results may not be as clear-cut as they could have been, experts say. The study was published in the journal Food Marketing Research and Education, which is published by the Association for Food Marketing and Education (AFCE). are required to disclose the number of calories in each item "as usually prepared and offered for sale," and provide a statement on suggested total daily caloric intake "in a clear and conspicuous manner" According to the proposed rule, calorie information must be provided adjacent to the name of the menu item so that it is clearly associated with that item. Establishments can choose to implement this requirement by including a column on the menu or menu board (including drive-through menu boards) with the heading "Calories" or "Cal" The restaurant or SRFE must also provide a statement concerning daily recommended caloric intake, presented in a manner that enables the public to understand the significance of each item in the context of a total daily diet. A 2,000 calorie diet daily diet is used as the basis for general nutrition advice; however, individual calorie needs may vary. The proposed rule would require covered entities to post a succinct statement about daily recommended calorie intake on menus and menu boards. The proposal would also require that additional nutrition information is available upon request. require that covered establishments declare calories on menus and menu boards to the nearest 5-calorie increment up to and including 50 calories. The FDA estimates a cost of $269 per item to determine this information, while some industry groups have determined it will cost as much as $500 to $1,000 per item. In the proposed rule, the FDA proposes use of the "80-120 rule," which permits a narrow deviation between the posted calorie value for a particular item and the actual calorie content of the item. allowing flexibility based on the context. The FDA estimates the cost of a menu board at $550. Industry estimates range as high as $1,500 per menu board. Calorie information must have a "reasonable basis" and be displayed adjacent to the name of the standard menu item on all menus and menu boards. The ACA required covered establishments to disclose the number of calories contained in standard menu items as usually prepared and offered for sale. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. must include the same nutrition information that is currently required by law on food package labeling. FDA further proposes that the term "primary writing" be interpreted from a customer's vantage point. This would include drive-through menus, take-out and delivery menus, and information posted on the Internet by the covered establishment. Advertisements would not be considered primary writing, but a menu sent through the mail might be, if customers routinely order from it. The nature and use of primary writing may vary depending on the type of restaurant or SRFE. Section 4205 required that nutrient content disclosures have a "reasonable basis," such as nutrient databases, cookbooks, or laboratory analyses. The law requires HHS to establish standards for determining and disclosing the nutrient content for standard menu items that come in different flavors, varieties, or combinations. Foods exempted from the law include items not listed on a menu or menu board (such as condiments and items for general use) and food items that are being market-tested. The FDA was further instructed to consider certain factors in rulemaking, including the standardization of recipes and preparation methods. per calendar year; part of a customary market test; and condiments available for general use, such as salt, pepper, and ketchup. The FDA tentatively concluded that the new menu labeling requirements do not apply menu items that a restaurant has that would be covered by the proposed rule. The grocery industry argues that this estimate is inaccurate, and that many more items at grocery stores would be affected by the adoption of Option 1 in the final rule, due to the inclusion of self-service food and food on display. preparation, making it more challenging to adhere to the 80-120 rule. Critics note that wide variation due to individual order preparation was one of the reasons the FDA exempted restaurant food from the NLEA regulations in 1993. The restaurant industry has argued that adhering to a stricter standard of "reasonable basis" may discourage smaller independent operators from participating voluntarily. Calorie counts may also be difficult to determine due to varying portion sizes. In grocery stores, foods that are "packaged and prepared for immediate consumption" are exempt. in food sales) unless the individual makes a health or nutrition claim for that food are also exempt. Foods with insignificant amounts of more than one-half the required nutrients may use a simplified labeling format. Prior to passage of the ACA, two other categories of food were also exempt from nutrition labeling requirements. These categories were (1) food "which is served in restaurants or other establishments in which food is served for immediate human consumption or which is sold for sale or used in such establishments," and (2) food which is processed and prepared primarily in a retail establishment. to restaurant food; however, if it applies to restaurant-type food, which would include many self-serve and deli items, then the affected number of items would be closer to 500 to 15,000 items. The proposed rule includes clarification of several concepts that were noted but not defined in the ACA, including the medium (i.e., menu, table tent, place mat), placement, and layout of the information provided to consumers. Under the law, covered establishments must provide calorie information on menus and menu boards. Proposed definition of restaurant-type food would mean grab-and-go items, such as sandwiches or meals prepared in a restaurant or SRFE, would also be regulated. The grocery industry disagrees with this definition. The interpretation of "variable menu items" has raised grocers' concern because certain prepared items vary in composition according to seasonality, altering the calorie and nutrient content. Composition of other products may also vary according to brand and ingredient availability. The FDA has estimated that grocery stores and supermarkets have approximately one-half of the number of restaurants in the United States.

ROUGE-1: 75.20, ROUGE-2: 70.24, ROUGE-L: 25.63
BERTScore: 64.00

==============================================
==================== [28/100] ====================
Summary:
We plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to interested congressional committees, the agencies included in our review, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. The major contributors to this report are listed in appendix. The Department of the Army Corps of Engineers said they had no comments on the draft report.localities.com. John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (continued) operations during fiscal year 1994. National Aeronautics and Space Administration National Archives and Records Administration National Endowment for the Arts. Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission Thrift Deposit Protection. Department of Health and Human Services Department of Housing and Urban Development Department of Army Corps of Engineers, Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board, Federal Mine Safety and health review commission, among others. Please contact me at (202) 512-8387 if you have any questions concerning this report. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006. any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. The list will be sent to you via email or a text message. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Hoover Dam, site rentals of cabins, trailers, and camping and group-use sites, and land-use fees. Public Information products, the review and approval of pipeline rights-of-way, Cenozoic Publication. User fees from applicants for licenses to engage in interstate commerce, parties in rail authority proceedings and compliant and compliant-type declaratory order proceedings (49 C.F.R. 1002.3) Registration fees from handlers of authorized drugs (doctors, pharmacies, and others) Sale of utilities (electricity, steam, water, and sewage treatment) to Federal Prison Industries, Inc. (Trade name-UNICOR); sale of meal tickets; rental income from staff housing located at various federal prisons. Sale of farm by-products; fees from the care and custody of state prisoners from various states Gift shop sales, tickets, and tours National Archives and Records Management Reproduction services, the sale of reference material, over-the-counter sales, publication sales, audiovisual sales and rentals, and Presidential library admissions. interest earned on investments, telecommunications income from billings, earned assessments, provision for assessment credit, exit/ entrance fees, recoverable expenses from the Uniformed Bank Performance Report (UBPR) collections, miscellaneous income from seminars, rents, and others. Collection of civil penalties, the sale of federal campaign disclosure reports and records, and revenues from FOIA User fee collections, fines and penalty payments, and Davis Law receipts. Filing fee from persons acquiring voting securities or assets who are required to file pre-merger notifications (15 U.S.C. 18a) with FOIA and requests made to the Research Division Duplicating costs under FOIA and the sale of Board publications reports License and inspection fees, annual fees, and other regulatory costs Rebates for volume discounts on governmentwide total quality training costs Fees for over 80 types of applications, statements, and reports filed pursuant to each of the statutes the Commission administers. User fees charged to cover the costs of materials, brochures, and space rental for seminars, workshops, business award events, and others. Ad valorem fees for cargo on vessels going into U.S. ports. observation decks and viewing machines at Eisenhower Lock; fees for vessel service, damage repairs, and violations; rental of office space; pleasure craft and noncommercial tolls for use of the seaway. Civil penalties, sale of test tires and vehicles, royalties, FOIA requests, Corporate Average Fuel Economy fine (CAFE) penalties, and user fees. User fees for processing applications to sell ships; operating the computer-aided Operations Research Facility at the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy. by state agencies. Total (fees + special accounts) Rate of return (percent) Transportation (including ferry, cruise, tourmobile) Food service operations, lodging, campgrounds, vending machines, retail sales, river running, big game hunting, marinas, ski resorts, transportation, cruise boats, boat docks, coin-operated copiers, and others. Retail sales, marina, beaches, golf courses. Lodging, food service operations,. pools, horseback riding, and firewood sales. bars, marinas, boat docks, horseback riding, and golf courses Retail sales, recreation equipment rentals, food service operations, marina, golf courses, tennis courts, theaters, and office and special purpose space Tennessee did not track concessioners’ revenues. It charged a flat concessions fee. Application fees and the sale of patent information. Fees for rule reviews, designations, Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), leverage audits, registration, reparations, photocopying, and publications. Most of the $20.5 billion was to be either deposited in Treasury’s special account or retained by the agency for its use. Agency officials estimated that activities generating $175 million, or about 1 percent, were not conducive to concessions operations. The activities included the sale of hydroelectric power, audiovisual products, coins, medals, and commemorative items; tours of the Hoover Dam; operation of gift shops and reproduction services; and admission to presidential libraries. In appendix VII, the activities varied and included the selling of Hydroelectric Power, Audiovisually Products, Coins, Medals, and Commemorative Items. of the $20.5 billion in income, could be converted into concessions operations. These activities included the sale of hydroelectric power, tours of Hoover Dam, and collection of user or entrance fees. On March 21, 1996, we provided copies of a draft of this report to the heads of the departments of the six land management agencies for comment. We did not ask for comments from all 75 agencies in our survey because to do so would have been impractical. The six agencies accounted for over 92 percent of total concessions. More than 10,000 megawatts of power (electricity) from 54 hydro power plants. Power generated at 22 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers projects located in a 10-state southeastern region. Revenue and fees obtained from contractor parking, fitness dues, and other fees. Gas sales to customers who redistribute to retail customers. Power from 21 multipurpose water resource projects of the Army Corps. and 9 of the Bureau of Reclamation, plus power from nonfederal generating plants. were to determine (1) the extent of concessions operations in the federal government, (2) the rate of return received by the federalGovernment from concessions, and (3) how the federalgovernment’s rate ofreturn compared to other governments’ rates of return. To accomplish objectives one, two, and four, we used three questionnaires to request data from 75 federal executive departments and agencies listed in the 1993/94 U.S. Government Manual. The first questionnaire requested summary information on all concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994. The second questionnaire asked for detailed agreement-specific information on each concessions agreements either initiated or extended during fiscal Year 1994. amount of revenues and fees, information on whether competition was used to select the concessioner, whether fees was one of the factors considered during competition, and how competed agreements were advertised. The third questionnaire asked for information on agencies’ income-generating activities that were not concessions. We pretested the questionnaires at six federal agencies or agency components: the Department of Agriculture’s Forest Service, the Army Corps of Engineers, the General Services Administration, the Smithsonian, and the Smithsonian. 27 of the 75 federal departments and agencies surveyed reported having concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994. Fifteen of the 27 agencies either initiated or extended at least 1 concession agreement. The Central Intelligence Agency provided an oral briefing on its concessions program and did not provide any details on its concession agreements. In response to our questionnaires, we received information on 5,000 concessions agreements. Our information about the agreements comes from only the agencies’ questionnaire responses for the agreements. However, to check whether the questionnaires were filled out completely and accurately, we (1) checked selected responses against copies of the concessions agreement. information on all concessions operations and detailed agreement-specific information (including copies of the concessions agreements) on each agreement that was either initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994. We interviewed federal concessions management staff at both headquarters and field levels and nonprofit organizations interested in concessions issues. We obtained and reviewed the laws, regulations, and policies for each federal entity’s concessions operations. Further, if concessions services in agencies were provided under agreements with GSA, we requested agencies not to include these operations in their responses. Twenty-seven of the 75 departments and agencies we surveyed reported that they had concessions operations during fiscal year 1994. Data on all concessioners’ revenues were not available. Some agencies reported that gross revenue data was not available because concessioners paid a flat concessions fee and the agency had no requirement to track gross revenues. As a result, Table II.1 contains overall information reported by the 27 departments and agency. Forty-two departments andagency responded because some had more than one component managing concessions. competitive agreements. Government received over $82 million from concessions operations during fiscal year 1994. Nine of the 42 agencies or agency components also estimated that concessioners provided an additional $4.7 million in nonfee compensation by maintaining government property. Agency responded that concessions fees were sometimes waived because of the following reasons: (1) reduced prices on vended items, (2) difficulty in obtaining contractors, and (3) a more attractive procurement was needed because of a lack of offerors, appendix III. The 42 agencies or agency components reported that they had 11,263 concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994. concessions operations ranged from small fishing guide services generating annual revenues of less than $1,000 to multimillion-dollar recreation corporations. The National Park Service and the Forest Service concessions operations accounted for about 90 percent of the six land management agencies’ reported concessioners’ gross revenues and fees paid to the government. Some agency officials said they had no requirement to track concessioners' revenues when concessioners paid a flat concessions fee. government’s land is usually needed to complete a service, such as adding a ski lift. However, other activities such as river running, jeep tours through scenic areas, and hunting trips, were very profitable to concessioners. On the basis of questionnaire data, we determined that 6 of these types of concessions were among the 50 concessions with the highest reported gross revenues to the concessioners in our survey and were initiated in fiscal year 1994. The reported information showed that the agreements were conducive to competition. Bureau of Reclamation responded that some revenue data were not available mainly because concessioners were not required to report revenues for certain concessions where they generally paid a flat concessions fee. Survey information was not available for the 225 concessions agreements that are managed. The 37 concessioners represent only a portion of the agency’s concessioners, according to the agency. The agency could not market Native Americans arts and crafts—an activity the agency couldn’t do, the agency said. It also could not charge a limited profit rate for concessioners. investment income (interest earned from the investment of operating funds in U.S. Treasury securities) Harbor maintenance fees; commissions on pay telephone stations; charges for testing, inspecting and grading services. fees and other charges for miscellaneous services and Consolidated Omnibus Budget and Reconciliation Act (COBRA) The objectives of our review were to determine (1) the extent of concessions operations in the federal government, (2) the rate of return the federalGovernment received from concessions, and (3) how it compared to other governments’ rates of return. that agencies sent to us; (2) checked agency totals for concessions revenues and fees against prior GAO reports; (3) followed up with agency staff in selected cases to clarify their responses. (4) manually reviewed all pages of each form; (5) had specially trained staff convert the data to computer-readable format and verify their entries. (6) manually checked computerized data against the original forms, including all data on concessions revenues. and fees; and (7) conducted computerized checks for data consistency. but delegated concessions management to park managers. As shown in appendix VI, concessions agreements entered into on a competitive basis had higher rates of return than those that were not competed. For campground permits where agencies reported both revenue and fee data, agencies reported that they competed 82 percent of the permits issued in fiscal year 1994. The impact of competition on the rate of return remained when the differences among services were considered. Questionnaire information showed that nonland management agencies competed more of their concessions than the land management agencies. initiated or extended in fiscal year 1994. We calculated the rate of return by dividing gross revenues into the sum of (1) concessions fees and (2) the amount concessioners deposited into special accounts for improvements. The rate represents the percentage of reported concessioners’ gross revenues that the federal government is to receive. Our analysis of the reported data showed a rate of. return of 2.8 percent for the 6 land management agencies’ concessions, 9.2 percent for. the nonland management agencies' concessions, and 3.1 percent for 50. concessions initiated on a noncompetitive basis. agreements comes from only the agency’s questionnaire responses for the agreements. Because agencies did not collect revenue data on all concessions, we could calculate the rate of return only for those agreements where agencies reported both the revenues and fees. We used the detailed information they provided on agreements containing both revenue and fee data that rate of returns were calculated. We also interviewed federal concessions management staff at both headquarters and field levels and officials of the National Parks and Conservation Association and the National Park Hospitality Association. Fifty components from 29 of the 75 federal agencies we surveyed said they received income of $20.5 billion in 1994 from activities that were not concessions. New agreements with preferential right of contract renewal resulted in a 3.8 percent rate of return, and those without the preference resulted in 6.4 percent. New and extended agreements granting possessory interest resulted in. a rate of returns of 3.7 percent. Those without possessoryinterest resulted. in a rate. of return of 4.5 percent. For the purpose of this assignment, we defined “concessions’ as private or public entities using federally owned/leased property. Concessions services included, but were not limited to, food operations, vending machines, retail shops, public pay telephones, barber/beauty shops, transportation, lodging, marinas, and campgrounds. We excluded day care centers, employee association stores, and services provided by the visually impaired under the Randolph-Sheppard Act. All 75 agencies responded to our request. State officials said key factors for selecting concessioners were the amount of fees generated for the government and bidders’ experience and financial status. According to state officials, agreements exempted from competition included short-term permits expecting to gross a low level of revenue, generally $5,000 or less. Officials for one state also said the state would enter into a noncompetitive agreement with a business that initiated a proposal for a concession, but if the operation proved lucrative after 1 year, they would renegotiate the concessions agreement. The preferential right for contract renewal is the right of incumbent concessioners to match or better the best offer received from firms competing for the concessions contract. The existing concessioner must have performed satisfactorily and must have been under the existing contract for 2 years. This preference reduces competition because it may limit the number of prospective concessioners. Businesses are reluctant to expend time and money preparing bids in a process where the award is most likely going to the incumbent contractor. The National Water Authority is a government agency. Local governments supply many of the services and accommodations provided on federal property to the public. Each year, millions of people use the services made possible through these agreements. A long-term agreement, which generally involves a large financial investment by the concessioner for construction or capital improvements, may last up to 50 years. A short-term permit or license, which typically requires little or no financial investment in facilities by the concessionser, mayLast up to 5 years. Each agency is responsible for developing, implementing, and monitoring its concessions program to ensure that Most land management agencies generally have discretion whether to compete concessions agreements. Concessions Policy Act of 1965, governing National Park Service concessions, is the only law covering concessions that specifically requires competition. Nonland management agencies reported that they either entered into concessions agreements using the Federal Acquisition Regulation or other policies that under most circumstances provide for competition.that nonland management agency entered into 101 of the agreements and competed 96 percent of them. The land management agency initiated 2,133 of these concessions agreements and Competition 8.6 percent of the time. National Park Service to give the public the right to compete for concessions contracts. However, competition is limited by the requirement that existing concessioners who perform satisfactorily be given a preferential right of contract renewal when the agreement expires. Officials in the land management agencies said that more competition is needed, but they also said it can not always be used. They said some operations could not be competed, such as ski areas where major portions of the operations are located on private land and the concessioners have a substantial financial investment in the activities. No overall federal concessions policy exists. In exchange for use of federal property, concessioners pay the government a concessions, franchise, permit, or license fee. The primary purpose of the six land management agencies’ concessions programs is to encourage operation of a public-private partnership to provide recreation for visitors to national parks, forests, and other public lands and waters. Concessions services include food service, retail sales, ski resorts, lodging, and marinas. We revised the questionnaires on the basis of their detailed feedback. Nonland management agencies such as the General Services Administration and U.S. Postal Service provide concessions services. The primary purpose of their concessions programs is to provide high-quality merchandise and convenient services at reasonable prices. Their concessions services include food service, retail sales such as gift shops, vending machines, and coin-operated photocopiers. Since the mid 1970s, we have conducted several reviews of the concessions programs in the land management agencies. (See the list of Related GAO Products on pp. 43 and 44.) rate of return. He added that three other factors also affect the rate of return: the National Park Service’s periodic operational reviews of concessioners, which may increase maintenance costs. The legislative requirement calls for National Park service concessioners’ prices to be comparable to those of similar services and facilities under similar circumstances, he said. It is likely that all larger concessioners would incur the costs of financial and routine maintenance audits, regardless of the agencies’ requirements, the author said. The Concessions Policy Act of 1965 gives National Park Service concessioners the right to be compensated for improvements they construct on federal lands. The legislation specifies that unless otherwise provided by agreement, the compensation must be based on “sound value,” which is generally defined as reconstruction cost less depreciation, not to exceed fair market value. In 1993, the Park Service issued a new policy covering standard concessions contract language, which included a provision to reduce possessory interest for contracts awarded after January 7, 1993. About 70 percent of the 42 agencies or agency components responding to our survey said retaining fees is or would be beneficial to them. The Concessions Policy Act of 1965 grants existing National Park Service concessioners a preferential right of contract renewal when their agreements expire. An official from one of the agencies that retained fees said that since the fees support agency operations, staff put forth extra effort to obtain a high rate of return on concessions. Bureaus of Land Management and Reclamation—reiterated the statement in our report that the primary purpose of the land management agencies’ concessions programs is to provide a service to the public. Park Service said that between 1985 and 1989, 28 of 29 contracts up for renewal were awarded to the incumbent concessioner. Officials from the four states and Canada said their regulations do not allow concessioners to acquire possessory interests. However, they said they consider the amount of a concessioner’s investment when deciding the length of the contract. According to the officials, concessioners are given enough time to make a profit and amortize their investments, but the maximum term of contracts is 20 years. From this reported information, we calculated the rate of return by dividing gross revenues into the sum of concessions fees and special accounts. The information showed that these five states had relatively high rates of return. We visited two of the states—Maryland and Tennessee—and met with their officials. We selected the five states on the basis of each government’s rate ofreturn. The data we obtained from objectives one, two, and four and sent a questionnaire to five state governments and Canada. return. California, Maryland, Michigan, and Missouri reported obtaining rates of return ranging from 11 to 17 percent. Canada reported receiving a 9.8 percent rate of return on its concessions operations. Canada and the four states reported that their concessions services included marinas, food service operations, campgrounds, and retail sales. All four states and Canada said they generally compete concessions agreements. The National Parks and Conservation Association noted the states as having high rates ofreturn from concessions. The states were California,Maryland, Michigan and Missouri. The rates of return ranged from a low rate of 2 percent to a high rate of 47 percent for the 15 service categories. Food service operations averaged the lowest rate of return (2 percent), and coin-operated copiers in U.S. Postal Service facilities averaged the highest rate ofreturn (47 percent) Four states and Canada reported on average a 12.7 percent rate ofReturn. Other governments reported receiving higher rates ofreturn from concessions operations than the overall federal rate. The rates ofReturn ranged from the low rates of2 percent to the high rates of47 percent. Federal Lands: Views on Reform of Recreation Concessioners (GAO-T/RCED-95-250, July 25, 1995). Federal Lands: Improvements Needed in Managing Short-Term Concessioner (GAo/RCed-93-177, Sep. 14, 1993). Federal Land: Little Progress Made in Improving Oversight of Concessiones (GAE/T-RCED -93-42, May 27, 1993) Forest Service: Little Assurance That Fair Market Value Fees Are Collected From Ski Areas (GAA/RCeds -93 -107, Apr. 16, 1993.) National Park Service: Policies and Practices for Determining Concessioned’ Building Use Fees. Parks and Recreation: Interior Did Not Comply With Legal Requirements for the Outdoors Commission ( GAO/RCedes -88-65, Mar. 25, 1988). Needs of the National Park Service (GAO/T-RCED-88-27, Mar. 23, 1988). Parks and Recreation: Limited Progress Made in Documenting and Mitigating Threats to the Parks. Parks and Rec: Recreational Fee Authorizations, Prohibitions, and Limitations. Corps of Engineers and Bureau of Reclamation’s Recreation and Construction Backlogs. The National Park service Has Improved Facilities at 12 Park Service Areas. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. We selected Canada to obtain information on another country’s experience. Because it was impractical for us to obtain comments from all 75 agencies, we provided copies of a draft of this report to the heads of the departments of the six land management agencies for comment. The six agencies accounted for over 92 percent of the concessions. On March 25, 1996, we discussed the draft report with officials designated by the departments. Their comments are discussed on the U.S. National Park System. The report was published in November 1995. 1996, we discussed the draft report with officials designated by the departments. The officials said they generally agreed with the facts as presented in the draft. Officials from four of the agencies—National Park Service, Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Bureau of Reclamation—said they agreed with draft report. The report was published in 1996 and is available on the National Park Service website and on the Internet at http://www.nps.gov/nps/nr/nr-nr/npr/nr.html.

ROUGE-1: 72.39, ROUGE-2: 67.86, ROUGE-L: 24.24
BERTScore: 50.87

==============================================
==================== [29/100] ====================
Summary:
soldiers were retained on active duty medical extensions. One of the soldiers told us, “People did not know who was responsible for what. No one knew who to contact or what paperwork was needed….” As a result, all four have experienced gaps in receiving active duty pay and associated medical benefits while they remained under a physician’s care for injuries received while on their original active duty tour. To support themselves and their families, these four soldiers needed the active duty military pay they were entitled to receive. Four soldiers were eligible for continued active duty pay and associated medical benefits due to their involvement in Operation Enduring Freedom. Although these injuries precluded them from resuming their civilian jobs, they experienced significant pay problems as well as problems in receiving needed medical care. All four soldiers experienced pay disruptions because existing guidance was not clear on actions needed to ensure that these injuries were treated properly. The soldiers' pay problems were a result of the lack of clearly defined implementing procedures in this area, the authors say. active Army locations directed the soldiers back to the USPFO. Army Regulation 135-381 provides that Army Guard soldiers who are incapacited as a result of injury, illness, or disease that occured while on active duty for more than 30 consecutive days are eligible for continued health benefits. With medical extension status, soldiers are entitled to continue to receive active duty pays, allowances, and medical benefits while under a physician’s care. We also found procedures were not clear on how to ensure timely processing of active duty medical extensions. at Walter Reed and my congressman. My orders were finally cut. In the end, I was discharged 2 weeks before my care should have been completed because the second amendment to my orders never came. The whole mess was blamed on the ‘state’ and nothing was ever done to fix it.” One sergeant was required to stay at Womack, the medical facility at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, while on medical extension. His home was in New Jersey. He had not been home for about 20. months, since his call to active duty. While he was recovering from his injuries, his wife was experiencing a high-risk pregnancy and depended upon her husband’s medical coverage. Even though she lived in New Jersey, she scheduled her medical appointments near Fort Bragg to be with her husband. The sergeant submitted multiple requests to extend his active duty medical extension status because the paperwork kept getting lost. Lapses in obtaining approvals for continued active dutyMedical extension status caused the sergeant’S military medical benefits and his activeduty pay to be cut. one was really looking after their interest or even cared about them. These problems resulted in numerous personal and financial difficulties for these soldiers. “Not having this resolved means that my family has had to make greater sacrifices and it leaves them in an unstable environment. This has caused great stress on my family that may lead to divorce.” “My orders ran out while awaiting surgery and the care center tried to deny me care. My savings account was reduced to nearly 0 because I was also not getting paid while I waited” be stopped several times. He told us that because of gaps in his medical extension orders, he was denied medical coverage, resulting in three delays in scheduling a surgery. He also told us he received medical bills associated with his wife’s hospitalization for the delivery of their premature baby as a result of these gaps in coverage. We found several instances in which existing DOD and Army regulations and guidance in the pay and allowance area are outdated and conflict with more current legislative and DOD guidance. Some existing guidance reflected pay policies and procedures dating back to Operations Desert. to receive the higher housing allowance (with dependents) rate. As a result, several soldiers’ dependent information was not loaded into the personnel system correctly, and they were paid a single rate housing allowance instead of the higher married rate allowance. Other soldiers did not receive the correct housing allowance because they did not turn in complete forms and documentation to initiate the correct allowance rate or were late in turning in documents. For example, one soldier, who appeared to have submitted his lease agreement 6 days after being called to active duty, did not received the correcthousing allowance amount for the first 2 months of active duty. that he submitted documentation on three separate occasions to support the housing allowance he should have received as of the beginning of his October 2001 mobilization. Each time he was told to resubmit the documentation because his previously submitted documents were lost. Subsequently, while he was deployed, he made additional repeated inquiries as to when he would receive his housing allowance pay. He was told that it would be taken care of when he returned from his deployment. However, when he Returned from his Deployment, he was. told that he should has taken care. of this issue while in the U.S. 42 soldiers from the unit were underpaid their entitled family separation allowance when they mobilized. The underpayments occurred as a result of Maryland USPFO military pay officials’ errors in calculating the start and stop dates for this allowance. Several soldiers did not receive the correct type of basic training. The Army Guard command generated an amendment on August 21, 2003, to reinstate the original order to avoid future questions regarding the soldier’s tour of duty. The amendment was passed by the Maryland Army Guard Command and signed into law on August 22, 2003. family separation allowance when the soldier had only been on active duty for 2 weeks. According to the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 27, soldiers are only eligible for this allowance after they have been separated more than 30 days from their families on a continuous active duty assignment. This overpayment problem had not been resolved as of March 31, 2003. USPFO officials were unable to provide supporting documentation explaining why five soldiers continued to receive a family separation allowance after available documentation showed that these soldiers’ active duty tours had officially ended. and eligibility requirements for the basic allowance for housing and the family separation allowance, respectively. For example, during our audit work at one of our case study locations, we determined that because of inconsistent interpretations of existing guidance for “dependents” in entering transactions, a number of Maryland soldiers were not paid the correct amount. At another case study location, we found that existing guidance on eligibility determination was misinterpreted so that soldiers were erroneously refused the “single parent soldiers family separation allowances” to which they were entitled. allowance for housing after being mobilized as specified in the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 26. We were unable to determine specific causes and amounts of all the unit’s problems associated with the basic allowance for housing because the unit had remobilized in July 2003. Some of the historical records relating to housing entitlements applicable to the prior mobilization could not be located. Based on our inquiries, we determined that some soldiers were underpaid their housing allowance because the Maryland unit had been mobilized in 2003. informed that a soldier did not return with his or her unit, or how the USPFO was to take action to validate the status of such soldiers. Data input and eligibility requirements for housing and family separation allowances were not clear, the audit found. A soldier returned early from a deployment when the soldier appeared at a weekend drill while his unit was still deployed. The audit found that procedural guidance was not clear with respect to transaction entry for soldiers returning early from deployment. The U.S. military has been accused of failing to properly vet soldiers who return early from deployments. USPFO military pay officials entered the incorrect date for the tour and therefore shortened the unit’s soldiers’ allowance by 1 day. Other soldiers did not receive the correct amount for this allowance as a result of different interpretations of how to enter “dependent” information provided on housing allowance application forms. According to personnel officials, married soldiers are required to write in their spouses’ names as dependents on Form 5960 in order to receive the higher housing allowance amount. However, guidance did not clearly specify that simply checking the box indicating that they are married is not sufficient support. administrator stated that many of these soldiers received amended orders after their initial mobilization when it was determined that they were not deployable for a variety of reasons. The Maryland Army Guard command initiated amendment orders to stop the active duty pays when it became aware of the problem. The orders were not generated in time for the USPFO to stop active duty pay in the system. They believe that the amendment fell through the cracks due to the general confusion and the limited personnel processing the mass mobilizations after September 11, 2001. A sergeant incurred pay problems during his mobilization and deployment to Afghanistan. The active Army and his state's USPFO were confused as to responsibility for processing pay input transactions associated with a promotion. The end result was the soldier was overpaid during the time he was in Afghanistan. A sergeant was promoted from a sergeant first class to master sergeant (E-8) and his demotion back to an E-7, and a second promotion back to a E-8. The sergeant was also overpaid for his deployment and demotion. duty in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. The sergeant wrote a letter from Afghanistan to a fellow battalion soldier back in his home state, discussing his pay problems. He stated that he was not receiving his special duty assignment pay from November 2001 to March 2002. His letter concluded, “Are they really fixing pay issues or are they putting them off till we return? If they are waiting, then what happens to those who (god forbid) don't don’t? " The sergeant was killed in action in Afghanistan on April 15, 2002, before he knew if his pay problems were resolved. Soldiers’ pays may appear as lump sum payments under “other credits” on their leave and earnings statements. In many cases these other credit pay and allowances appeared on leave and earning statements without adequate explanation. The sergeant apparently was not aware of receiving these payments because of the way they were combined. The review determined that some of the sergeant’s pays were started up to 2 months late, but others had actually been paid properly. pay personnel did not immediately detect the overpayments in monthly pay system mismatch reports. For these five soldiers, over payments continued for up to 3 months. One of these soldiers was discharged early because of drug-related charges. However, his pay continued for 3 months past his discharge date. By the time the USPFO stopped the active duty pay, the former soldier had received over pay of about $9,400. In July 2003, state military pay personnel initiated collection for the overpayment. In one case study unit, a mobilized soldier was released from active duty and discharged from the Army in June 2002, earlier than his planned release date. But, the soldier continuied to receive active duty pay. The soldier’s pay continued until the USPFO military pay supervisor identified the discrepancy on the September 25, 2002, personnel/pay mismatch report. Because this discrepancy was not identified until late September, the Soldier received $9,400 in extra pay following his discharge. In addition, we found a number of instances in which Army Guard soldiers’ active duty pays continued after their demobilization. early discharge for drug-related charges. Forty-eight of 51 soldiers in a California National Guard military police unit received late payments because the unit armory did not have a copy machine available to make copies of needed pay-related documents. Four Virginia Special Forces soldiers who were injured in Afghanistan and unable to resume their civilian jobs experienced problems in receiving entitled active duty pays and related health care. In some cases, the problems we identified may have distracted these professional soldiers from mission requirements, as they spent considerable time and effort attempting to address these issues. Five soldiers improperly received active duty pay and allowances even though they did not mobilize with the unit. Several other soldiers received promotions at the time of their mobilization, but state military pay personnel at the state pay office were not aware of this. The delay in entering the transfer and stopping pay caused each of these soldiers to receiveactive duty pay for 10 days. Even though his assignment to this military police unit did not require that special skill, the soldier was still paid for the 10 days he spent on active duty. 21 soldiers from the 114th Military Police Company experienced underpayments, overpayments or late payments. Of the estimated $50,000 in overpayment, we identified about $13,000 that was subsequently collected from the unit’s soldiers. For example, several soldiers did not receive their entitled $100 per month family separation allowance until 7 months after mobilization. We considered as late payments any active duty pays or allowances paid to the soldier over 30 days after the date on which the soldier was entitled to receive them. Thirteen soldiers received overpayments because they continued to receive pay after they were released early from active duty. Soldiers mobilized on October 1, 2001, and then received amended orders to be released from activeduty around October 13, 2001. Many continued to receiving basic pay,basic allowance for subsistence, basic allowance for housing, and family separation allowance payments through the end of November 2001. The unit did not receive the correct or timely entitlements related to basic pay and other entitlements when called to active duty in 2001. soldier readiness program contributed to some of the late payments we identified. Some soldiers did not receive their family separation allowance because they did not provide documentation supporting custody arrangements. confusion at the USPFO over the eligibility of single parents contributed to these late pays. It was later in the unit’s active duty tour that finance officers initiated action for 11 of the 114th Military Police unit's soldiers to receive retroactive payments, some for as much as 7-months of back pay. In another case, a former Special Forces soldier improperly received jump pay. not receive payments for up to 7 months after their mobilization dates, and others who still have not received certain payments. 93 soldiers experienced underpayments, overpayment, late payments, or some combination, during their tour of active duty at Fort Campbell and in Cuba. 3 soldiers experienced pay problems during their demobilization from Fort Stewart related to the proper payment of basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, and location-based pays such as hardship duty pay. In total, we identified estimated overpayments of $50,000. Finance officials at Fort Belvoir, Virginia, inadvertently entered a transaction to collect the entire amount of the housing allowance previously paid to the soldier. Sixty-two soldiers from the unit were overpaid their entitled subsistence allowance by active duty officials. As summarized in table 22, we identified a number of pay problems associated with five different types of active duty pays and allowances associated with the unit’s deployment. The problems were resolved by paying the soldier a “catch-up” housing allowance payment. 56 out of 62 soldiers did not receive certain pays and allowances at all, or in a timely manner, after being activated on December 5, 2001. The types of pay for which most problems occurred during mobilization were parachute jump pay, foreign language proficiency pay, HALO pay, and basic pay. We identified 31 out of 65 soldiers from Virginia’s B Company who didn’t receive certain pay at all or were overpaid. We also found that these pay problems were exacerbated by breakdowns in customer service. and foreign language pay occurred at mobilization because the necessary documentation to support jump pay eligibility or language proficiency for a number of soldiers was not always provided to the USPFO or the mobilization station. For example, of the 8 soldiers in the unit who were underpaid for jump pay, 4 did not receive jump pay until mid- February 2002. In another instance, we identified 10 soldiers who were eligible to receive foreign language proficiency pay in January 2002, but didn't receive payments for 1 or more months. unresolved pay errors that had occurred as far back as 1996. According to U.S. Army Forces Command Regulation 500-3-3, these problems should have been corrected during required annual soldier readiness reviews. USPFO officials told us that they have been working with a sergeant from Virginia’s B Company who performed a pay review. For example, over $22,500 was processed for 52 B Company soldiers’ and included in pay distributions from October 2001 to March 2003. eligible C Company soldiers. USPFO officials stated that they could not pay the increased amount until they received a copy of the new orders. The orders for the soldiers were not received for several months, which created a delay in the payment of the soldiers’ special duty assignment pay. Supporting documents showed that adelay in the production of the orders led to the delay in paying the $110 a month to the soldiers. The soldiers were paid the old amount and then paid the correct amount when orders were received. to continuation of active duty pay entitlements after they were released early from active duty. Maryland’s USPFO officials told us they had not experienced a large-scale mobilization to active duty in more than 10 years. We identified a number of causes associated with these pay problems, including delays in submitting documents, incorrect data entry, and limited personnel to process the mass mobilizations. Seventy-five of 90 soldiers from the 200thth were mobilized to the active duty force. did not receive them within 30 days after being mobilized on October 2, 2001. The types of pay entitlements either not paid at all or paid late associated with the unit’s initial mobilization included basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, and family separation allowance. According to DFAS reserve component mobilization procedures; the California USPFO was responsible for initiating these pays. However, a late payments during the mobilization phase primarily resulted from military pay personnel's lack of understanding of their responsibility for initiating active duty pays. inquiries with cognizant USPFO personnel to identify if (1) soldiers’ entitled active duty pays and allowances were received within 30 days of initial mobilization date. As such, our audit results only reflect problems we identified. Soldiers in our case study units may have experienced additional pay problems that we did not identify. In addition, our work may have identified additional problems with pay and allowances that we were not aware of at the time of the audit. We apologize for any confusion caused. period of his demotion. DFAS garnished his wages and collected approximately $1,100 of the soldier's salary. The soldier's wife had to obtain a grant of $500 from the Colorado National Guard's Family Support Group to pay bills. We found existing guidance did not provide for clear responsibility and accountability between USPFOs and the Army Guard’s and active Army’S mobilization station and in-theater finance offices to enter transactions for deployed soldiers. However, we found that existing guidance was not clear on who was responsible for the transactions. In May 2003, DFAS-Indianapolis erroneously processed a payment transaction instead of a debt correction transaction in DJMS-RC. This created a payment of $20,111, which was electronically deposited to the sergeant’s bank account without explanation. A debt of $30,454 still appeared on his Leave and Earnings Statement. About 9 months after his demobilization, the sergeant's unpaid debt balance was reportedly $26,559, but the actual amount of his debt had not yet been determined. as of September 2003. Under current procedures, if a soldier is determined to owe the government money while on active duty, he is assessed a debt and informed of this assessment with a notation of an “Unpaid Debt Balance” in the remarks section of his Leave and Earnings Statement. This debt assessment notification procedure is even more egregious when debts, particularly large debts, are assessed in error and up to two-thirds of the soldier’s pay may be garnished to begin repaying the erroneous debt. For example, at our case study units, we found that the only notice several soldiers received when they were erroneously assessed payroll debts was an ‘Unpaid debt balance’ Soldiers owed debts for the 11 months of their active duty tour. They were told it would take approximately 4 to 5 years to pay off these debts. Some soldiers now returned from active duty, resumed participation in monthly training, and began having two-thirds of their drill pay withheld and applied to offset their largely erroneous debt balances. The soldiers were told not to write a check because the exact amount of each soldier’s debt could not be readily determined and tracking such a payment against an as-yet undetermined amount of debt could confuse matters. overseas or continued to receive paychecks, as if they were still on active duty status, for over 2 months beyond their release from active duty. Of the estimated $494,000 in overpayments, we identified about $88,000 that was subsequently collected from the soldiers of Colorado’s B Company. Despite considerable time and effort of DFAS and others across the Army Guard and Army, as of the end of our fieldwork in September 2003, Colorado's B Company debt problems had not been resolved. In fact, for one sergeant, his pay problems were further complicated by these efforts. special forces soldiers to address pay problems, in some cases, distracted them from important mission operations. In addition, several soldiers told us that the numerous pay problems they encountered would play a major role in their decision whether to reenlist. According to several soldiers from Colorado’s B Company, the combined effect of recurring pay problems adversely affects morale and may have an adverse effect on a soldier's willingness to continue his military career. The soldiers also reported receiving poor payroll customer service during their active duty tours. or her service with the Army Guard. As of September 30, 2003, three soldiers had left B Company primarily due to frustration over pay problems. As summarized in table 4, we identified a number of pay problems associated with eight different types of active duty pays and allowances related to the unit’s mobilization to active duty. These problems resulted from failure to enter data, data entry errors, or late entry of data needed. For more information, go to: http://www.armyguard.org/. We identified over $1 million in largely erroneous debt transactions as a result of breakdowns in this area. At the Colorado Special Forces unit, we found that actions taken by the Colorado USPFO in an attempt to amend 34 soldiers’ orders resulted in reversing the active pay and allowances the soldiers received for 11 of the 12 months they were deployed on active duty. As a result, 34 soldiers received notice on their Leave and received garnishment of up to two-thirds of the soldier’s pay. DOD erroneously billed 34 soldiers in a Colorado National Guard Special Forces unit an average of $48,000 each. The largely erroneous total debt for these soldiers of about $1.6 million remained unresolved at the end of our audit in September 2003. DOD officials did advise us that, as a result of our work, they implemented a software change on September 18, 2003, intended to help avoid such problems in the future. We were informed of this problem in April 2003 and sent a follow-up letter in June 2003. At five of the 6 units audited, we identified 86 individuals who had total pay and allowance debts of approximately $300,000 as of March 31, 2003. A sergeant with the Colorado Army National Guard, Special Forces, encountered numerous severe pay problems associated with his mobilization to active duty. The sergeant’s active duty pay and other pay and allowances should have been stopped on December 4, 2002. However, when he was released from active duty, he was paid with no explanation. We gathered available data and analyzed the pay experiences of Army Guard special forces and military police units mobilized to active duty in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. We audited six Army Guard units as case studies of the effectiveness of the controls over active duty pays in place for soldiers assigned to those 31, 2003. These case studies are presented to provide a more detailed view of the types and causes of pay problems. We did not independently verify the reliability of the pay controls.and controls. they are receiving all entitled active duty pays and allowances. The extensive problems we identified at the case study units vividly demonstrate that the controls currently relied on to pay mobilized Army Guard personnel are not working and cannot provide reasonable assurance that such pays are accurate or timely. The personal toll that these pay problems have had on mobilized soldiers and their families cannot be readily measured, but clearly may have a profound effect on reenlistment and retention. It is not surprising that cumbersome and complex processes and ineffective human capital strategies, combined with the use of an outdated.  450 of the 481 soldiers from our case study units had at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization to active duty. For one unit, these pay problems resulted in largely erroneous debts totaling $1.6 million. Due to the lack of supporting documents, we may not have identified all of the pay problems related to the active duty mobilizations of these units. The payment problems we identified did not include instances of fraudulent payments, which were a major finding resulting from the further investigation of improper payments found in our 1993 audit. duty in January 2003, sent to Kuwait in February 2003, and deployed to Iraq on military convoy security and highway patrol duties in April 2003. Of the 152 soldiers mobilized in this unit, we identified 54 soldiers who our review of available records indicated were either overpaid, underpaid, or received entitled active duty pays and allowances over 30 days late. We found that these pay problems could be attributed to overpaid or underpaid soldiers, or for whom erroneous pay-related debts had been created. Data collected from Army Guard units mobilized to active duty indicated that some members of the units had concerns with the pay support customer service they received associated with their mobilization. Of the soldiers who provided written comments about customer service, none provided any positive comments. Several had negative comments about the customer service. including such comments as “nonexistent,” “hostile,’ or “poor.’’ The Army Guard is the Army’s second-largest pay system. still deployed during the period of our review; Colorado’s 220th Military Police Company. The purpose of our limited review was to determine if there were any pay problems experienced by a more recently mobilized unit. We also obtained in-depth information from soldiers at four of the six case study units. Using a data collection instrument, we asked for soldier views on pay problems and customer service experiences before, during, and after mobilization. There were 325 soldiers in these units; in total, we received 87 responses. Many cases in which active duty pays were not started until more than 30 days after the entitled start dates because soldiers did not submit the paperwork necessary to start these pays. None of the DOD, Army, or Army Guard policies have been changed since the last readiness review. We identified a recurring soldier concern with the level and quality of customer service they received associated with their pays and allowances when mobilized to active duty. Have a question about a soldier's pay or allowance? Send it to us at tips@dailymail.co.uk. pay and allowance entitlements throughout their active duty mobilizations. Identify and evaluate options for improving customer service provided to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Review the pay problems we identified at our six case study units to identify and resolve any outstanding pay issues for the affected soldiers. Evaluate the feasibility of using the personnel-to-pay interface as a means to proactively alert pay personnel of actions needed to start entitled active duty pays and allowances. The Army Guard is a joint service of the U.S. Army and the National Guard. during their active duty tours adversely affects morale and may have a negative effect on the soldiers’ willingness to continue serving with the Army National Guard. Several soldiers told us that the numerous pay problems they encountered would play a major role in their decisions whether to reenlist. We identified a number of pay problems associated with the unit’s mobilization to active duty. These problems resulted from failures by unit soldiers to provide necessary documentation to initiate certain pays, and data entry errors or late entry of data needed to start active duty pays. Army Guard soldiers may go to the military pay section of their home state’s Army Guard, the designated active Army area servicing finance office, and a toll free number, 1-888-729-2769. Not all Army Guard soldiers and their families were informed at the beginning of their mobilization of the pays and allowances they should receive while on active duty. This information is critical for enabling soldiers to identify if they were not receiving such pays and therefore require customer service. In addition, as discussed later in this report, we found that the documentation provided by the Army Guard did not facilitate customer service for soldiers. As a result, we found indications that Army Guard soldiers had difficulty using the leave and earnings statements to determine if they received all entitled active duty pays and allowances. Without such basic customer service, the soldiers cannot readily verify that they receive all the active duty pay and allowances to which they were entitled. In addition, several soldiers told us that they had difficulty discerning from their leave and Earnings statements whether lump sum catch-up payments fully compensated them for previously underpaid activeduty pay and allowance entitlements. The company commander for the unit told us that he was frustrated with the level of customer support his unit received as it moved through the initial mobilization process. Only two knowledgeable military pay officials were present to support active duty pay transaction processing for the 51 soldiers mobilized for his unit. The Fort Lewis finance office asked the California USPFO to supply additional personnel and temporarily reassigned soldiers from other units stationed at Fort Lewis to assist in the pay processing. As summarized in table 26, we identified a number of pay problems associated with the unit. USPFO military pay official mistakenly instructed the unit to take its pay data to the mobilization station to enter transactions to start active duty pays. DFAS reserve component mobilization procedures state that the USPFO has the initial responsibility for initiating these pays. The Fort Lewis mobilized to active duty, these personnel were able to enter the omitted transactions needed to startactive duty pays and correct the previous erroneous entries. It was not until more than 2 months after mobilization that the unit was able to begin cost of living allowance pays for 36 of the unit’s soldiers. military pay personnel at the unit’s mobilization station were the initial cause of the pay problems. In total, 48 out of 51 soldiers of the 49th Military Police Company did not receive certain pay and allowances and incentive pays at all. An Army pay technician at the Fort Lewis finance office entered the incorrect code, thereby paying a soldier the wrong type of allowance, which resulted in an underpayment. USPFO officials were unable to provide sufficient documentation to explain why 3 soldiers appeared not to have received cost of living allowance payments due them for a 2-month period. elapse between the receipt by the responsible Army Guard or Army pay office of proper documentation and processing the related pay transaction through the pay system. The case study units lacked specific written requirements for conducting and documenting monthly reconciliations of pay control breakdowns. Pay system input errors associated with amended orders, delays and errors in coding pay and allowance transactions, and slow customer service response were among the problems. Colorado USPFO military pay-processing personnel told us they are reviewing pay records for all deployed soldiers from this unit. case study units to identify and resolve any outstanding pay issues for the affected soldiers. The National Guard Financial Services Center is working with each of the identified units and supporting USPFOs to ensure all pay issues are resolved. The Army and DFAS will continue to work the correction of any specific cases identified as still open for these units. Many of the cases identified have already been resolved or involved a delay in payment over 30 days from entitlement rather than an actual unresolved discrepancy. (p. 77/Draft Report) month, so that all elements were to be reconciled and all necessary corrective actions taken over a 3-month period. However, documentation was not always retained to determine the extent to which these reconciliations were done and if they were done consistently. Our findings are similar to those in reports from Army Guard operational reviews. One such report concluded, “Failure to reconcile the. pay and personnel record discrepancies each month.’‘‘The results of the most recent reviews at three of the six case study locations we audited showed that state Army Guard personnel were not performing effective reconciling of pay and Personnel record discrepancies. instances at two of our case study locations in which military pay technicians at either a USPFO or an active Army finance office made errors in amending existing orders. These errors resulted in establishing virtually all prior pays made under the original orders as debts. A major contributor to the pay errors we found in this area was that existing procedures did not clearly state how USP FOs and Army finance personnel should modify existing order tour start and stop information in the pay system. Also, these procedures did. that this was primarily because unit commanders have many such administrative duties, and without additional training on the importance of these actions, they may not receive sufficient priority attention. The lack of unit commander training may have contributed to the pay problems we identified at our case study units. For example, at our Virginia case study location, we found that when the unit was first mobilized, USPFO pay personnel were required to spend considerable time and effort to correct hundreds of errors in the unit’s pay records dating back to 1996. Personnel/Pay Mismatch listing monthly provides a perfect opportunity to establish fraudulent personnel or pay accounts. Several instances we identified in which soldiers received pay and allowances for many months after their release from active duty likely would have been identified sooner had USPFO military pay personnel investigated the personnel/pay mismatch report discrepancies more frequently. We determined a number of causes for these pay problems. First, we found a lack of sufficient numbers of knowledgeable staff. In addition, after-the- fact detective controls were not in place. The USPFO does not have the resources required to carry out such reconciliations each month. The purpose of the reconciliation is to ensure that for common data elements, the pay and personnel systems contain the same data. As summarized in table 25, we identified a number of pay problems associated with the unit’s mobilization to active duty. Failures to enter transactions or late entry of transactions needed to start active duty pays by Army GuardUSPFO military pay personnel and by active Army. The Mississippi Army National Guard USPFO identified the overpayment and took action on October 2, 2002, to stop the individual's pay. However, collection efforts on the $9,400 overpayment did not begin until July 2003, when we pointed out this situation to USPfo officials. The lack of an integrated set of systems was also apparent in the relationship between JUSTIS and the order. Further, the problem was not detected because reconciliations of pay and personnel data were not performed timely. B Company soldiers expressed dissatisfaction with the time and effort they, or their spouses, were required to spend attempting to identify and correct problems with their pay. Another complaint concerned the circular nature of any attempts to get assistance. USPFO officials acknowledged that in instances in which the active Army finance office did not resolve soldiers’ pay problems, USPfo staff would try to fix the problems. According to several soldiers, the combined effect of recurring pay problems and receiving poor payroll customer service had a number of adverse effects. the unit’s soldiers an average of $48,000 each, for a largely erroneous total debt of over $1.6 million. Many soldiers with the company characterized the service they received from the state United States Property and Fiscal Office (USPFO) and the active Army finance offices as “poor’ or “openly hostile” Some of the soldiers in the unit expressed significant dissatisfaction with the time and effort they, or their spouses were required to spend attempting to identify and correct their pay. The underpayments and late payments resulted in adverse financial repercussions for a number of the unit’s members and their families. We were told that neither the spouses nor the soldiers received clear guidance on whom to contact to address their pay concerns. For example, some of the spouses tried to contact the soldiers while they were deployed to find out why they were not receiving the anticipated funds. Some of the units’ members were not paid at all for some of their missions, we were told. Soldiers sought help from the active Army’s finance offices at Fort Knox and Fort Campbell. Officials at those locations told soldiers they should contact their home state Army Guard USPFO. According to DFAS officials, the active army finance offices have the capability to service Army Guard soldiers. Colorado”s B Company soldiers turned back Army finance office could not effectively answer questions concerning their pay entitlements or transaction processing documentation requirements. A frequent complaint we received was the circular nature of any attempts to get assistance on pay issues while deployed overseas. Special forces personnel were particularly critical of the customer service they received both while deployed in Afghanistan and when they were demobilized from active duty. Unit officials expressed frustration with being routed from one office to another in their attempts to resolve problems with their active duty pays and allowances. For example, the unit administrator told us he contacted the servicing area active Army finance office for the 101st Airborne in West Virginia because his unit was attached to the West Virginia Army base. He described the experience as time consuming and frustrating. the 101st when they were deployed. The finance office instructed him to contact the USPFO in West Virginia because, although he was from a Colorado unit, his unit was assigned to a West Virginia Army Guard unit. Several systems issues were significant factors impeding accurate and timely payroll payments to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. The lack of an integrated or effectively interfaced pay system with both West Virginia and Colorado was cited as a reason for the pay problems for the 101st. The 101st was deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan. We selected six states that had a large number of special forces or military police units that had been mobilized, deployed, and returned from at least one tour of active duty in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. We chose California, Colorado, Maryland, Mississippi, Virginia, and West Virginia. We also identified and performed a limited review of the pay experiences of a unit. We further limited our case study selection to those units both mobilized to active duty and demobilized from active duty during the period from October 1, 2001 through March. Six case study units were deployed to various locations in the U.S. and overseas in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. In addition, we conducted a limited review of the pay experiences of a seventh unit mobilized more recently and deployed to Iraq in April 2003. The Colorado Army Guard’s 220th Military Police Company was one of the seven units reviewed. The pay problems we found in our six cases study units persisted, as shown in figure 2. The unit was deployed to help perform a variety of critical tasks. Of 119 soldiers of the Mississippi Army National Guard’s 114th Military Police Company, 105 experienced at least one pay problem associated with mobilization in support of Operation Noble Eagle. Pay problems included overpayments, underpayments and late payments of entitlements. The unit was demobilized from active duty at Fort Lewis on July 28, 2002. Of the estimated $74,000 in ofOperation Noble Eagle, the unit had estimated over pay of $74k and underpayment of $11k.  unit administrative officer, while deployed in Cuba, discovered the soldier still on company pay records and reported the error. Following his discharge, this soldier continued to receive active duty pay until August 31, resulting in an overpayment. The unit, including 90 soldiers who received orders to mobilize with the 200th Military Police Company, reported to its home station, Salisbury, Maryland, on October 1, 2001. The soldiers demobilized at Fort Stewart, Georgia, where they were released from active duty on July 10, 2002. The Mississippi Army National Guard’s 114th Military Police Company was called to active duty in support of Operation Noble Eagle for a 1-year tour. For C Company, 63 soldiers received their last 3 months of special duty assignment pay over 30 days late. The USPFO inadvertently overlooked the manual transaction entries required to process special duty assignments pay for those soldiers. Another 3 soldiers did not receive their last three months ofSpecial Duty Assignment Pay because of a clerical error. The soldiers were paid on December 27, 2001, through January 5, 2003. The President declared a national emergency as a result of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. The Secretary of Defense delegated to the Secretary of the Army the authority to order Army Guard soldiers to active duty as part of the overall mobilization effort. Approximately 93,000 Army Guard troops were activated as of March.mission. The U.S. military is committed to the mission of preventing, detecting and responding to acts of terrorism and acts of war. The mission is led by the U.N. Security Council and the United Nations. Army Guard soldiers accounted for 34 percent of the total reserve components mobilized in response to the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001. Army Guard soldiers participated in direct combat in Afghanistan under Operation Enduring Freedom. U.S. homeland security missions, Operation Noble Eagle, were also part of the 9/11 response. In general, missions to fight terrorism outside the United States were categorized under OperationEnduring Freedom, while missions to provide domestic defense were categorized as OperationNoble Eagle. For more information, visit www.armyguard.org. On January 2, 2002, the Virginia Army National Guard’s B Company, 3rd Battalion, 20th Special Forces, was called to active duty in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. The unit in-processed at Fort Pickett, Virginia, and departed for Fort Bragg, North Carolina. In early May 2002, B Company deployed to Afghanistan to perform search and destroy missions against al Qaeda and Taliban terrorists. Although several of B Company's soldiers returned from Afghanistan during August and September 2002, most of the unit's members returned to Fort. Bragg for demobilization during October 2002 and were released from active duty on January 1, 2003. West Virginia’s 19th Special Forces Group, 2nd Battalion, C Company, was called to active duty in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. The unit was mobilized at Fort Knox and subsequently deployed in Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and surrounding areas to search for possible Taliban and al Qaeda terrorists. It returned to Fort Campbell for demobilization and was released from active duty on December 4, 2002.discontinued. As discussed earlier, these pay-related problems for wounded soldiers caused significant hardship for them and their families. The Colorado Army National Guard’s B Company, 5th Battalion, 19th Special Forces, was mobilized to active duty on orders for a 2-year period. The unit was mobilized at Fort Knox and subsequently deployed in Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and surrounding areas to search for Taliban and al Qaeda terrorists as part of Operation Enduring Freedom. No charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9505. then proceeded to Camp Fretterd located in Reisterstown, Maryland, for the soldier readiness program (SRP) in- processing. On October 13, 2001, they arrived at their designated mobilization station at Fort Stewart, Georgia, where they remained for the next 2 weeks undergoing additional in-processing. The company arrived at Ft. Eustis, Virginia, in late August 2002 and was released from active duty on September 30, 2002. In addition, 3 of the 90 soldiers were deployed to guard the Pentagon. The 49th Military Police Headquarters and Headquarters Detachment (HHD) was mobilized to active duty for a period not to exceed 24 months. The unit performed its active duty mission at Fort Lewis, where it provided base security as part of the military police force. The 49th MP HHD mobilized at its home station, Pittsburg, California, and then proceeded to its designated mobilization station, Fort Lewis on October 12, 2001. Fort Stewart did not provide the amended orders with the earlier release date in time to stop the pay.and allowances through July 15, 2002. 17 soldiers who had significant problems with their HALO pay. According to USPFO personnel, the unit commander for C Company did not provide a list of the unit members who were eligible to receive HALo pay. Soldiers who are eligible for regular parachute pay and HALO Pay are paid the higher of the two amounts, but not both. In this case, the 17 members of C Company’s HALO team should have received a $225 per month payment from the beginning of their mobilization. USPFO occurred about 2 months after the unit mobilized. When the USPFO personnel attempted to collect the soldiers’ regular parachute pay, they inadvertently collected a large amount of the soldiers' basic active duty pay for the first month of their mobilization. Personnel at the US PFO stated that the error caused debts on soldiers' accounts but was corrected immediately after a pay supervisor detected the error in February. Even after the pay was corrected, USP FO personnel did not stop the regular parachute pays for the HALO team members, but instead let it continue, then collected the $150. Nine soldiers in the unit were eligible for HALO pay in January 2002. Pay problems occurred for seven of the nine soldiers during January 2002, the initial month of their mobilization. Two soldiers, who were not eligible to receive HALO. pay, received HALo pay for 3 months. Another soldier received HALO Pay starting in January but did not become eligible for. this pay until mid-April 2002. Documentation was not available to explain these errors. In May 2002, Virginia’s B Company left Fort Bragg and traveled to Afghanistan. While in Afghanistan, the C Company provided a more accurate list to the USPFO some time after the first list. Problems with HALO and family separation pay were not resolved for several months after the mobilization. As a result, the soldiers’ pay problems persisted into their deployment overseas. Based on our findings that the pay problems continued after this review, it does not appear that the active Army finance office at Fort Knox carried out its responsibility to review and validate all of C Company soldiers' active duty pays and allowance support records. for foreign language pay, and 10 soldiers who were overpaid for HALO pay. We found that some soldiers received payments over 5 months late and other soldiers had been overpaid. Seven soldiers did not receive their $225 per month HALO. pay until over a month after mobilization, and 18 other soldiers received combat diver pay and HALo pay to which they were not entitled. The soldiers in C Company attended a soldier readiness program at their unit armory. This program was intended to ensure that all soldiers had proper administrative paperwork and financial documents. Army soldiers’ pay issues. When pay technicians at the West Virginia USPFO attempted to help take care of some of the National Guard soldiers' pay problems, they were told by personnel at DFAS-Indianapolis not to get involved. Eventually, the sergeant was ordered to travel to the finance office at Camp Doha, Kuwait, to get its assistance in fixing the pay problems. This trip, during which a soldier had to set aside his in-theatre duties to attempt to resolve Army Guard pay issues, proved to be not only a major inconvenience, but also life-threatening. Oman and returned safely to Uzbekistan. While guidance that permits both Army Guard and active Army military pay personnel to enter transactions for mobilized Army Guard soldiers provides flexibility in serving the soldiers, we found indications that it also contributed to soldiers being passed between the active Army and Army Guard servicing locations. For example, at another of our case study locations, we were told that several mobilized soldiers sought help in resolving active duty pay problems from theactive Army’s mobilization station finance office at Fort Knox. spent significant amounts of time and effort trying to correct the pay problems while deployed on critical mission operations in Afghanistan and surrounding areas. For example, as discussed in greater detail in our West Virginia case study summary, a soldier from that unit took several days away from his unit to get location-based pay started for both the West Virginia and Colorado special forces units. We were also told that some members of the unit used their satellite radios to attempt to resolve their pay issues while deployed in Afghanistan. The sergeant delivered a box of supporting documents used to input data into the system. He worked with the finance office personnel at Camp Doha to enter the pertinent data on each member of his battalion into DJMS-RC. The total travel time was 16 hours. On his flight between Oman and Uzbekistan, the sergeant’s plane took enemy fire and was forced to return to Oman. No injuries were reported. The next day, he left the Kuwait International Airport and flew to Camp Snoopy in Qatar. The local finance office in Uzbekistan correctly entered transactions to start C Company’s hardship duty pay for designated areas into the DJMS-RC pay system. However, finance personnel at Fort Bragg incorrectly initiated a recurring certain places hardship duty payment for soldiers in C Company. For some soldiers, payments continued until May 31, 2002 and for others the payments continue until the end of their tour of active duty on December 4, 2002. In addition, because DJ MS-RC processing capability limitations required the designated areas payment to be manually entered every month the unit was in the designated area, the in-theater finance office failed to consistently enter the monthly designated area payments. The West Virginia National Guard Special Forces unit was stationed in Uzbekistan with the rest of his unit, which was experiencing numerous pay problems. The local finance office in Uzbekistani did not have the systems up and ready, nor available personnel who were familiar with DJMS-RC. According to the sergeant, the active Army finance personnel were only taking care of the in-theater finance office. DFAS policy clearly states that it is the active army that is responsible for location-based pays. Pays started for all the companies under the battalion, including C Company. On the return flight from the sergeant’s mission in Kuwait, his plane encountered enemy fire and was forced to return to a safe airport until the next day. The failure by active Army personnel at the finance office in Uzbekistan to enter the transactions necessary to start location-based pays for the unit delayed payments to some soldiers for up to 9 months. Per DOD FMR, volume 7A, chapter 10, soldiers who perform duty in hostile fire zones are entitled to hostile pay. were unsuccessful because finance personnel at that location were not familiar with DJMS-RC’s transaction processing requirements for starting these types of pay. Two soldiers were ordered to travel to Camp Snoopy, Qatar, where another Army finance office was located. After attempts by the unit administrator and the Uzbekistan finance office failed to initiate the payments, a sergeant in C Company was ordered toTravel to Camp Doha, Kuwait, to have the unit's location-based pays started. One of the soldiers told us that they flew to Kuwait because they were advised that the finance unit at that active Army Finance office was more knowledgeable about how to enter the necessary transactions. Active Army in-theater finance offices did not always know which units they were dealing with. Soldiers experienced problems in receiving the full amounts of their entitled HALO pay. Army Guard soldiers encountered additional pay problems related to hardship duty pay, special duty assignment pay, and, to a lesser extent, hostile fire pay and basic pay. The pay problems could be attributed, in part, to the active Army servicing finance office’s lack of knowledge about how to process transactions through the Defense Joint Military Pay System. active Army mobilization stations and in-theater servicing finance offices with respect to responsibility for entering transactions while in the theater. For example, at one of our case study locations, this broad authority for entering changes to soldiers’ pay records enabled almost simultaneous attempts by two different pay offices to enter pay transactions into DJMS-RC for the same soldier. At another case study location we found that, in part because of confusion over responsibility for starting location-based payments, two pay offices tried to enter the same transaction. The unit stayed at Fort Campbell to perform post security duties until June 2002. The E-4 specialist received a "general" discharge order for a drug-related offense. He continued to receive active duty pay, totaling approximately $9,400, until September 2002. Although the discharge information was promptly entered into the soldier's personnel records, it was not into the pay system for almost 4 months. This problem was caused by weaknesses in the processes designed to work around the lack of integrated pay and pay systems. USPFO did not enter transactions for the promotions until several months later, resulting in late promotion pay to the affected soldiers. Delays by the unit in submitting the promotion paperwork or by the state personnel office caused these problems. However, supporting documents were not available to enable us to determine the specific cause of the delays. After leaving the unit’s home station, the 114th Military Police Company traveled to Fort Campbell, its active Army mobilization station. As required by Army guidance, Fort Campbell personnel conducted a second soldier readiness program intended, The unit mobilized in Clinton, Mississippi, and departed for Fort Campbell, Kentucky, on January 6, 2002. The unit in-processed at Fort Campbell and for the next 5 months performed military police duties. On June 10, 2002, the 114th Military Police Company deployed to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to perform base security and guard duties for Taliban and al Qaeda prisoners. After guarding detainees in Cuba for approximately 6 months, the unit returned to Fort Campbell in late November 2002. At Fort Campbell the unit out- Processed and returned to Clinton, Miss., and was released from active duty. Fort Campbell finance personnel performed only a perfunctory review of each soldier’s pay record. At this point, because the soldiers had only recently mobilized and had not received their first paychecks, they were unaware of pay problems. Failure to follow requirements for finance verification at Fort Campbell caused pay problems to persist past the mobilization stage. In addition, we were unable to determine specific causes for certain pay problems at the base. The Army is investigating the incident and will release a report in the coming months. The soldier was promoted to Sgt.First Class at the end of May, but the pay system did not reflect the promotion until October. The delay caused the soldier to be paid at her old rank for 5 months. According to DFAS guidance, when a change occurs in a soldier’s pay, the on-site Army finance office should input the change. In cases where personnel changes occurred that affected pay, either the soldiers failed to submit documents or personnel at Fort Campbell failed to input the changes. The majority of soldiers from Colorado’s B Company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more of the three phases of their active duty mobilization. Overall, all 62 soldiers with the company had at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization. Soldiers told us their ability to identify and correct pay problems while deployed was impaired by limited access to telephones, faxes, e-mail, and their current Leave and Earnings Statements. Failure to stop location-based and other active duty pays and allowances for the unit's soldiers resulted in. 39 of the unit’s 62 soldiers continued to receive active duty pay and allowances, some until February 14, 2003. Instead of demobilizing on schedule with their unit, these five soldiers demobilized individually earlier due to various reasons. According to DFAS procedures, the finance office at the servicing demobilization station is to conduct a finance out-processing, which would include identifying and stopping any active duty pays. However, when these individual soldiers were released from active duty, Fort Campbell processed discharge orders but Fort Campbell’S finance office failed to stop their pay. We identified a number of pay problems associated with four types of active duty pays and allowances associated with the unit’s deployment while on active duty. While at Fort Campbell, eight soldiers experienced problems resulting from delays in entering changes in the family separation allowance, basic allowance for housing, and active duty pay increases from promotions. For example, one soldier was promoted to the rank of Private. The unit remobilized in February 2003, and unit administrative personnel did not retain payroll source documents relating to the prior mobilization. The sergeant’s mobilization orders called him to active duty for 730 days and not the 365 days that he was actually mobilized. The Army area servicing finance office at the demobilization station, Fort Campbell, did not enter the release from active duty date into DJMS-RC. The sergeant continued to improperly receive payments, as if he were still on active duty, for 2 and a half months totaling over $8,000. He was one of 34 soldiers in the company whose pay continued after their release. Some soldiers received extra hardship duty payments, while others were only paid sporadically. Only 9 of the 100 soldiers who deployed to Guantanamo Bay with the 114th Military Police Company received the correctly computed hardship duty pay. While in Cuba, the soldiers were either underpaid, or were late in receiving their entitled hardship duty pays. The soldiers encountered additional pay problems related to the location-based payment for soldiers located at designated hardship duty locations. Most of the unit’s soldiers were mistakenly provided both types of hardshipduty pay while deployed to Cuba. Bay finance office correctly entered transactions to start hardship duty pay for the 114th Military Police unit’s soldiers into DJMS-RC. For 11 soldiers, the finance office inadvertently overlooked entering one or more monthly hardship duty payments. The combination of erroneous certain places duty early resulted in overpayments to 88 enlisted soldiers. According to the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 17, soldiers are entitled to receive hardship duty. pay only while they are stationed in a hardship duty location. payments, along with sporadic payments of hardship duty designated area pays caused confusion for the soldiers who were performing a stressful mission in Cuba. The 114th Military Police Company returned to Fort Campbell on November 23, 2002, to begin the demobilization process. Soldiers continued to experience pay problems. As summarized in table 19, overpayment problems consisted of improper continuation of hardshipduty pay following the unit’s return from Cuba and failure to stop active duty pay and allowances to soldiers who had been discharged or returned from active duty. While deployed to Cuba, the three soldiers were mistakenly paid the old type of hardship duty pay. The 200th Military Police Company returned to Fort Eustis around the end of August 2002 to begin the demobilization process. The soldiers did not receive all their entitled hardship duty pays. Furthermore, the hardshipduty pays they did receive were more than 30 days late. We are happy to clarify that this was not the case and that the soldiers were paid as part of the Army’s regular hardship pay program. Soldier’s spouse had to obtain a grant from the Colorado National Guard to pay bills while her husband was in Afghanistan. Some soldiers did not receive payments for up to 6 months after mobilization and others still had not received certain payments by the conclusion of our audit work. Ninety-one of 100 members of a Mississippi National Guard military police unit that was deployed to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, did not get the correct amount of Hardship Duty Pay. One soldier from the Mississippi unit was paid $9,400 in active duty pay during the 3 months following an promotion. The USPFO did process a number of transactions to start entitled active duty pays and allowances for the unit’s soldiers. Such pays were started more than 30 days after the date they were entitled to receive such pays. In one case, a soldier's spouse had to obtain a $500 grant from the Colorado National Guard in order to pay bills while her husband was on active duty. As summarized in table 5, we identified pay problems associated with the hostile fire pay, and identified ways to fix them. For the six units we audited, we found significant pay problems involving over one million dollars in errors. These problems consisted of underpayments, overpayments and late payments that occurred during all three phases of Army Guard mobilization to active duty. Overall, for the 18- month period from October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003, we discovered more than $1 million in errors in the Army Guard pay system. The Army Guard was responsible for providing security at the Pentagon shortly after the 9/11 terrorist attacks. December 19, 2002, directed mobilization site finance offices to use transaction codes that resulted in soldiers receiving a prior type of hardship duty pay that was eliminated in the December 2001 revisions. 91 of 100 Mississippi military police unit soldiers deployed to Cuba to guard al Qaeda prisoners were paid incorrect amounts. Army Regulation 37-104-4, dated September 1994, was still in effect at the end of our case study locations. We found that because the active Army finance office followed the outdated DFAS guidance for starting hardship duty pays. An administrative clerk’s review of this report while the unit was mobilized in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, resulted in action to stop active duty pay and allowances to a soldier who was previously demobilized. While these reconciliations are an important after-the-fact detective control, they are limited because they can only detect situations in which payroll and personnel records do not agree. A number of pay errors we identified resulted from the fact that neither personnel nor pay records were updated. Soldiers returning from deployments earlier than their units. did not identify any pay issues associated with the unit’s soldiers who were released from active duty on September 30, 2002. However, as shown in table 23, we did identify three soldiers who continued to receive active duty pay after their early release. Specifically, the three soldiers from the unit returned from Cuba, demobilized at Fort Stewart, and were released on July 10, 2002, while their original orders showed a September 30,. 2002, release date. They continued to receiving active duty Pay. Some soldiers in B Company left Afghanistan during August and September 2002. Most of the unit returned to Fort Bragg in when the soldier leaves the hostile fire/combat zone. Overpayments to B Company soldiers occurred during demobilization because the in-theater finance office continued to make hostile fire and hardship duty pays after soldiers left Afghanistan in October 2002. We found that 55 of 64 soldiers eligible for hostile fire pay were overpaid for at least 1 month beyond their departure from Afghanistan. Also, we found that 57 of 64Soldiers eligible for hardship duty pay are overpaid at least part of the time. Fort Bragg processed October and November 2002 special duty assignment duty payments for 24 of the unit’s soldiers in December 2002. The Army finance office personnel at Fort Bragg were not aware that these payments were still being made after the soldiers had returned to the United States. Four members of Virginia’S B Company, who were injured while deployed in Afghanistan, requested medical extensions to their active duty tours so they could continue to receive active duty pay and medical benefits until they recovered. One of the members of B Company was injured in Afghanistan. detailed analysis of soldiers’ long-standing pay problems. This sergeant performed these pay-related tasks in addition to his mission- related duties as a professional engineer. After leaving the unit’s home station, B Company traveled to Fort Bragg, its active Army mobilization station. According to USPFO officials and active Army finance office officials, problems with jump pay have been a problem for the unit since January 2002 for the majority of their mobilization. The unit is currently deployed in Afghanistan. The in- theater finance office for Virginia’s B Company, located in Kuwait, did not start these pays as required. We were told that this occurred because finance personnel in Kuwait did not know that B Company had arrived in Afghanistan. Finally, at Kuwait the appropriate in-theater pays were activated and the two soldiers returned to Afghanistan. Despite this costly, time-consuming, and risky procedure to start location-based pays for the unit, 63 of 63 of the unit's soldiers were paid. Virginia’s B Company soldiers, who became eligible for hardship duty pay in May 2002, not receive their location-based pay entitlements until July 2002. Problems with special duty assignment pay also occurred during the unit's deployment. We found that both underpayments and overpayments of this type of pay were made as a result of confusion about who was responsible for making the manual monthly transactions necessary for entitled soldiers in the unit to receive these pays. For example, 10 soldiers in B Company did not receive at least 1 month of entitled special duty assignments pay. 66 of C Company’s 94 soldiers experienced pay problems associated with their demobilization from active duty. In October 2002, eligible soldiers in the unit were entitled to a special duty assignment pay increase from $110 per month to $220 per month. To initiate this higher pay rate, the West Virginia Army National Guard military personnel office was required to cut new special duty assignments pay orders for all soldiers. All of the unit had returned from overseas and was demobilized on December 4, 2002. the variable housing allowance. The act also replaced foreign duty pay with hardship duty pay. Yet, chapter 8 of Army Regulation 37-104-4 (Military Pay and Allowances Policy and Procedures – Active Component) still refers to foreign dutypay. Further, current DFAS and Army mobilization procedural guidance directs active Army finance units to use transaction codes to start soldiers’ hardship duty pays that are incorrect. However, DOD amended FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 17, to establish a new “designated area” hardshipduty pay with rates of $50, $100, or $150 per month, depending on the area. Soldiers who perform duties in designated areas for over 30 days are entitled to the hardship duty pay incentive. Effective December 31, 2001, the regulation no longer permitted soldiers newly assigned to locations specified as “certain places” to begin receiving hardshipduty pay. The regulation specified Afghanistan and Uzbekistan as designated areas and provided for paying $100 a month to each soldier serving there. While deployed to Afghanistan or Uzbekistan, soldiers can receive $100 per month for up to three months. They can also receive up to $200 a month for the remainder of the year. for entering into DMO hardship duty pay, for deployed soldiers entitled to these types of pays and for which a performance certification is received from the respective unit commanders. Because pay transactions must be manually entered every month soldiers are entitled to receive these pays, it is often difficult to ensure that mobilized soldiers receive their entitled nonautomated pays and allowances. For example, we found a number of instances in which soldiers were underpaid their entitled jump, foreign language proficiency, special duty assignment, or hardship duty pays because pay technicians inadvertently omitted the monthly manual input. or all of the current manual monthly pays, including special duty assignment pay, foreign language proficiency pay, hardship duty pay, and HALO pay. Evaluate the feasibility of using the JUSTIS warning screen to help eliminate inadvertent omissions of required monthly manual pay inputs. Evaluates the feasibility. of redesigning Leave and Earnings Statements to provide soldiers. with a clear explanation of all pay and. Earnings statements to. provide soldiers with aclear explanation ofAll pay and earnings statements. Evaluating the. feasibility of eliminating the use of the “other credits” for processing hardship duty (designated areas) and special duty assignments pay. The local servicing active Army finance office also has primary responsibility for entering transactions to stop hardship duty pay, hostile fire pay, and the combat zone tax exclusion. However, in this case, that office did not take action to stop these types of pay and allowances for many of the unit’s soldiers. For example, military pay personnel at Fort Campbell failed to deactivate hostileFire pay for 41 out of 62 B Company soldiers. With regard to hardship duty, the finance office has responsibility for stopping that pay and allowance when soldiers leave an authorized hostile fire/combat zone. fire pay as soon as they enter the zone. 45 soldiers in C Company did not have their hostile fire pay started until over 30 days after they were entitled to receive it. Some of C Company’s soldiers received retroactive payments over 2 months after they should have received their pay. 18 soldiers from the unit were not yet paid for 1 or more months that they were in the hostile fire zone. We also identified 40 soldiers who received hostileFire pay after they had been in the zone for over a month. combat zone tax exclusion, and hardship duty pay that unit soldiers were entitled to receive based on their deployment to Afghanistan and surrounding areas. Some soldiers in Colorado’s B Company received these pays sporadically, were not paid at all, were paid but for inexplicable dollar amounts, or were overpaid their entitled active duty pays and allowances while deployed. For example, 16 of the 62 soldiers in B Company. received the wrong type of hardship duty. pay, formerly called Foreign Duty Pay, in addition to the correct hardship duty location pay while they were deployed. C Company soldiers traveled to Uzbekistan and Afghanistan to perform special forces missions. Soldiers consistently experienced problems related to specific location-based payments such as hostile fire pay and hardship duty pay. In 78 cases, the payments were not started within 30 days from when the soldiers left the U.S. C Company soldiers consistently experienced issues with location- based payments. In 58 cases, they experienced problems with hostile firepay and hardshipduty pay. The problems were related to three different types of active duty pays related to the unit's deployment. In 60 cases, the soldiers were overpaid or payments were not stopped when they left the combat zones. In 22 other cases, we determined that soldiers had not received all location-based pays as of March 31, 2003. Due to the lack of supporting documents at the state, unit, and battalion-levels, dates for when each soldier entered and left combat zones were not always available. Consequently, there may have been other deployment-related pay problems for C Company that we were not able to identify. The pay problems experienced by Virginia’s B Company were the result of a number of factors, including late submission of required pay support documents. Of the estimated $25,000 in overpayments, we identified about $2,000 that was subsequently collected from the soldiers. We did not identify any collections related to overpayment for this unit. As summarized in table 13, several soldiers from C Company did not receive the hostile fire pay or other high-risk location pays they were entitled to receive based on their deployment. example, the military finance office in Kuwait, which was responsible for paying Virginia 20th Special Forces soldiers in the fall of 2002, did not stop hostile fire and hardship duty pays as required when these soldiers left Afghanistan. We found that 55 of 64 soldiers eligible for hostile fire pay were overpaid for at least 1 month beyond their departure from Afghanistan. An Army National Guard Special Forces sergeant believed that he was not receiving certain active duty pays and allowances during his mobilization to active duty. The sergeant was correct. 64 of the 65 soldiers with the company experienced at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization. These pay problems included not receiving entitled pays and allowances at all; not receiving some entitled pay and allowances within 30 days; and for some, overpayments. In total, we identified estimated over pay of $17,000, underpayments of $1,300, and late payments of $67,000 associated with the pay problems we found. We found 31 soldiers did not receive certain pay and allowance entitlements at all, orWithin 30 days of their initial mobilization entitlement. The majority of soldiers from C Company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more of the three phases of their active duty mobilization. Overall, 86 of the 94 soldiers with the company experienced at least one pay problem associated with its mobilization. 36 soldiers were either overpaid, did not receive certain pay and allowance entitlements at all, or didn't receive pay within 30 days of their initial mobilization entitlement. 84 soldiers who were overpaid or didn’t receive certain entitlements were also underpaid or underpaid. with six different types of active duty pays and allowances associated with the unit’s deployment while on active duty. These problems primarily resulted from a data entry error and inadequate document retention practices. For example, the USPFO paid one soldier her basic pay,basic allowance for subsistence, and basic allowance for housing nearly 4 months late. USPfo officials were unable to provide support explaining why five other soldiers continued to receive basic pay after the date available records show their active duty tours had ended. We identified the payments made to these five soldiers as overpayments. Late, under- and overpayments of foreign language proficiency pays to the unit’s soldiers primarily resulted from delayed or inadequate data entry. Late payment, underpayment, and overpayment of cost of living allowances resulted from the inability of DJMS-RC to pay certain active duty pays and allowances automatically, inaccurate data entry, and inadequate documentation retention practices. For example, our audit discovered that USPFO pay technicians failed to manually enter cost of Living Allowance transactions into DJ MS-RC in a timely manner. Transactions for nonautomated, month-to-month pay and allowance entitlements were not separately itemized on the soldiers’ leave and earnings statements in a user-friendly format. A significant number of soldiers were overpaid their entitled automated pays when they were demobilized from active duty. This occurred because pay technicians did not update the stop date in DJMS-RC, which is necessary to terminate the automated active duty pays when soldiers leave active duty early. For more on this story, visit CNN.com. left the country and were no longer entitled to receive such pays. These overpayments occurred primarily because hostile fire pay is an automatic recurring payment based on the start and stop date for the soldier’s mobilization. The active Army finance office in Uzbekistan did not amend the stop dates for automated active duty pays in DJMS-RC to reflect that C Company left the designated area before the stop date entered into DJms-RC. This resulted in overpayment of this pay to 40 soldiers. In February 2003, pay personnel at the Colorado USPFO created a transaction to cancel the tour instead of processing an adjustment to amend the stop date consistent with the date on the Release from Active Duty Order. When this occurred, DJMS-RC automatically processed a reversal of 11 months of the sergeant’s pay and allowances that he earned while mobilized from March 1, 2002, through February 4, 2003. This created a debt in the amount of $39,699 on the soldier's pay record. DJMS-RC was not designed to make active duty pays and exclude federal taxes in a single pay transaction. To compensate for this system constraint, DFAS established a workaround that requires two payment transactions over a 2-month payroll cycle to properly function. Such manual workarounds are inefficient and create additional labor-intensive, error- prone transaction processing, the authors say. The report was published by the Center for Military Readiness, a think tank based in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday. For more, go to www.militaryreadiness.org. DJMS-RC withholds federal taxes the first month, identifies the taxes to be refunded during end- of-month pay processing, and then makes a separate payment during the first pay update the following month to refund the taxes that should not have been withheld. Soldiers’ taxes could not be refunding the same month because the DJMS- RC refund process occurs only one time a month. Army Guard USPFO and in-theatre active Army area servicing finance office. exempt soldiers’ pay for the combat zone tax exclusion. we identified, we found several instances in our case studies in which soldiers received large lump sum payments, probably related to previous underpayments or other pay errors. Further, the lack of preventive controls over large payments poses an increased risk of fraudulent payments. DJMS-RC does have edits that prevent soldiers from (1) being paid for pay and allowances beyond the stop date for the active duty tour, or (2) beingpaid for more than one tour with overlapping dates. Each month, DFAS Indianapolis pay personnel receive an Electronic Fund. All pays and allowances and subsequent changes are documented in the Master Military Pay Account (MMPA)—the central pay record repository in DJMS-RC for each soldier. While deployed on active duty, there are several Army Guard (USPFO), active Army, and DFAS components involved in paying mobilized Army Guard personnel. The active Army servicing finance office, which may be within the United States or in a foreign country, is responsible for initiating pays earned while the soldier is deployed. Upon completion of an active duty tour, soldiers normally return to the same Army. DJMS-RC was originally designed to process payroll payments to Army Reserve and Army Guard personnel on weekend drills or on short periods of annual active duty. DFAS officials told us that the system is now stretched because it is being used to make payments and allowances that it was not structured for. Army finance office official told us handling two sets of pay transaction processing procedures is often confusing because they are often required to process a large number of both active and reserve personnel at the same time. While the Army Guard offers training for their military pay technicians, we found that there was no overall monitoring of Army Guard pay personnel training. DJMS-RC is not programmed to generate automatic payment of certain other types of pay and allowances. USPFO pay personnel are responsible for entering into JUSTIS special duty assignment pay, foreign language proficiency pay, and high altitude low opening (HALO) pay, each month. Army area servicing finance offices are responsible. For more information on how to use DJMS- RC, visit the Army's official website, or call the Army Pay System on-line at 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.armypaysystem.org. After soldiers complete their initial SRP and receive individual mobilization orders, they travel as a unit to a mobilization station. At the mobilization station, mobilized Army Guard personnel undergo a second SRP review. Mobilization pay technicians are required to promptly initiate pays that were not initiated during the first SRP. The mobilization station commander is required to certify that the unit is ready for mobilization, including ensuring that all authorized active duty pays are in place for the soldiers in the unit, at the end of this process. duty pays to mobilized Army Guard personnel. Pay technicians did not understand how to properly code data on the soldiers’ dependents status, which is used to determine housing allowances. Correcting these erroneous transactions required additional labor-intensive research and data entry by other more skilled pay technicians. We also found instances in which personnel pay-affecting changes such as changes in family separation allowance, basic allowance for housing, and active duty pay increases from promotions, were not entered into the pay system promptly. DJMS-RC is an aging, COBOL/mainframe- based system. DFAS established a number of “workarounds’ to compensate for DJMS- RC processing limitations. The finance office lacked sufficient numbers of knowledgeable military pay staff to expeditiously enter the large volume of transactions necessary to start active duty pay entitlements for the 49th Military Police Company’s soldiers. One of the assigned pay technicians was not familiar with DJMS.RC and consequently entered the wrong transactions. In 1995, the Army decided to process pays to mobilized Army Guard soldiers from the DJMS-RC system rather than the active Army payroll system. If the demobilization station did not take action to return a soldier to a demobilized status, the state USPFO has this responsibility. According to the then Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army (Financial Operations), this decision was made as an interim measure (pending the conversion to a single system to pay both active and reserve component soldiers) Audit work, provides that mobilized Army Guard soldiers are to be paid through the active Army pay system. This procedure, in effect during the mobilizations to support Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm, was changed in 1995. In 1995, it was agreed that Army Guard personnel would no longer be moved to the active duty pay system, DJMS-AC, when mobilized to active duty. Maintaining such outdated references in current policies may have contributed to confusion by USPFO and active Army finance personnel regarding required actions. DJMS RC’s current monthly manual pays can be automated rapidly in the new commercial off the shelf based environment. Programming changes to DJMS-RC have been implemented to enhance the processes for special duty assignment pay and foreign language proficiency pay. However, monthly input is still required. Hardship duty pay is scheduled for implementation for April 2004. High altitude, low opening demonstrated that DJMS RC's current monthly Manual Pay System can be Automated rapidly. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. the personnel and order-writing systems, limitations in DJMS-RC processing capabilities, and ineffective system edits of payments and debts. DOD has a significant system enhancement project under way to improve military pay. Given that the effort has been under way for about 5 years and DOD has encountered challenges fielding the system, it is likely that the department will continue to operate with existing system constraints for at least several more years. Our findings related to weaknesses in the systems environment were consistent with issues raised by DOD in its June 2002 report to the Congress. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service to evaluate the feasibility of establishing an edit check. The DFAS has already updated its current input system (Defense MilPay Office) to provide a warning to field finance personnel concerning the debt impact of tour cancellation (vice modification) for Reserve/Guard members. DJMS-RC would require a small to medium system change to edit debts that are above a specified dollar amount. (p. 78/Draft Report) Joint Military Pay System - Reserve Component (DJMS-RC) to identify any demobilizing soldiers whose tours in the pay system were not adjusted to coincide with the demobilization date. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. For medical extensions, the Army published revised guidance on June 10, 2003, reinforcing procedures on this process. Included were the requirements for publishing orders, including the requirement for publishing medical extension orders. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army to clarify the policies and procedures for how to properly amend active duty orders. Transfer Excess Dollar Listing after the electronic fund transfer payment has been processed. DJMS-RC does not contain edit checks to reject payments over the threshold amounts. 76 other payroll-related payments during the period October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003, of over $7,000 (net) each were paid by the unit. Our case studies identified individuals who received debt notices in excess of $30,000. For example, one soldier received an erroneous electronic payment totaling $20,110 without prior approval. DJMS-RC lacks effective edits to reject large proposed net pays over $4,000 at midmonth and over $7,000 before their final processing. DOD established these thresholds to monitor and detect abnormally large payments. We interviewed officials from the National Guard Bureau, State USPFOs, Army and DOD military pay offices, as well as unit commanders. We obtained documentation and performed walk-throughs associated with pay status/active duty change transactions, such as those to ensure that tour start and stop dates match MMPA dates. We found significant pay problems at the six Army Guard units we audited. These problems related to processes, human capital, and systems. The six units included three special forces and three military police units. The units were as follows: Special forces units Colorado B Company, 5th Battalion, 19th Special Forces Virginia B Company. Military police units Mississippi 114th Military Police Company, West Virginia C Company, 2nd Battalion, 3rd Battalion, 20th Special Armed Forces West Virginia, C Company. We used DJMS-RC pay transaction extracts to identify pay problems associated with our case study units. We did not perform an exact calculation of the net pay soldiers should have received. Rather, we used available documentation and follow-up follow-ups. The information provides further insight into some of the pay experiences of selected Army Guard soldiers who were mobilized under Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. These data collection instruments is not representative of the views of the Army Guard members in these units nor of those of Army Guard member overall. Automated improvements could be used to proactively alert USPFOs of certain pay-impacting transactions that are created in SIDPERS. In our case studies, we found instances in which mobilization order data were either not entered into DJMS-RC for several months after the personnel action or were entered inconsistently. At the case study locations we audited, several Army Guard soldiers received amended or revoked orders that were entered into SidPERS but were not entered in DJMS. the stop date that was entered into DJMS-RC. We also obtained documentation on and walk-throughs of the personnel-to-pay system interface process. We held interviews with officials from the Army National Guard Readiness Center, the National Guard Bureau, and DFAS Indianapolis and Denver. Because our preliminary assessment determined that current operations used to pay mobilized Army Guard soldiers relied extensively on error- prone manual transactions entry into multiple, nonintegrated systems, we did not statistically test current processes. process large numbers of pay transactions without sufficient numbers of knowledgeable personnel. Lack of personnel undermines the ability of the USPFO pay functions to carry out established control procedures. For example, our audits at several of the six case study units showed that there were no independent reviews of proposed pay transactions before they were submitted for processing. Such independent supervisory reviews are required by DJMS-RC operating procedures. However, an official told us that because of a limited number of pay technicians available to process pay transactions, such reviews are not carried out. In 2002, DOD estimated that integrated personnel and pay functions of DIMHRS would be fully deployed by fiscal year 2007. By the end of fiscal year 2003, DOD reporting shows that it will have invested over 5 years and about $360 million in conceptualizing and planning the system. Part of the requested funding for fiscal year 2004 was to acquire a payroll module, Forward Compatible Payroll. According to program officials, this module, in conjunction with a translation module and a Web services component, is to replace DJMS-RC by March 2006. DOD has a major system enhancement effort under way in this area. The Defense Integrated Military Human Resources System (DIMHRS) is described as the largest personnel and pay system in the world in both scope and number of people served. One of the major benefits expected with DIMH RS is “service members receiving accurate and timely pay and benefits.” Begun in 1998, it is ultimately intended to replace more than 80 legacy systems (including DJMS-RC) and integrate all pay, personnel, training and manpower. The DFAS is working with the Army DIMHRS Office to document existing workflow and roles and responsibilities. The program is still in the very early stages of determining when and how integrated processes and workflows will be incorporated into the D IMHRS based operational concept. The current plan is to integrate the DFAS system into the operational concept in the DIMhRS environment. The DFAS program is funded by the Department of Defense’s Office of Personnel Management (OPM) and the Defense Logistics Agency. allowances received so that they can readily determine if they received all and only entitled pays. Evaluate the feasibility of establishing an edit check and requiring approval before processing any debt assessments above a specified dollar amount. As part of the effort currently under way to reform DOD’s pay and personnel systems—referred to as DIMHRS—incorporate a complete understanding of the Army Guard pay problems as documented in this report into the requirements development for this system. In developing D IMHRS, consider the need for an Army Guard edit check. exceeded an established threshold or required approval. Secondary manual processing would be required to start the collection process or delete the debts. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The DFAS has already begun the process of collecting the debts and will continue to do so until the debt is paid off. The Army Guard pay problems as documented in this report will be incorporated into the requirements development for this system. (p. 78/Draft Report) DoD responds by saying it has already started the process. The toll free number for this center as well as the myPay internet address will be incorporated in the flyer discussed in response to recommendation 13. Until the implementation of DIMHRS, with full integration of pay and personnel, the processing of pay transactions will still require the movement of some entitlement information/authorization from units and personnel to finance via paper. As such, a network of finance support activities is required to geographically align with deployed combat and supporting personnel units. As always, pay is still pay. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through the Internet. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full- text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics.. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. GAO e-mails this list to you every afternoon. The list contains links to the full-text document files. Go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to e-mail alerts” under the “Order GAO Products” heading. For more information on the GAO’s work, visit its website at: http://www.gaO.gov/gao-news. For the latest in GAO news, visit: www.GAO.site daily. The General Accounting Office is the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. The GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core mission: “To improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the American people.” The agency was founded in 1947 and is based in Washington, DC. system that was not designed to handle the intricacies of active duty pay and allowances, would result in significant pay problems. While it is likely that DOD will be required to rely on existing systems for a number of years, a complete and lasting solution to the pay problems we identified will only be achieved through a complete reengineering. However, immediate actions can be taken in these areas to improve the timeliness and accuracy of pay and allowance payments to activated service members and their families. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. a complete reengineering of the processes and controls and ensure that this reengineering effort deals not only with the systems aspect of the problems we identified, but also with the human capital and process aspects. In its written comments, DOD concurred with our recommendations and identified actions to address the identified deficiencies. DOD’s response outlined some actions already taken, others that are underway, and further planned actions with respect to our recommendations. If effectively implemented, these actions should substantially resolve the deficiencies pointed out in our report. of clarity in existing procedural requirements in this area, we found that several of the locations we visited had established standard but undocumented reconciliation practices. Several of the case study locations we audited established a standard, but undocumented, practice of reconciling roughly a third of the common data elements every month. We found that although all the USPFOs told us they received monthly SIDPERS and DJMS-RC mismatch reports, they did not always fully reconcile and make all necessary system corrections each month. to “…initially mirror the existing ‘As-Is’ structure until the new capability has been fielded and risk factors/ requirements have been clearly identified. A determination of what additional skills and expertise are required for operators of a knowledge-based personnel community must be made after the capabilities of the commercial off the shelf product are fully known.” Staff making key contributions to this report include: Paul S. Begnaud, Ronald A. Bergman, James D. Berry, Jr., Amy C. Chang, Mary E. Chervenic.  DFAS Indianapolis is the central site for all Army military pay and is responsible for maintaining over 1 million MMPAs for the Army. Each MMPA contains a soldier’s pay-related personnel, entitlement, and performance data. Personnel data contained in the MMPA are generated from SIDPERS—a personnel database maintained and used by the Army Guard at the 54 state-level personnel offices to capture data on personnel-related actions (e.g. discharge, promotion, demotion actions) USPFO pay technicians use JUSTIS to access and record data in DJMS-RC. The unit commander is responsible for ensuring that all personnel data for each soldier under their command are current. By entering the soldier’s Social Security number and mobilization order number into JUSTIS, the pay technician can view the pay data for that soldier. The Army Guard pay technicians are responsible for initiating basic pay and allowances by manually entering the start and stop dates for the active duty tour that appears on each soldier's mobilization order. DMO is the pay input subsystem used by active Army finance offices and the DOD military pay offices to update DJMS-RC. DMO can be used to create transactions for military pay and allowances that are not reported at the time of mobilization for upload. Additional data needed to create pay transactions associated with active duty pay and allowance must be entered manually into JUSTIS from hard copies of mobilization orders. JustIS and DMO share the same operating system platform and certain database tables. For more information on how to use JUSTIS, visit: www.justis.org.  JUSTIS is the pay input subsystem used by the 54 state-level Army Guard commands, including the USPFOs. This subsystem processes transactions for submission to DJMS-RC to create payments for Army National Guard soldiers. JUSTIS receives certain pay-affecting personnel data from SIDPERS. It also receives a limited amount of mobilization order data directly from AFCOS. These systems are decentralized in that each of the 54 sites owns and maintains its own JUSTIS database. It is used for file transfer transactions, online queries of MMPAs, and downloads of data files. (1) requires manual review and acceptance by USPFO pay personnel of the transactions created in SIDPERS. (2) does not create pay and allowance transactions to update a soldier’s pay records. For example, when Army Guard soldiers change from inactive drilling status to active duty status, state personnel offices create personnel-related transactions in SIDs. USPfo pay personnel are not aware that a pay-related transaction is needed until they receive documentation from the soldier, the soldier's unit commander, or the monthly personnel/pay mismatch report. USPFO pay personnel had a procedure in place to help prevent inadvertently omitting month-to-month entry of nonautomated pays for entitled soldiers. Pay personnel at the USPFO in Maryland used a warning screen within JUSTIS as a mechanism to alert them that soldiers were eligible to receive that particular pay component that month. Although this does not alleviate the problem of month- to-month manual entry, the warning screen could be used to help preclude some of the pay problems we found. operate JUSTIS when she was assigned to the job. Instead, she stated, she has learned how to operate the system through on-the-job training and many phone calls to system support personnel in Indianapolis. She estimated that she was not fully comfortable with all the required transaction processing procedures until she had been on the job for about 7 years. U.S. Army Forces Command Regulation 500-3-3, Reserve Component Unit Commander’s Handbook (July 15, 1999) requires unit commanders to (1) annually review and update pay.  warning messages will appear when a transaction is entered to cancel or amend a tour of duty. The new warnings will advise that the transaction will or could result in a collection action and will ask the pay technician to confirm that is their intent. While we did not verify the effectiveness of this change, it has the potential to reduce pay problems associated with errors made in amending orders. Required time frames for processing pay transactions. Written requirements did not exist with respect to the maximum amount of time that should be spent processing transactions. processing, and paying mobilized Army Guard soldiers were not integrated. Lacking either an integrated or effectively interfaced set of personnel and pay systems, DOD must rely on error-prone, manual entry of data from the same source documents into multiple systems. With an effectively integrated system, changes to personnel records automatically update related payroll records from a single source of data input. Without an effective interface, an automatic personnel-to-payroll system interface can also reduce errors caused by independent, manual entries. between the personnel and pay systems, we found instances in which pay-affecting information did not get entered. We found that an existing interface could be used to help alert military pay personnel to take action when mobilization transactions are entered into the personnel system. Army Guard state personnel offices used an already existing interface between SIDPERS and JUSTIS to transmit data on certain personnel transactions (i.e., transfers, promotions, demotions, and address changes) to the 54 USPFOs to update the soldier’s pay records. writing system—AFCOS. Currently, certain personnel and order information entered and stored in the AFCOS database is automatically filled in the JUSTIS input screens. This auto-fill functionality eliminates the need for some error-prone, manual reentry of data into JUSTIS. However, currently, manual entry of data from a hard copy of the soldier’s orders and other documentation is required to initiate the soldier's pay and allowances. This procedure defeats the purpose of an effective interface. end of active duty tour date documented on the soldier’s mobilization orders. This automated feature is intended to prevent erroneous payments to soldiers beyond their authorized active duty status. A change in dependent status, such as marriage or divorce, a promotion, jump pay disqualification, or being demobilized before a tour ends would change or eliminate some of the pays and allowances a soldier would be entitled to receive. However, human intervention is required when a pay or allowance error is detected or an event occurs that requires a change in the soldier's pay and personnel file. units we audited, USPFO pay personnel had to manually enter the soldier’s active duty tour start and stop dates into JUSTIS from a hard copy of the actual mobilization order. When we brought this to the attention of NGB officials, they stated that providing the auto-fill functionality to the mobilization input screens would require minimal programming changes. N GB officials stated that they planned to release a programming software change to all 54USPFOs that would allow the start andstop dates to be automatically filled into the mobilization screens. The financial portion of the SRP is conducted by one of the 54 United States Property and Fiscal Offices (USPFO) If documentation, such as birth certificates for dependents or parachute jumping certifications, is missing, soldiers have a few days to obtain the necessary documentation. The SRP also verifies the accuracy of pay records for each soldier and to make changes to pay records based on appropriate supporting documentation for the pays and allowances that the soldiers will be entitled to receive when initially mobilized. receive at least 1 month of their special duty assignment pay. According to DFAS procedures, the unit’s Army Guard USPFO should have initiated these pays. In addition, these problems could have been minimized if they were identified and corrected by the Army mobilization station finance office at Fort Knox during the soldier readiness processing at that location. In essence, under Department of Defense (DOD) guidance, the active Army mobilization stations are to act as the primary source of payment for special duty soldiers. were physically fit for the ensuing mobilization. Soldiers not submitting the correct paperwork at the time of the Soldier Readiness Program caused some payments to be late. For example, according to the USPFO, one soldier did not submit the proper paperwork for his family separation allowance. The delay in submission caused his first payment to be over 3 months late. Another problem with the unit’s mobilization related to soldiers’ pay records in DJMS-RC. The unit was ordered to report back to the U.S. base in Charleston, West Virginia. as specified in the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 26. The purpose of this review was to ensure that all soldiers had proper administrative paperwork and financial documents and were physically fit for the ensuing mobilization. Mississippi USPFO personnel, who conducted the finance portion of the 114th Military Police unit’s soldier readiness program, were required to verify soldiers’ supporting financial documentation. Not submitting the complete and current paperwork at the time of the mobilization was a violation of the FMR. The US Army Reserve Command (USARC) has expanded training programs on DJMS-RC. Over 35 training events have occurred since February 2002 in support of deploying units and mobilization/demobilization sites. The Army finance school is working with USARC to develop an exportable training package on DJ MS-RC, which should be available within the next 6 months. Additionally, DFAS and the Army are sending a joint training team to Kuwait and Iraq to train soldiers on the JUMPS system. For the midterm (6 months to 2 years), the training on reserve component pay input for soldiers in finance battalions and garrison support units will be evaluated to determine how best to expand the training. The Army finance school is already evaluating the expansion of the current instruction on mobilized reserve componentpay in the training curriculum for the finance advanced individual training course. In light of the planned integration of reserve and active component pay processing into a single system, the training will be expanded in the coming months and years. locations from which they were mobilized for demobilization out-processing before returning to their home units. Demobilization personnel, employed by the active Army or Army Guard, are required to provide each soldier with a Release from Active Duty (REFRAD) order and a Form DD 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from active duty. At this time, the supporting USPFO is responsible for discontinuing monthly input of all nonautomated pays and allowances. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. 57 soldiers continued to receive pays to which they were no longer entitled because they left Afghanistan. These include hostile fire pay, hardship duty pay, or both. According to DOD mobilization procedures, the finance office at the servicing demobilization station is to conduct a finance out-processing. In addition, according to DOD’s Financial Management Regulation (FMR), Volume 7A, chapters 10 and 17, location-based pays must be terminated. The finance office is responsible for inputting transactions to stop certain location- based pays.  DFAS-Indianapolis guidance did not clearly specify how to carry out assigned responsibilities for soldiers who return from active duty earlier than their units. DFAS, in cooperation with the Army, will reinforce existing procedures on responsibilities for stopping active duty pays. This will be part of the revised guidance identified in response to recommendation one. In addition, mechanisms have been established to perform automated comparisons of personnel demobilization records and the Defense Department. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Colorado’s B Company demobilization was complicated by the fact that the unit did not demobilize through the same active Army location used to mobilize the unit. Some soldiers in the unit told us that upon their return from overseas deployments, they were informed that they should have corrected these problems while in- theater. DFAS procedures provide that Army Guard soldiers are to demobilized and have their active duty pays stopped by the installation from which they originally mobilized. However, the unit received orders to dem mobilize. to ensure that resources are available to provide appropriately skilled pay personnel at mobilization stations to support surge processing. No such contingency staffing plan exists for the USPFOs. To support surge requirements, the National Guard could use additional National Guard soldiers being brought on active duty in a Temporary Tour of Active Duty status. The additional requirement and funding will need to be found. (p. 76/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to determine whether issues. concerning resource allocations for the military pay operations. exist at all 54 USPfos. support surge processing at mobilization and demobilization sites. provide additional resources to support surge processing for pay start and stop transaction requirements at Army Guard home stations during initial soldier readiness programs. Modify existing training policies. Determine whether issues concerning relatively low-graded military pay technicians exist at all 54 USPFOs, and if so, take appropriate actions to address these issues. If so, implement a plan to address the issues by the end of the year. If not, implement an alternative plan to meet the needs of the U.S. Army. their units. Clarify the policies and procedures for how to properly amend active duty orders, including medical extensions. Require Army Guard commands and unit commanders to carry out complete monthly pay and personnel records reconciliations. Update policies to reflect current legal and DOD administrative requirements with respect to active duty pays and allowances for mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Consider expanding the scope of the existing memorandum of understanding between DFAS and the Army concerning the provision of resources to conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) identify any pay problems for this unit in the demobilization phase. To obtain an understanding and assess the processes, personnel (human capital), and systems used to provide assurance that mobilized Army Guard soldiers were paid accurately and timely. We reviewed applicable policies, procedures, and program guidance; observed pay processing operations; and interviewed cognizant agency officials. We applied the policies and procedures prescribed in these documents to the observed and documented procedures and practices followed by the various DOD components involved in providing active duty pays. A joint task force has been established to review existing procedural guidance, lessons learned to date, and available metrics. As a first step, expanded central guidance will be published within the next 30 days. This breakout of responsibilities will also be provided in a simple matrix form to visually reinforce this guidance. Within approximately 60 days, the Army and DFAS will begin compliance with the new guidance. The Army will then begin the process of implementing this guidance in a phased manner, starting with the mobilization/demobilization stations. reviews of the mobilization/demobilization stations to ensure adherence to published guidance and to provide any further assistance these offices may require. Within the next 3 to 6 months, the task force will build upon the existing guidance to provide comprehensive procedures and related standards, down to the individual technician level. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to establish performance measures for obtaining supporting documentation and. processing pay transactions. will prepare a standard information flyer to be given to all mobilizing reservists. The flyer will address entitlements as well as sources of pay support. It will be published via Army Knowledge Online and incorporated into the overall revision to procedural guidance addressed in response to recommendation one. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to identify and evaluate options for improving customer service provided to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. The need for such actions is increasingly imperative in light of the current extended deployment of Army Guard soldiers in Operation Iraqi Freedom. Immediate steps to at least mitigate the most serious of the problems we identified are needed to help ensure that the Army Guard can continue to successfully fulfill its vital role in our national defense. We recommend that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Army, to take steps to mitigate the problems. The Army Guard is a vital part of the U.S. military. prior to the end date of the current active duty tour. The Army and DFAS have implemented changes to the input systems to warn the operator processing a tour cancellation when the correct input should be a tour curtailment. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to require Army Guard commands and unit commanders. to carry out complete monthly pay and personnel records. reconciliations and take necessary actions to correct the problem. The importance of conducting annual pay support documentation reviews and monthly reconciliations will be incorporated into precommand courses at the company level for the National Guard by the end of Fiscal Year 2004. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to identify and evaluate options for improving. customer service provided to mobilized Army Guard soldiers by providing improved. procedures for informing soldiers of their pay and allowance entitlements throughout their active duty mobilization. correct any pay and personnel record mismatches found each month. Within 60 days, the Army will reinforce to all reserve commands the importance of this requirement. As noted by the GAO, this requirement is already included in US Army Forces Command Regulation 500-3-3, Unit Commander’s Handbook. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. within 60 days. ( p. 75 / Draft Report) The GAO recommended that the. Secretary of Defense direct the Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to update policies and procedures to reflect current legal. and DoD administrative requirements with Enclosure respect to active duty pays and allowances. GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to evaluate the feasibility of using the. personnel-to-pay interface as a means to proactively alert pay personnel of. actions needed to start entitled active duty pays and allowances. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Within the next 6 months, we will evaluate the viability of using this interface. (p. 77/Draft Report) addressed by the supplemental provided to Army. Normal manning at the USPFO, Military Pay Section is based on Full Time Support authorized state strength levels. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to determine whether concerns over relatively low graded. military pay technicians exist at all 54 USPfos. (p. 76/Draft Report) Enclosure grade levels in the US PFOs’ Comptroller sections and the current grade levels for military. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to establish an ongoing mechanism to monitor the quality and completion of training for both pay and finance personnel and unit commanders. (p. 76/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The National Guard currently reviews the training status of military pay technicians at the USPFOs as part of the ongoing quality assurance review program. The appropriate mechanism for monitoring the training of unit commanders and finance battalion personnel is dependent on the location of that training in the overall Army training infrastructure. remains essentially a command responsibility. For dependents of deployed soldiers, the single source for finance, or any administrative issues, is either the rear detachment of the soldiers’ deployed unit or, for the National Guard, the applicable State Family Assistance Coordinator. The GAO recommended that the. Secretary of Defense direct the Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to review the pay problems we. identified at our six bases. The pay problems. we identified at six bases are now under review by the Department of Defense. pay is scheduled for automation in April 2004. We will also recommend inclusion of automation of high altitude, low opening jump pay in FCP. We acknowledge that the information available to the member is inadequate in today’s system. This has already been addressed in the FCP requirements. For the future, FCP is being designed with an easily understandable leave and earnings statement as one of the main requirements. FCP will also resolve pay systems capability related problems described in this report. and effective immediately, provide the finance battalions/Defense Military Pay Offices with the National Guard newsletter.  DFAS has recognized the urgency of improving the military pay system capabilities supporting our Service members. A study was conducted of improvement alternatives in the fall of 2002, which concluded that a new commercial off the shelf based payroll capability (“Forward Compatible Payroll” (FCP) was the best option to expeditiously improve our system payroll services. FCP is currently prototyping military entitlements and deductions and has already been used by the military. The small volume of members entitled to this pay has not justified nor provided an adequate return on investment for this automation. GAO: Standards for the timeliness of processing pay transactions are currently in place for units, finance offices, and central site. These standards are focused on the full range of transactions and associated unit level data is generated based on the normal permanent/home station relationship with a Reserve Component Pay Support Office. Within the next 6 months, DFAS and the Army will jointly review how these existing mechanisms can be used to more succinctly capture data specifically related to mobilized soldiers and units. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. FCP will resolve pay systems capability related problems described in this report. Until such time FCP has been implemented, we will ensure that these certain pays paid under “other credits” are included in the flyer addressed in response to recommendation 13. DFAS will update the DFAS Reserve Component Mobilization Procedures to mandate a remark be entered on the service member’s leave and earnings statement for pays paidUnder “Other Credits” to inform the service members exactly what entitlement(s) they have paid. their families to access for customer service for any pay problems. (p. 77/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The existing centralized information sources on individual soldiers pay will be expanded. DFAS is developing a separate view-only Personal Identification Number capability which soldiers will be able to give their dependents so they can see the Leave and Earning Statement without being able to change anything on the pay record. This enhancement is scheduled for August 2004. The DFAS also operates a central customer service center for pay. Having out-of-date requirements in current regulations may contribute to confusion and customer service issues. The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998 replaced the basic allowance for quarters and the variable housing allowance. However, volume 7A, chapter 27 of the DOD FMR, dated February 2002, still refers to the basic Allowance for Quarters and variable Housing Allowance. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Army finance personnel while stationed at the Pentagon during the period of December 15, 2001, through December 31, 2001. Prior to this period, the soldiers were stationed at Fort Stewart and were not provided lodging or mess. When the unit was redeployed to the Pentagon, mess facilities became available. However, active Army finance personnel did not reduce the unit’s subsistence allowance rate to reflect the available mess facilities. According to DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 25, enlisted soldiers are not entitled to the full subsistence allowance when mess facilities are provided. against identified overpayments through March 31, 2003. We did not attempt to estimate payments received against identified underpayments. We provided the support for the pay problems we identified to appropriate officials, at each of our case study locations. We briefed DOD and Army officials, National Guard Bureau officials, DFAS officials, and USPFO officials in the selected states on the details of our audit, including our findings and their implications. On October 10, 2003, we requested comments on a draft report. GAO: We conducted our audit work from November 2002 through September 2003 in accordance with U.S. generally accepted government auditing standards. We received comments on November 5, 2003, and have summarized those comments in the “Agency Comments and Our Evaluation” section of this report. DOD’s comments are reprinted in appendix VIII.of this report, and are summarized in appendix VII. of the report. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS), in GAO-04-89. The National Guard will develop a JUSTIS table identifying all applicable soldiers in order to notify the USPFO technician of accounts requiring monthly entitlement input. This will be more efficient and effective than a pop-up warning screen, which would appear only if the individual soldier’s social security number were input. (p. 78/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur with the National Guard's plan to use the JUSTIS warning screen to eliminate inadvertent omissions of required monthly manual pay inputs. Defense Finance and Accounting Service, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to evaluate the feasibility of redesigning leave and earnings statement. Soldiers would have clear explanation of all pay and allowances received so that they can readily determine if they received all and only entitled pays. (p. 78/Draft Report) Enclosure understanding their leave and Earnings statement by reviewing and updating (as necessary) the information provided on our website(s); by providing independent leave andEarnings statement remarks for present and future changes; and by providing monthly newsletters. unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies of the report to interested congressional committees. We will make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at the following sites: www.cnn.com, www.dailymail.co.uk, and www.theguardian.com. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. We focused on 14 basic types of pays and allowances applicable to Army Guard units we selected for case studies. We categorized these 14 pay and allowance types into two groups: (1) pays, including basic pay, special duty assignment pay, parachute jumping and foreign language proficiency skill-based pays, and location-based hostile fire and hardship duty pays. (2) allowances, including allowances for housing, subsistence, family separation, and cost of living for the continental United States. In this case study, we focused on the basic pay and allowances. Army Guard soldiers may be eligible for tax advantages associated with their mobilization to active duty. mobilized Army Guard soldiers assigned to or working in a combat zone are entitled to exclude from taxable income certain military pay that would otherwise be taxable. There are three key phases associated with starting and stopping relevant pays and allowances. Army Guard units and state-level units can be mobilized at any time. The Army Guard is a joint service with the U.S. Department of Defense and the Department of the Treasury. such as guarding the Pentagon, airports, nuclear power plants, domestic water supplies, bridges, tunnels, and other military assets were conducted under Operation Noble Eagle. The Army Guard also supported federal peacekeeping operations in Southwest Asia with Operation Desert Spring and in Kosovo with Operation Joint Guardian under various other military operations. While on active duty, all Army Guard soldiers earn various statutorily authorized pays and allowances. The types of pay and allowances soldiers are eligible to receive vary depending upon rank and length of service, dependency status, skills and certifications acquired. enlist for 8 years and are entitled to a number of benefits while serving in the Army Guard. Army Guard members are required to attend one drill weekend each month and one annual training period (usually 2 weeks in the summer) each year. Initially, all nonprior service personnel are required. to attend initial entry training, also known as Basic Training. After Basic Training, soldiers go to their Advanced training. After their enlistment periods, former Army Guard member are entitled. to veterans’ benefits, such as health care and burial benefits. The Army Guard has armories and training facilities in more than 2,800 communities. The Army Guard is a partner with the active Army and the Army Reserves in fulfilling the country's military needs. The National Guard Bureau (NGB) assists the Army Guard in this partnership. NGB is a joint bureau of the Departments of the Army, the Air Force and is charged with overseeing the federal functions of the National Guard. For more information, visit the Army Guardsman's website or call 1-800-273-8255 or go to http://www.armyguard.org/. NGB helps the Army Guard and the Air Guard procure funding and administer policies. NGB also acts as a liaison between the Departments of the Army and Air Force and the states. All Army forces are integrated under DOD’s “total force” concept. Under this concept, active and reserve components are to be blended into a cohesive total force to meet a given need. The U.S. Army is the largest military service in the world, followed by the European Union and the United States. Reports to the governor of the state, or in the case of the District of Columbia, the mayor. At the state level, the governors have the ability, under the Constitution of the United States, to call up members of the Army Guard in times of domestic emergency or need. Army Guard units battle fires or help communities deal with floods, tornadoes, hurricanes, snowstorms, or other emergency situations. In times of civil unrest, the citizens of a state rely on the Army Guards to respond, if needed. The President has the authority to mobilize the Army Guard, putting them in federal duty status. While federalized, the units answer to the Combatant Commander of the theatre in which they are operating and, ultimately, to the President. Nonfederalized Army Guard members’ pay and allowances are paid with state funds while federalized Army Guards are paid for with federal funds. Even when notFederalized, The Army Guard has a federal mission to maintain properly trained and equipped units, available for prompt mobilization. The Army Guard is the oldest component of any of the uniformed services. It traces its roots to the colonial militia, and claims a “birth”of 1636. Today, the Army Guard exists in 54 locations that include all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and three territories: Guam, the Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico. During peacetime, Army Guard units report to the adjutant generals of their states or territories, or in the case of the District, to the Commanding General. GAO’s Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government states that effective human capital practices are critical to establishing and maintaining a strong internal control environment. Management should take steps to ensure that its organization has the appropriate number of employees, GAO says. Our audit identified concerns with the numbers of knowledgeable personnel dedicated to entering and processing active duty pays and allowances to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Both active Army and Army Guard military pay personnel play key roles in the military pay system, the report says. Defense (Comptroller), to take the following actions to address the issues we found with respect to the existing processes, human capital, and automated systems relied on to pay activated Army Guard personnel. Establish a unified set of policies and procedures for all Army Guard, Army, and DFAS personnel to follow for ensuring active duty pays for Army Guard Personnel mobilized to active duty. Established performance measures for obtaining supporting documentation and processing pay transactions (for example, no more than 5 days would seem reasonable). Establish who is accountable for stopping active duty pay for soldiers who return home earlier than expected. Several organizations with key roles in payroll payments to mobilized Army Guard soldiers have issued their own implementing regulations, policies, and procedures. Existing written policies and procedures are voluminous. The DOD Financial Management Regulations (FMR) guidance on pay and allowance entitlements alone covers 65 chapters. As a result of their size, we found unwritten practices in place at some of the case study locations we audited. The Army Guard organization is responsible for providing guidance, training, and oversight and coordination for active duty pays to Army Guard personnel. We found instances in which unclear procedural requirements for processing active duty pays contributed to erroneous and late pays and allowances to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. A significant problem we found at the case study locations we audited concerned procedures that should be followed for amending active duty orders. We found existing policies and procedural guidance were unclear with respect to the following issues.may adversely affect the Army’s ability to retain these valuable personnel. In addition, these cumbersome policies and procedures contributed to the pay errors we identified. date—some of which still reflected practices in place in 1991 during Operation Desert Storm. We found that a substantial number of payment errors were caused, at least in part, by unclear procedural requirements for processing active duty pay and allowance entitlements to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Overall, as shown in figures 3, 4 and 5, we found that an extensive, cumbersome, and labor-intensive process has evolved to pay mobilized Army Guards for their active duty service. While figures 1, 2, and 3 show the number of payments made, figures 4, 5 and 6 show the total amount paid. and continually evolving nature as legal, procedural, and system requirements change. We found that policies and procedures were not well understood or consistently applied across the potentially hundreds of organizations and thousands of personnel involved in paying mobilized Army Guard personnel. These processes have been developed in piecemeal fashion over a number of years to accommodate changing legislative requirements, DOD policies, and the unique operating practices of different DOD organizations and systems involved in these processes. As discussed in the following sections, these extensive and evolving policies were confusing both across various organizations and personnel involved. policies and procedures were unclear with respect to organizational responsibilities. Confusion centered principally around pay processing responsibility for Army Guard soldiers as they move from state control to federal control and back again. To be effective, current processes rely on close coordination and communication between state (Army Guard unit and state-level command organizations) and federal (active Army finance locations at mobilization/demobilization stations and at area servicing finance offices) We found a significant number of instances in which critical coordination requirements were not clearly defined. command support components, as well as active Army finance components and DFAS, have key roles in this process. In addition, there are five key computer systems involved in authorizing, entering, and processing active duty pays to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Army’s standard order writing system, Automated Fund Control Order System (AFCOS), is used to authorize, enter, and process active duty pay for the Army Guard. DFAS’ Army Guard and Reserve pay system, DJMS-RC, is used for Army Guard pay. implement an integrated military pay and personnel system. DOD’s report acknowledged that major deficiencies in the delivery of military personnel and pay services must be addressed by the envisioned system. The report indicated these deficiencies were the direct result of a myriad of current systems with multiple, complex interfaces to fully support current business process requirements. Figure 6 provides an overview of the five systems currently involved in processing Army Guard pay and Personnel information. The five key DOD systems involved in authorizing, entering, and authorizing Army Guard personnel information. Thousands of Army Guard (individual units and state-level organizations), active Army, and DFAS components may be involved in authorizing, processing, and paying mobilized Army Guard soldiers. An estimated 2,300 local Army Guard home units, unit commanders, and unit administrators that are involved in maintaining up-to-date soldier personnel and related pay records. 54 state- level Army Guard commands, including both USPFOs andState- level personnel offices involved in authorize and pay mobilized Army Guards. and personnel mismatch reports and unit commanders’ finance reports. Available documentation showed that these controls were either not done or were not done consistently or timely. The processing of Army Guard pay relies on systems that are not integrated or effectively interfaced. These after-the-fact detective controls are critical to detecting and correcting erroneous or fraudulent pays. To be effective, the 54 state-level Army Guard commands must individually reconcile common data elements in all54 state-operated personnel databases for Army Guard personnel at least monthly. Military pay technicians at both the USPFOs and active Army finance office locations made data coding errors when entering transaction codes into the pay systems. We were told that these errors occurred because military pay personnel were unfamiliar with the system’s pay processing requirements for active. soldiers.may have extensive experience and knowledge of pay processing. requirements for regular Army soldiers, but may not be well versed in the unique procedures and pay transaction entry requirements for Army Guard soldiers, the study found. The study was conducted by the U.S. Army Pay Office. risk associated with “Service issues with business process reengineering and data migration.” The department’s ability to effectively mitigate such risks is of particular concern given its poor track record in successfully designing and implementing major systems in the past. Army Guard soldiers will likely be required to rely on existing pay systems for at least several more years, the authors say. The review of the pay experiences of the soldiers in the Colorado Army Guard's 220th Military Police Company, which was mobilized to active duty, was limited. Army Guard pay technicians relied primarily on on-the-job-training and phone calls to determine how to process active duty pays to activated Army Guard personnel. The Army Guard began offering training on mobilization pays and transaction processing to the USPFO military pay technicians in fiscal year 2002. However, there is no requirement for USPfo pay technicians to attend these training courses. The National Guard has instituted mobilization specific training for pay technicians. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to modify existing training policies and procedures. fiscal year 2003 were canceled. Only two of the six case study locations we audited tracked the extent to which pay technicians have taken training in this area. We were told that few of the military pay technicians at the state Army Guard USPFOs had formal training on JUSTIS, DJMS-RC, or mobilization pay processing requirements and procedures. Throughout our case studies, we found numerous errors that involved some element of human capital. One payroll clerk told us that she had not received any formal training. pay eligibility or payroll processing requirements used to provide accurate and timely pays to Army Guard soldiers. There are no DOD or Army requirements for military pay personnel to receive training on pay entitlements and processing requirements associated with mobilized Army Guards. Neither Army Guard unit commanders nor active Army commanders were required to get training on the importance of the pay to on-board personnel reconciliations. We were told and procedures to require all USPFO and active Army pay and finance personnel responsible for entering pay transactions for mobilized soldiers to receive appropriate training upon assuming such duties. weaknesses include insufficient resources allocated to pay processing, inadequate training related to existing policies and procedures, and poor customer service. A sufficient number of well-trained military pay staff is particularly crucial given the extensive, cumbersome, and labor-intensive process requirements that have evolved to support active duty pay to Army personnel. The lack of sufficient numbers of military pay professionals can undermine the effectiveness of even a world-class integrated pay and personnel system.particularly in light of the extensive set of policies and Procedures now in effect in this area. pay sections of the USPFOs, (2) the relatively lower grade structure for nonsupervisory personnel in the military pay sections in comparison with the grades for similar positions in other sections, and (3) few military pay technicians on board at the six locations we audited had received formal training on pay eligibility and pay processing requirements for mobilized Army Guard personnel. NGB provides annual authorization for the overall staffing levels for each state. Within these overall staffingMilitary pay sections made it difficult to recruit and retain employees. authorizations, each state allocates positions to each of the sections within a USPFO. We compared the actual number of personnel on board to the NGB-authorized staffing level for the military pay sections. Two of the six case study locations had fewer military pay technicians on board than they were authorized. Officials at several of the case study units also stated that restrictions on rank/grade at which U.S.PFOs are allowed to hire personnel for their sections were not clearly spelled out. Army Guard operating procedures provide that the primary responsibility for administering Army Guard soldiers’ pay as they are mobilized to active duty rests with the 54 USPFOs. We identified concerns with (1) the number of staff on board in the military backlogs in processing pay start transactions during mobilization processing. We also identified instances in which the personnel at military pay offices did not appear to know the different aspects of the extensive paperwork associated with activating appropriate basic pays, entitlements, and special incentive pays. concerns at all three phases of the active duty tours and involving DFAS, active Army, and Army Guard servicing components. Consistent with the confusion we found among Army Guard and active Army finance components concerning responsibility for processing pay transactions for mobilized Army Guard soldiers, we found indications that the soldiers themselves were similarly confused. Many of the complaints we identified concerned confusion over whether Army Guard personnel mobilized to active duty should be served by the USPFO or by the active Army because they were mobilized to federal service. starting active duty pay transactions; active Army finance offices or DOD Military Pay Offices at over 15 mobilization stations across the United States. 28 active Army area servicing finance offices at over 50 locations worldwide that are involved in servicing Army Guard soldiers’ location-based active duty pays. DFAS-Indianapolis—the central site for processing Army Guard soldier’s active duty payments; DF AS-Denver—theCentral site for maintaining the pay system used to pay Army Guard personnel. DF AS Cleveland—thecentral site for handling soldier military pay. active duty pays at the same time—this requirement was often not followed. The Chief of Payroll at one of our case study locations told us that because they were currently understaffed, staff members worked 12 to 14 hours a day and still had backlogs of pay start transactions to be entered into the pay system. We were also told that two of our other caseStudy locations experienced backlogs and errors in entering pay start. transactions when they were processing large numbers of Army Guard soldiers during initial mobilizations.

ROUGE-1: 78.90, ROUGE-2: 74.03, ROUGE-L: 21.22
BERTScore: 53.62

==============================================
==================== [30/100] ====================
Summary:
that may put the government at risk of contractors inappropriately influencing government decisions. Unlike the aggregate DOD spending limit, the statutory requirement for guidance on reductions in funding for closely associated with inherently governmental functions and staff augmentation are directed to each component. The reductions are expected to take place at each component, rather than an aggregate reduction across the department. Through subsequent revisions of the law, Congress extended the time period for DOD to implement the full 20 percent reduction through fiscal year 2015. Fiscal years 2014 and 2015. support contractors by 10 percent each year from fiscal year 2011 through 2013. If components are not in compliance with the full 30 percent reduction by fiscal year 2015, a Comptroller official said that the Comptroller’s office plans to enforce the reduction by making adjustments to component funding levels for the 2014 fiscal year. Section 808 calls for a total of 20 percent in reductions in fiscal years 2012 and 2013, as well as an additional 10 percent reduction for fiscal year2011. The Comptroller also plans to also include the additional 10percent reduction called for by Secretary Gates’ Efficiencies Initiative. and assistance services indicate that all of the military departments achieved reductions of greater than 20 percent by fiscal year 2014. As shown in table 2, the Air Force and Navy achieved reductions in advisory and assistance service obligations greater than 30 percent from fiscal years 2010 through 2013. The DOD Comptroller intends to measure a 30 percent reduction from 2010 levels based on former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates’ Efficiencies Initiative which called for DOD to reduce service. The Army achieved a 9 percent reduction by fiscal Year 2013, but achieved a 32 percent reduction in fiscal Year 2014. services budget category to measure the reductions. We analyzed each military department’s obligations for this budget category reported in the Comptroller's PRCP data from fiscal years 2010 through 2014. We conducted this performance audit from January 2015 through September 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. The evidence obtained provided sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable based for our audit findings, the agency says. full 20 percent reduction. Because DOD has efforts underway to address our December 2014 recommendations, we are not making new recommendations in this report. In DOD’s written comments, reproduced in appendix II, the Director for Operations, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), concurred with the findings of our report. We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees. In addition the report is available at no charge on the Department of Defense's website, which is open to the public. report on actions taken to implement reductions through the fiscal year 2013 inventory review. Only one of 35 components reported all of the information necessary to demonstrate compliance. The Comptroller’s office plans to assess the military departments and defense agencies reductions in advisory and assistance service obligations when the fiscalyear 2017 budget is submitted. However, a Comptroller official agreed that the data as presented in table 2 are consistent with its preliminary analysis indicating that each of theMilitary departments has met the obligations. The data have not yet been reported through fiscal year 2015, our analysis of currently available obligation data for advisory fiscal year 2017 budget submissions. plan to report the final results in 2016. DOD obligated $54.6 billion, or $280 million less than the limit on contract services in fiscal year 2014. DOD issued guidance in June 2012 instructing components to rely on the inventory of contracted services to measure funding reductions. DOD Inspector General found that the information included in the inventory was not sufficient to determine whether funding reductions were met and also recommended that DOD clarify how reductions should be reported. The Comptroller’s office improved planning and oversight of contract services which DOD components reduced. Advisory and assistance services is a budget category that includes many of the types of contractor services that are considered closely associated with inherently governmental and staff augmentation functions. This new measure was adopted after a lack of data hindered DOD’s previous attempts to demonstrate compliance. Section 813 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2015 or implemented. All of the military departments achieved funding reductions greater than 20 percent by fiscal year 2014. For example, DOD instructed components to reduce funding for certain programs by 20 percent. Office of Personnel and Readiness that outlines the results of the review and any corrective actions to be taken to ensure that contractors are not performing inherently governmental functions. Section 808 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2012 further reinforced those provisions by requiring DOD to issue guidance instructing components to reduce funding by 10 percent for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 for contracts identified with inherently governmental and staff augmentation functions. These functions may include personal services or other positions, according to the Office of Personnel and Readiness. Section 955 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2013 required the Secretary of Defense to ensure that the civilian and service contractor workforces are appropriately sized to support and execute the National Military Strategy. Section 955 further required the secretary of defense to develop an efficiencies plan for those workforces. This annual inventory submission is to include, among other things, the number of contractor full time equivalents and the associated direct labor cost for these positions. It is also to include the associated full time equivalent wages. requires that the efficiencies plan ensures that total funding reductions for the civilian and service contractor workforces are commensurate with reductions in military end strength. We have on-going work assessing DOD’s compliance with section 2330a as well as DOD‘s implementation of section 955. We plan to report the final results in fiscal year 2016. The U.S. Code requires the secretaries of the military departments and heads of the defense agencies to complete a review of the contracts identified in the inventory. activities do not include inherently governmental functions. The review should also ensure that to the maximum extent practicable, the activities don't include any closely associated with inherently government functions. DOD guidance instructs the secretaries of the military departments and heads of the defense agencies to submit an inventory review certification letter to the White House after the review is complete. The inventory review is expected to be completed by the end of the year. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. the aggregate spending limit through fiscal year 2015. Congress has also enacted legislation to improve the availability of information on DOD’s acquisition of services and to help the department make more strategic decisions about the appropriate workforce mix of military, civilian, and contractor personnel. In fiscal year 2002, Congress enacted section 2330a of title 10 of the U.S. Code, which required the Secretary of Defense to establish a data collection system to provide management information on each purchase of services by a military department or defense agency. Section 808 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2012 limited DOD’s total obligations for contract services in fiscal years 2012 through 2014. The limit does not apply to contract services for military construction, research and development, and services funded for overseas contingency operations. DOD may adjust spending above 2010 levels to account for the cost of additional civilian personnel positions over fiscal year 2010 levels. DOD identified an aggregate spending limit of $55.75 billion for fiscalyear 2014, the authors say. They say DOD would still be in compliance with the law if total obligations were less than the aggregate limit. the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. Contact points for our Office of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. The objectives for this review were to determine the extent to which the Department of Defense (DOD) implemented the requirements of section 808 of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for fiscal year 2012, as modified by section 802 of the NDAA. our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In addition to the contact named above, W. William Russell (Assistant Director); Beth Reed Fritts; and Suzanne Sterling made significant contributions to this review. Pete Anderson, Virginia Chanley, John Krump, and Roxanna Sun made key contributions to the report. We are happy to share our findings with the public. We hope you will use this information to help with your own audit of your own company. We would like to thank all those who contributed to this report. Navy FMC officials identified two factors that led to the Navy exceeding its target. Officials attributed the remaining $600 million of the $1.07 billion it obligated over its target to a coding error in its financial system. To mitigate this issue for fiscal year 2015, the Navy FMC office began monthly monitoring of contract services obligations, which should help identify potential overages as they occur, officials said. The Navy submitted a waiver request to the Comptroller’s office in June 2014 requesting an additional $263 million. The Air Force obligated $1.45 billion less than its fiscal year 2014 target provided by the Comptroller. The Army and Navy exceeded their spending targets. Air Force officials said that FMC did not have to make adjustments to command’s obligation targets for fiscal year $10.4 billion on contract services for the operations and maintenance account. The monitoring allowed Army budget officials to identify, request, and obtain approval for an additional $200 million from the comptroller. In fiscal year 2013, Navy FMC officials said they do not set command spending targets for contract services, but expect commands to stay within respective budgeted amounts. Navy financial management officials said they manually corrected these coding errors in the past, but decided to forego the manual corrections in fiscal year 2014. The Navy FMC office requested updates to its financial system in August 2013 to correct this coding issue, but the change has not yet been approved. To make progress payments for these types of items, Navy officials explained that these payments are coded as contract services to work around the system limitation. The change is expected to be approved in fiscalyear 2016. In fiscal year 2014, DOD obligated $54.6 billion for contract services. DOD reported obligating $1.17 billion less than the limit. DOD’s methodology for calculating the spending limit contained errors. DOD concurred with this recommendation and has taken steps to address it for fiscal year 2015. The actual limit should be reduced from $55.8 billion to $ 54.9 billion, as shown in figure 1. The Comptroller took steps in fiscal year2014 to improve management of the contract services spending limit. Each of the military departments exceeded their respective Comptroller-provided targets in fiscal year 2012. The departments implemented fiscal controls in fiscal 2013, to varying degrees, which helped the Air Force and Navy adhere to their targets. We concluded that significant discrepancies between the for fiscal year 2014 by seeking input when setting spending targets and implementing a waiver request process to allow for adjustments during the year. We found that DOD obligated $1.72 billion more than the limit in fiscal Year 2012 and about $500 million less than thelimit in fiscalyear 2013. In December 2014, we reported on DOD’s implementation of the section 808 limitations in fiscal years 2012 and 2013. We found DOD exceeded the spending limit in fiscal year 2012 and adhered to the limit in 2013. However, we also identified issues with the DOD Comptroller office’S calculation of the spendinglimit. These issues resulted in an overstated limit in Fiscal years 2012 & 2013. Whatever required reductions that DOD didn’t achieve in those years are required to be taken in 2014 and 2015. limit to allow for unexpected costs during the year. This new process allowed the Comptroller to approve adjustments related to specific requests and allocate portions of the reserved amount among the components. The Comptroller received three waiver requests totaling $607 million for fiscal year 2014. For example, the Navy submitted a waiver request in June 2014 requesting $263 million in additional target allocation to account for additional costs, such as ship and facilities maintenance, ship modernization, and audit readiness. These additional steps allowed the comptroller to ensure that targets were achievable based on components’ input. 2014, as each command was able to manage to their respective target. In fiscal year 2014, the Army obligated $254 million more than its adjusted Comptroller target. Army budget officials attributed a portion of the obligations over its target to coding errors in its financial system. These coding errors include obligations for this step was needed because in fiscal years 2012 and 2013 the Comptroller set the Army’s spending target based solely on its enacted budget amounts for contract services. The Army budget office relies on historical budget data to determine contract services budget estimates for inclusion in the budget request. contract services from overseas contingency operations that are not subject to the spending limit. Army budget officials attributed these errors to limitations with its financial system. Army officials plan to review the fiscal year 2015 obligation data to correct these errors before submitting its data to the Comptroller’s office. One step taken by the Army Budget Office in fiscal year 2014 to better manage contract services was to solicit contract services estimates from commands outside of the regular budgeting process. An Army budget official explained that this step was to help the Army better manage its contract services. military departments’ adherence to obligation targets for fiscal year 2013 signaled that improvements could be made to better manage contract services obligations. The report recommended that the Secretary of Defense evaluate the fiscal controls used by the military departments to identify effective practices to improve the management of contract services. DOD agreed with this recommendation and while the Comptroller’s office has not taken action to implement it, military departments have improved implementation of fiscal controls as discussed later in this report. We also have ongoing work that will further examine DOD”s planning, programming and budgeting process for contracted services. For fiscal year 2014, the military departments continued to improve their management of contract services obligations. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government call for effective control activities that enforce guidance to help ensure stewardship of government resources. The military departments implemented controls such as.adjustments to targets when needed during the year. We found that they used a variety of controls to manage contract services. obligations to ensure compliance with the Comptroller- provided targets. With the Army improving its controls from previous years, we found that the Army improved its controls.

ROUGE-1: 64.69, ROUGE-2: 59.65, ROUGE-L: 23.30
BERTScore: 60.83

==============================================
==================== [31/100] ====================
Summary:
the upcoming 1996-97 program year, it is too early to determine their impact. Corporation award (adjusted) $12,071,004 $31,881,332 $3,470,008 $2,333,452 (Table notes on next page) The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check. For more information about this testimony, please call Wayne B. Upshaw at (202) 512-7006. GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. The U.S. General Accounting Office is located at P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015. facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. of other program costs, including participant training, education, and uniforms. Staff salaries, travel, transportation, supplies, and equipment; and program evaluation and administrative costs. If participants leave the program during the year, the Corporation may either allow the program to redirect participant stipend and benefit funds to other program expenses or take back any unused portion of the grant. To ensure that federal Corporation dollars are used to leverage other resources for program support, grantees must also obtain support from non-Corporation sources. program operating costs from 25 to 33 percent for grants awarded for the 1996-97 program year. The Corporation’s revised grant guidelines also seek to reduce costs by encouraging a program requesting increased funding to add additional participants, thereby reducing its cost per participant. The guidelines also encourage programs to seek additional funding only for education awards. It means cash and in-kind contributions that pay participants’ living allowances, social security taxes, health insurance, child care, and the education awards they earn in exchange for their service. a state or local government source, with the split between cash and in-kind contributions being about 43 percent ( about $57 million) and 26 percent (about $34 million), respectively. The remaining 31 percent of matching resources were from private sources. Nonfederal AmeriCorps*USA grantees received resources of less than $800. Non-Corporation federal funds accounted for about 50 percent of total resources available to federal grantees. This amounted to about $16 per service hour or in- Kind contributions from sources other than the Corporation. to help pay for the program. This support, which can be cash or in-kind contributions, may come from other federal sources as well as state and local governments, and private sources. Some federal agencies received grants during the initial 2 program years to support AmeriCorps*USA participants who performed work furthering the agencies’ missions. Since we completed our review, the Congress and the Corporation have undertaken a number of measures that are intended to reduce the costs of Ameri corps. about $20 per direct service hour, assuming 20 percent of the 1,700 hours of total service was nondirect service time. Because most AmeriCorps*USA programs were still implementing their first year of operations, actual cost could not be determined. We calculated available resources per participant on a full-time-equivalent (FTE) basis. It is important not to equate our funding information with cost data. These figures represent resources available for all program expenses and are not the equivalent of annual salaries or hourly wages for participants.  Selection of participants is not based on financial need. Corporation used about $149 million of its fiscal year 1994 appropriations to make about 300 grants to nonprofit organizations and federal, state, and local government agencies. Most of the Corporation’s funding for AmeriCorps*USA projects went to providing operating grants and education awards. About 69 percent of all matching resources came from either a federal or state or local government source, according to the program's website. The program is funded by donations from individuals, corporations, foundations, foundations and individuals. Congress also mandated that GAO further study the Corporation’s operations. The Corporation has revised its grant application guidelines for programs receiving funding in the upcoming 1996-97 program year. In response to congressional concerns over the cost of mandating the purchase and use of uniforms, the AmeriCorps*USA uniform package (t-shirt, sweatshirt, button, and so on) is no longer a program requirement. The corporation also has directed grantees exceeding a program year 1995-96 cost per participant of $13,800 to reduce their proposed program year1996-97 per-participant costs by an overall average of 10 percent. reduced tuition. Half of the participants have chosen to do so. A second program allowed participants to earn 36 credit hours toward an associate’s degree in the natural sciences through their service, which can lead to state certification as an environmental restoration technician. On the legislative side, the Congress mandated new funding restrictions for the Corporation. The Corporation, after consulting with Members of Congress, has revised its grant guidelines. These new measures will only apply to AmeriCorps members who have completed their service. per participant from non-Corporation federal sources, or about 3 percent of their total resources. The appendix contains more detailed program resource information by sponsoring agency. AmeriCorps*USA has also sponsored an evaluation of its own that summarized results at a sample of programs during their first 5 months of operation. The evaluation identified diverse achievements related to each service area. Participants renovating inner-city housing, assisting in the construction of new homes, and helping with other community service projects. They also helped with community clean-ups and clean-up efforts. Team built a community farm market and renovated a municipal stadium. Participants of several programs spanned a wide age range, from teenagers to retirees. Teams also showed diversity in educational, economic, and ethnic backgrounds. Participants said that a valuable aspect of the program was working with others with different backgrounds and benefiting from their strengths. Another of AmeriCorps*USA’s program objectives was to foster civic responsibility. The program is funded by the federal government. For more information on the Americorps* USA program, visit www.corps-usa.org. AmeriCorps’s legislation identified renewing the spirit of community as an objective. We observed several projects focused on rebuilding communities. For example, a multifamily house being renovated was formerly a congregating spot for drug dealers. Program officials believe that after completion, it will encourage other neighborhood improvements. Another project was maintaining and reestablishing native vegetation in a flood control area, analyzing neighborhood crime statistics to better target prevention measures, and developing a program in a community food bank for people with special dietary needs. We saw evidence of this at programs such as one where participants devoted half of each Friday to working on community service projects. Participants at another program, in which they organized meetings to establish relationships between at-risk youth and elderly people, commented that this work had taught them how to organize programs. Training periods included conflict resolution techniques and team-building skills. At the sites we visited, participants indicated that the education award was an important part of the program. education or job training. We hope to see more of these programs in the future. AmeriCorps*USA is the largest national and community service program since the Civilian Conservation Corps of the 1930s. Participants earn education awards to help pay for postsecondary education in exchange for performing community service that matches priorities established by the Corporation. A minimum of 1,700 hours of service within a year is required to earn the full $4,725 award. The Corporation requires that programs devote some portion of the award to community service. The award is for full-time service or half of that amount for part- time service. AmeriCorps*USA participants receive a living allowance stipend that is at least equal to, but no more than double, the average annual living allowance received by Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA) participants. Additional benefits include health insurance and child care assistance for participants who need them. Individuals can join a national service program before, during, or after postsecondary education. A participant must be a citizen, a national, or a lawful permanent resident of the United States. but no more than 20 percent, of participants’ service hours to nondirect service activities, such as training or studying for the equivalent of a high school diploma. To earn a part-time award, a participant must perform 900 hours of community service within 2 years. Individuals can serve more than two terms; however, they can only receive two education awards. The awards, which are held in trust by the U.S. Treasury, are paid directly to qualified postsecondary institutions or student loan lenders. of their decision to participate in AmeriCorps*USA. Programs also supported participants in obtaining high school diplomas or the equivalent. According to Corporation regulations, a full-time participant who does not have a high school diploma or its equivalent generally must agree to earn one or the other before using the education award. In one program, a general equivalency diploma (GED) candidate was receiving classroom instruction and individual tutoring. She had recently passed the preliminary GED test after failing the Ged test five times. larger program that recruited at-risk youth, most of whom do not have high school diplomas. Program officials said most of the participants are enrolled in high school equivalency courses. We also saw programs that offer participants the chance to get postsecondary academic credit. One such program, affiliated with a private college, offered participants the option of pursuing an environmental studies curriculum through which they can earn up to six upper-level credits at a college. The program is free and available to the public.

ROUGE-1: 77.91, ROUGE-2: 71.20, ROUGE-L: 30.77
BERTScore: 54.70

==============================================
==================== [32/100] ====================
Summary:
for response and recovery planning and preparation. We visited a decontamination contractor that performed environmental remediation activities in the aftermath of the 2006 radioactive poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko in London. Two officials from the United Kingdom who we interviewed during our site visit reviewed a draft of the information contained in appendix III for content and accuracy. We conducted this performance audit from October 2008 to January 2010 in accordance with the standards set by the U.S. Department of State. We also reviewed documents provided by these officials and from other sources to obtain a better understanding of this system. with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Table 1 provides a brief summary of four RDD exercises, since May 2003, which contained recovery objectives including a planned exercise for April 2010. The United Kingdom provides an example of another country’s efforts to prepare to recover from a terrorist attack using chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear weapons. The U.S. government has conducted four exercises since 2003. In contrast, detonating an IND would require a terrorist group to obtain nuclear weapons material. Another form of nuclear terrorism occurred with the dispersal of radioactive materials through a sequence of events in London during November and December 2006. On November 23, 2006, Alexander Litvinenko, a former officer of the Russian Federal Security Service, was poisoned with a milligram of polonium-210—about the size of a grain of salt. The perpetrators of that attack dispersed the poloniam by the perpetrators of the 2006 London bombings. response capabilities. In November 2006, the Government Decontamination Service was requested to respond to an incident involving the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko with a milligram of polonium-210. This service was asked to assist the City of Westminster, within greater London, given the international nature of the event. The incident was classified as a hazardous materials event rather then a terrorist incident. According to the recovery planning process, the city selected a contractor from a list of specialized contractors for the remediation work. The aftermath of the 2006 polonium poisoning incident in London had many of the characteristics of an RDD incident. FEMA regional office respondents (7 of 9) indicated that it would be beneficial to synchronize existing guidance from multiple and disparate sources to ensure that they are complementary and not competing. In particular, through this incident, U.K. officials gained an appreciation for the need to have an established cleanup plan, including a process for determining cleanup levels, and procedures for handling the radioactive waste. people who might have been in various ways exposed to the polonium. Health officials tested 738 of them and found that 137 had reportable levels of this substance. Few of these individuals turned out to have levels that warranted medical attention. The decontamination activities at these sites spanned 19 days, involved a number of methods and technologies, and cost more than $200,000. The estimated total cost of managing this incident, including law enforcement investigation, testing individuals, sampling materials, and cleanup, was $4 million. The crime and the victim resulted in widespread contamination across London and even abroad. His poisoning was detected only after he was hospitalized for a few weeks and tested for symptoms of radiation exposure because of hair loss. Following the poisoning, forensic investigators examined 47 sites across London for traces of polonium. Of these locations, about 12 showed signs of this radioactive material, including a restaurant, hotel room, soccer stadium, and an eastbound British Airways plane. British investigators also identified over 1,000. Guidance emphasizes that response and recovery are not discrete activities and do not occur sequentially. Recovery should be an integral part of response from the very beginning, as actions taken at all times can influence longer-term outcomes for communities. Established a Government Decontamination Service in 2005 to address issues associated with contaminated land, buildings, open space, infrastructure, and transportation routes from both deliberate and accidental releases of chemical, biological, and nuclear materials. No single approach could meet the needs of every affected area, so guidance is not prescriptive or operational manual. and used a model contract developed by this service for this purpose. This model contract contains allowable costs per unit, equipment charges, and charge out rates for the emergency response. Under the contract, the selected specialized contractor agrees to start off with nonaggressive, simple, and less expensive decontamination approaches, and then apply more sophisticated approaches, if necessary, to meet the desired cleanup level. The actual payments for these services were made by the owners of properties, such as a hotel where the perpetrators of the crime had stayed, that were contaminated with polonium. contractors, the service has identified three specialized contractors that have capabilities to address various decontamination scenarios. A specialized contractor is invited to visit the location and receives a briefing on the incident scenario. The Government Decontamination Service then assesses the contractor’s approach and recommendations to identify issues, strengths, and weaknesses. The service develops improvement plans, backed with exercises, to address identified performance gaps. For example, in December 2007, the government tested and evaluated the capabilities of one of its specialized contractors. testing of methods and technologies for cleaning up and decommissioning contaminated structures and soils. In addition, since the passage of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), EPA has undertaken significant efforts to study, develop, and use technologies that can address radioactive contamination. DOD has also played a major role in studying potential applications for innovative technologies for its Superfund sites. As a result of federal agencies’ experience with radioactive materials, there is evidence that the agencies could effectively carry out the analysis and environmental cleanup of localized sites. The report is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. In our review, we examined the extent to which federal agencies are planning to fulfill their responsibilities to help cities and states clean up areas contaminated with radiation. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, current research has focused on predicting the effects of radiation release in urban settings. EPA’s National Homeland Security Research Center informed us that while there are available methods that have proven successful for cleaning up various types of contamination. More research is needed to develop standard national guidance for their efficacious application in urban areas and to other RDD or IND incident scenarios, they say. According to a decontamination expert, experience has shown that without guidance and discussion early in the response phase, it can be difficult to get to the bottom of the problem. a contractor might use a decontamination technology during this phase for no other reason than it was used before in an unrelated situation. This situation might lead to selecting environmental cleanup technologies that generate waste types that are more difficult to remove than the original material and that create more debris requiring disposal. For example, the conventional use of high-pressure hosing to decontaminate a building is effective under normal conditions but could be the wrong cleanup approach for an RDD using cesium-137. In this case, the imbibing (absorbing) properties of some porous surfaces such as concrete would actually cause this soluble radioactive isotope to penetrate even further into surfaces. A senior EPA official with the Office of Radiation and Indoor Air told us that the agency has studies under way to determine the efficacy of high-pressure hosing for removing contamination from porous urban surfaces. There are also limitations in federal capabilities to help address, in a timely manner, the magnitude of cleanup, the official said. of contaminated areas and levels of cleanup after applying decontamination approaches. FEMA’s proposed process for determining cleanup standards during the recovery phase for RDD and IND incidents has not been fully exercised. EPA determined that there was a significant capacity and competency gap in efficiently to enhance the capacity and capability of public laboratories. Some technologies are more efficient than others at removing certain kinds of contamination. The current DHS planning guidance for the cleanup of urban areas contaminated with radioactive materials in recovering from RDD or IND incidents. phases of an RDD incident, as this incident is expected to present a challenge for these coordinators. This guidance addresses possible decontamination approaches for eight types of radionuclides. As previously mentioned, federal agencies’ current approaches to analysis and environmental cleanup have only been applied in localized areas. In Exercise Streetwise, a specialized contractor was fully tested at the venue on its capability to detect and clean up actual radioactive materials. According to a senior official with the Government Decontamination Service, “you cannot get a realistic picture of recovery needs and issues through only tabletop exercises” areas contaminated by these materials. DOE’s National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) has developed operational plans, orders, and publications on how to respond to a radiological or nuclear incident. NNSA has developed various FRMAC manuals to guide operational, assessment and monitoring activities. In regard to environmental cleanup, EPA has published inventories of radiological methods and technology guidance for contaminated sites, surfaces, and media. The cleanup technologies are generally grouped into radiological and environmental cleanup technologies. The Government Decontamination Service has no statutory powers itself. Instead, it provides advice and guidance to local governments. It maintains and builds a framework of specialized contractors to conduct these activities. It also advises the national government regarding the issue of radioactive and nuclear materials. The service was established because it would not be cost-effective for each responsible authority to maintain the level of expertise needed for the analysis and environmental cleanup of affected areas. The release of such material would be a rare event, the government says. chemical and physical technologies. During the initial response phase to an incident, responders might rely on fairly simple cleanup approaches. EPA has also published guidance for its On-Scene Coordinators at each regional office to aid in their response to a radiological incident. This guidance covers the full range of radiological incidents, but its focus is primarily on the early to intermediate phase. The latter recovery phase might require no additional action or use of complex decontamination technologies depending on the level of desired cleanup. Security experts have raised concerns that terrorists may try to smuggle radiological or nuclear materials into the United States to produce either an RDD or IND. Sealed sources are used throughout the U.S. and are commonly called a sealed radiological source. This radioactive material is encapsulated, or sealed, in metal, such as stainless steel, titanium, or platinum, to prevent its dispersal and is commonly known as a sealed Radiological Source (RDS) or dirty bomb. The RDD is a bomb made from a mixture of nuclear and radioactive materials. other countries in equipment designed to diagnose and treat illnesses, preserve food, detect flaws in pipeline welds, and determine the moisture content of soil. Depending on their use, sealed sources contain different types of radioactive material, such as strontium- 90, cobalt-60, cesium-137, plutonium-238, and plutonium-239. While no terrorists have detonated a dirty bomb in a city, Chechen separatists placed a canister containing cesiam-137 in a Moscow park in the mid- 1990s. waste disposal facilities for waste generated by users of radioactive materials in their states. Another issue is paying for waste disposal. In the Superfund program, EPA can bill the responsible party, if known. However, covering the cost of waste disposal would be complicated in the case of RDD or IND incidents. One additional complicating factor would be the mixing and problematic separation of radioactive, biological, and chemical materials in the debris that would stem from such incidents. According to a recent research paper on disposal issues, the proper characterization of the quantity, properties, and level of debris contamination and decontamination is important. and experiences drawn from national and international sources. For example, a Government Decontamination Service official told us that this agency is currently engaged in learning more about how to deal with the disposal of radioactive waste that has no known owner. The issue is not only ownership, but where to put the radioactive debris and how to cover the cost of storage and disposal. In this regard, the United Kingdom has a clearance rule for allowing very low-level radioactive waste to be disposed of in less expensive ways. restrictions on accessing possible disposal facilities for the radioactive debris stemming from such incidents. According to NNSA officials, DOE’s disposal sites currently can only accept low-level and mixed low- level radioactive waste from its own and DOD facilities. EPA is concerned about access to commercial radioactive waste disposal sites in the event of such an incident, according to an EPA decontamination expert. Currently, there is only one low-levels radioactive waste. disposal site located in Utah that could be used by most states for radioactive debris disposal. The United Kingdom has established a framework for addressing the release of radiological materials. This framework was primarily established through the 2001 Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations and the 2004 Civil Contingencies Act. The regulations require preparation of on- and off-site emergency management plans for release of radioactive materials in the event of a nuclear power plant accident. These regulations also require the conduct of exercises to test preparedness to respond to radiological releases.manage and recover from hardship. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. and more numerous solid and hazardous waste landfill sites without specific regulatory approval or exemption. In addition, the United Kingdom and the U.S. have agreed to increase the exchange of information and personnel regarding the research, development, testing, evaluation, and development of technical standards and operations to address chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear incidents. While passage of the 2004 Civil Contingencies Act was an important legislative step to further emergency preparedness, the reaction of local responders to several domestic incidents following passage of this act made it clear to the national government that these responders needed more comprehensive guidance. Sources of contamination considered in the handbooks include nuclear accidents, radiological dispersion devices, and satellite accidents. Compendia of comprehensive, state-of-the-art datasheets for around 100 management options. Decision-aiding framework comprising color-coded selection tables, look-up tables and decision trees. The handbooks can also be applied for training purposes and during emergency exercises. Conducted a full-scale RDD recovery exercise in the U.S. in 2009. The handbooks can be applied as part of the decision-aiding process to develop a recovery strategy following an incident, for training purposes, and during emergency exercises. The handbooks are divided into several independent sections comprising supporting scientific and technical information, an analysis of the factors influencing recovery, compendia of state-of-the-art datasheets for around 100 management options, guidance on planning in advance, and several worked examples. An example of a datasheet for one of the management options—high pressure hosing—contained in the UK Recovery Handbooks for Radiation Incidents: 2009, is provided. The handbooks are intended to aid decision makers in developing recovery strategies for contaminated food production systems, drinking water, and inhabited areas. The handbooks were first published in 2005 in response to the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. The 2009 version of the UK Recovery Handbooks for Radiological Incidents is considered relevant to radiological releases from the nuclear and nonnuclear industry sectors. The development of these handbooks was sponsored by six government departments and agencies representing national and local governments, according to a senior official from the Health Protection Agency. Agency, the European Union also supported the development of a series of generic recovery handbooks for use by other countries based on the structure, format, and content of the handbook developed for the United Kingdom. Sources of contamination considered in the handbooks include nuclear accidents, radiological dispersion devices, and satellite accidents. The current handbooks, updated from the 2008 version, include management options for application in the prerelease, emergency and longer-term phases of an incident. The handbooks U.K. officials told us that the attention to recovery in their country is rooted in decades of experience with the conflict in Northern Ireland, dealing with widespread contamination from the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. The UK Nuclear Recovery Plan Template considers recovery to be more than simply the replacement of what has been destroyed and the rehabilitation of those affected. The manner in which recovery processes are undertaken is critical to their success and, therefore, best achieved when the affected community is able to exercise a high degree of self-determination. Recovering from RDD or IND incidents would likely be difficult and lengthy. Completing the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials would be among the first steps in the recovery process after the initial response to save lives. A faster recovery would help lessen the consequences of RDD and IND incidents. In fact, being fully prepared to recover from such an incident may also serve as a deterrent to those who would do us harm. In the U.S. and Canada, the Department of Energy and Climate Change is conducting a study of the effects of radioactive contamination in the United Kingdom. The UK Nuclear Recovery Plan Template provides a generic recovery strategy and structures needed to address a radiological release from a civil or defense nuclear reactor. It is also considered applicable to recovery from RDD and IND incidents. Among other things, it provides guidance on the formation of for them. This guidance is based on examples from existing local government recovery plans and experiences. While not specific to malicious use of radiological and nuclear materials, according to a senior government official with the UK Nuclear Emergency Planning Liaison group. maintains and builds a framework of specialized analysis and environmental cleanup contractors, and advises the national government regarding response capabilities. This service implemented its responsibilities by assisting the City of Westminster. Developed online national recovery guidance in 2007. This guidance reinforces and updates the early emergency response and recovery guidance by establishing, among other things, a recovery planning process during the response phase so that the potential impacts of early advice and actions are explored and understood for the future recovery of the area. The service was established after the November 2006 polonium poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko. a Recovery Advisory Group and Science and Technology Advisory Cell early in the response phase. This advisory group would transition into a broader Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group during the recovery phase. The guidance requires that all high-risk cities in the United Kingdom prepare recovery plans. Finally, according to United Kingdom officials, the 2006 polonium incident in London showed the value of a long-term recovery plan for radioactive waste. The U.S. government has a similar recovery plan in place, but it has not yet been implemented. strategy would provide guidance to federal, state, and local agencies in revising their operational plans for recovery activities. Currently, the limited federal planning guidance related to the recovery from RDD and IND incidents can be found in a number of documents. There are several annexes to the National Response Framework that address, in part, federal agency responsibilities and assets to help state and local governments recover from these incidents. The June 2008 nuclear and radiological incident annex describes federal responsibilities and provides some operational guidance for pertinent response activities. in a single mission, such as through FRMAC. FEMA has not issued specific guidance describing how federal capabilities would be integrated into and support state and local plans for recovery from RDD or IND incidents. According to a senior FEMA official, the agency has delayed issuing this guidance pending the reevaluation of its planning approach by the new administration. EPA stated that our survey results underscore the importance having clear communication and notification among federal agencies. If not addressed, could hamper recovery efforts, EPA said. because FEMA is already aware that its planning system does not fully recognize the involvement of state and local governments, the agency is developing regional support plans. FEMA officials: In August 2008, DHS issued stop-gap guidance outside of FEMA’s planning guidance framework to provide some immediate direction to federal, state, and local emergency response officials in developing their own operational plans and response protocols for protection of emergency workers after RDD or IND incidents. In regard to recovery, EPA says it is working with FEMA to develop a plan. FEMA and other federal agencies worked together on this guidance. It was intended to clarify the processes for providing federal cleanup assistance following such an incident. EPA informed us that DOE had convened an interagency workgroup to address gaps in DHS’s guidance and had issued a preliminary report, for comment by September 30, EPA said in a response to a draft of this report. The report is available for comment on the DHS guidance here, and on the DOE guidance at www.dhs.gov/response. 2009, containing additional operational guidelines to respond to an RDD incident. DOD has established operational plans for consequence management following terrorist incidents, including RDD and IND attacks. Without federal guidance for coordinating federal, state, and local planning for recovery from RDD or IND incidents, cities and states lack a framework for developing a recovery plan. EPA has also worked with other federal agencies to examine its own 1992 protective action guides to address shortcomings and to incorporate more recent guidance. However, according to EPA officials, much work remains to convert the new guidance into operational guidance. cities and states in our survey offered some opinions on the need for intelligence information on RDD and IND threats. They generally said that sharing information with law enforcement agencies is necessary for appropriate planning for RDD or IND incidents. Only half of the respondents indicated that they were getting sufficient intelligence information from law enforcement sources. The EPA and FEMA regional office emergency management officials that responded to our survey also offered a number of suggestions on ways to improve federal preparedness to recover from an RDD incident. The United Kingdom reported taking the following actions: Enacted civil protection legislation in 2004. The Civil Contingencies Act established a statutory framework of roles and responsibilities for local responders to address the effects of the most serious emergencies. The November 2005 guidance addressing emergency response and recovery covers the principles, practical considerations, operational doctrine, and examples of good practice for these activities. The terrorism. Act established an integrated emergency management system, not unlike that in the United States, comprising six related activities: anticipation, assessment, prevention, preparation, response, and recovery. than that contained in the 2005 guidance for emergency response and recovery activities. One such event was the July 2005 subway bombing in London by a terrorist group that killed 52 people. This incident, in conjunction with other events in 2005, such as the Buncefield Fire and severe flooding, prompted the government in 2006 to form a National Recovery Working Group. This working group was comprised of a wide range of government departments and agencies, as well as other stakeholders who had been involved in the recovery phase. FEMA has not developed a national disaster recovery strategy, as required by law and directed by executive guidance. FEMA has not issued specific guidance to coordinate federal, state, and local government recovery planning for RDD or IND incidents. The federal government has placed a higher priority on developing a strategy to respond to domestic incidents, including RDD and IND incidents, than it has on a similar strategy for recovering from these incidents. Moreover, federal agencies have conducted few exercises to test recovery plans forThese incidents. FEMA recognizes its responsibility to prepare a national disaster recovery strategy. The new administration has decided to rethink the entire approach. FEMA plans to seek out opinions of nonfederal stakeholders. Once completed, the official said that the recovery once completed will not include guidance on long-term recovery activities. The FEMA coordinator also told us that FEMA could not provide a time frame for its completion. The previous administration had drafted a “white paper” addressing this strategy. This same official did say that in developing this strategy, FEMA will seek out opinion of non-Federal stakeholders. of RDD and IND incidents. In developing such a recovery strategy, respondents from the cities, like those from their states, want the federal government to consult with them. Respondents representing most cities (10 of 13) and states (7 of 10) also provided specifics on the type of planning guidance necessary. This is important because, according to one city official, “recovery is what it’s all about.” For example, respondents said they wanted to clarify responsibilities among federal, state, and local governments. Government charged working group with producing national recovery guidance for local responders. Working group also identified gaps in the country’s recovery capability with recommendations to address them. In 2007, the working group produced a National Recovery Guidance document. This guidance establishes a planning process for involving recovery stakeholders during the response phase to ensure that the potential impact of early advice and actions for the future recovery of the area are explored and understood. The working group also contributed to the ongoing review of the 2005 nonstatutory guidance for emergency response and recovery activities. Online guidance covers 14 generic issues, such as recovery structures and processes, training and exercises. National Recovery Working Group found that many organizations had already conducted small-scale recovery exercises and had applied lessons learned from them. For example, the National Recovery Guidance addresses the need for training recovery personnel on essential roles, responsibilities, and procedures to test competencies, as well as the need to design and conduct recovery exercises. One of the issues addressed is how to train recovery personnel to respond to an emergency. FEMA’s National Exercise Schedule reveals 94 RDD or IND response exercises planned and carried out by these authorities from May 2003 through September 2009. These exercises were identified as either full-scale, tabletop, workshop, seminar, functional, or a drill. Some locations have conducted several of them over the past three years, and some locations have done more than one exercise at a time. The cycle of preparedness for prevention, protection, response, and recovery missions ends with adequate exercising, evaluation, and improvement. a period of time. FEMA’s National Exercise Division told us that only three of them actually included a recovery component that exercised activities associated with environmental cleanup. Many response and a few recovery exercises were conducted over the last 6 years that do not appear in FEMA's National Exercise Schedule. We previously reported that information in the National Exercise schedule database was unreliable. Nevertheless, for the past 6 years, FEMA has conducted a number of response and recovery exercises that don’t appear in the database. Several hundred participants took part in the exercise. The lessons learned from this exercise were incorporated into the United Kingdom’s recovery strategy. One key lesson is the benefit of exercising the handover of government leadership during the response phase to leadership of the recovery phase. Established a recovery strategy for the UK in 2008. 2008. The U.K. launched a recovery plan for the country following the earthquake and tsunami of September 11, 2011. The United Kingdom has a long history of dealing with natural disasters. In November 2008, Exercise Green Star tested government capabilities to recover from a terrorist attack based on RDD scenarios. This was the first time that complex recovery issues had been considered in a national-level exercise. In this exercise, several hundred participants were wholly focused on recovery issues. About 6 weeks after an initial RDD tabletop response exercise, a 2-day recovery exercise took place involving three scenarios: rural contamination of crops and livestock, contamination of the urban transit infrastructure, and disruption of the water supply. A recovery discussion following an RDD or IND response exercise has typically not occurred. This is because of the time needed to fully address the response objectives of the exercise, which are seen as a higher priority. The most recent RDD response exercise, based in Albany, New York, set aside 2 of RDD and IND response and recovery exercises. In addition, we attended the first full-scale recovery tabletop exercise— Empire09—based on an R DD incident scenario in Albany on June 16-17, 2009. intergovernmental coordination, such as setting environmental cleanup priorities and levels. It is uncertain whether federal capability is sufficient to effectively clean up from RDD or IND incidents. Some cities sought better guidance on monitoring radioactivity levels, acceptable cleanup standards, and management of radioactive waste. Most respondents from cities expressed the need for greater planning interactions with the federal government and more exercises to test recovery plans. In addition to this RDD recovery exercise, the National Exercise Schedule has listed two planned IND response exercises in 2010 that are to have some recovery components. response phase, a Strategic Coordinating Group, which manages this phase of the process. The Recovery Advisory Group would be charged with identifying immediate and high-level strategic objectives for recovery early in the response phase. The Science and Technology Advisory Cell would include experts to advise on health and welfare, environment and infrastructure, and monitoring. On transition to the recovery phase of an incident, the Strategic coordination group would be replaced by a Strategic Recovery Coordinating group. The subgroups would include ones for finance and legal, communications, business and economic recovery, and health and Welfare. and inhabited areas, including identifying options for the restoration and cleanup of the physical infrastructure and natural environment. The guidance suggests that this subgroup consider forming task groups to, among other things, address waste management and disposal, criteria to determine when remediation can cease, evaluate feasibility, and recommend remediation options for defined affected areas. The templates would be referred to throughout the recovery to ensure that the work of the Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group is focused and on track. In addition to the person named above, individuals who made important contributions to this report were Dr. Timothy Persons (Chief Scientist), days (June 16-17, 2009) for federal, state, and local agencies to discuss operational recovery issues. One unresolved operational recovery issue discussed during this exercise pertained to the transition of the leadership of FRMAC from the initial analysis of the contaminated area to the later cleanup phase. For example, there are unresolved operational issues regarding the level and quality of the monitoring data necessary for EPA to accept the leadership from DOE. According to EPA officials, this transitional issue has been discussed in exercises dating back to the development of the Federal Government. exercise, participants looked at immediate cleanup issues, including resource priorities and management responsibilities. On day two, participants considered the longer-term issues of environmental contamination, monitoring strategies, and financial considerations. The use of a real radioactive isotope within the exercise scenario ensured that participants were able to investigate their own and wider mechanisms for obtaining scientific advice. A scientific advisory group was put in place to expedite the recovery process by helping to manage scientific input into the decision-making process. An after-action report was prepared following this exercise to capture lessons learned. Device (RDD) and improvised nuclear device (IND) incidents. What is known about the federal government’s capability to effectively clean up areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD and IND incidents. Suggestions from government emergency management officials for improving federal preparedness to help cities and states recover from such incidents. In addition, we are providing information on actions taken in the U.K. to prepare for recovering from R DD and IND incidents and are providing suggestions for improving such preparedness. Emergency management officials in the cities and states we surveyed confused about which federal agency to turn to for assistance. Many federal regional office officials we surveyed were not certain about which environmental cleanup methods and technologies would be the most successful in removing radioactive materials. As the United States moves forward in recovery preparation, some insights might be gained from the actions already taken by the United Kingdom to increase its preparedness to recover from acts of nuclear and radiological terrorism, many of which are similar to those suggested by the city. to recovery shortened with more effective decontamination, mitigation, and rapid recovery operations. FEMA has not developed a national disaster recovery strategy, as required by law, which would help guide RDD and IND recovery planning. Federal agencies have also included only a few recovery discussions in the response exercises to these incidents. The lack of clearly communicated guidance on federal responsibilities and activities state, and federal emergency management officials we surveyed for improving federal preparedness to recover from R DD and IND incidents. To better prepare federal agencies to coordinate with state and local governments on the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials following RDD or IND incidents, we recommend that the Secretary of Homeland Security direct the Federal Emergency Management Agency Administrator to prepare a national recovery strategy. additional guidance was needed on the distribution of government responsibilities for the recovery phase of RDD or IND incidents. Many of the federal regional office respondents mentioned the need to conduct recovery exercises that involve state and local governments. The United Kingdom has actual experience with recovery from a radiological incident in an urban area and was suggested to us by EPA officials as a country that is one of the leaders in recovery planning. We also reviewed past GAO reports and other documents that addressed areas for improvement in federal preparedness. The lack of a national disaster recovery strategy is problematic, the authors say. Most localities would count on the federal government being prepared to carry out analysis and cleanup, they say. The confusion could hamper the timely recovery from these incidents, they write. The authors say the EPA and FEMA need to reach out and involve state and local governments in developing this recovery strategy. recovery strategy was needed to address overlaps and gaps in current government responsibilities in the context of RDD and IND incidents. Almost all of the EPA regional offices (6 of 10) and FEMA regional offices said this was needed. Be due, in part, to the relatively low priority given to preparing for them by city and state emergency management officials. For example, the majority of city respondents indicated that natural disasters, such as severe weather and infrastructure failure, were the most significant risks facing their jurisdictions. Federal agencies and local jurisdictions have used existing federal guidance as a basis for planning RDD and IND response exercises and, to a much lesser extent, recovery exercises to test the adequacy of their plans and level of preparedness. Emergency management officials representing all 13 cities and their states in our survey indicated that while their jurisdictions had prepared emergency response and recovery plans for domestic incidents, few of these plans specifically addressed RDD and IND recovery activities. Few city respondents (3 of 13) indicated that their recovery plans included preparations for an RDD incident. In regard to IND preparation, all city respondents informed us that recovery planning was still important despite the magnitude of such events, but none of them had prepared such plans. The lack of recovery planning for R DD and IND incidents may may be a problem. We reviewed existing planning documents for domestic incidents to determine the extent to which they addressed recovery issues, particularly from RDD and IND incidents. We included questions about the potential use of these approaches in our semistructured phone survey of federal, state, and city emergency management officials. We conducted a content analysis of these questions to identify patterns in the responses, that is, what types of questions were asked. We found limited discussion of recovery planning for these incidents in various annexes to the National Response Framework. Liberty RadEx will take place April 26-30, 2010, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The exercise is to focus on a few technical recovery issues involving forward to the lessons to be learned from the upcoming Liberty RadEx exercise in 2010. There are also limitations in federal capabilities to help state and local governments address the interim storage and eventual disposal of the radioactive waste that would arise from RDD or IND incidents. The National Science and Technology Council’s 2008 report found gaps in our nation's capabilities to effectively remove and dispose of radioactive debris. all analysis and environmental cleanup activities associated with recovering from an RDD or IND incidents of the magnitude described in the national planning scenarios. Most of these officials reported that they believe they could adequately address a smaller RDD incident, such as one that is confined to a city block or inside a building. GAO provided DHS, DOE, and EPA with a draft of this report for their review and comment. DHS and FEMA concurred with the recommendations in the report. DOE, through NNSA, because federal agencies have only carried out environmental cleanup of localized areas of radioactive materials. Some limitations exist in federal capabilities to help address the magnitude of the cleanup that would follow these incidents. There are some limitations in the capability of federal agencies to efficiently characterize the full extent of the areas contaminated with radioactive materials in the event of RDD or IND incidents. For example, DOE has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in research, development, and that would be associated with RDD and IND incidents, the authors say. Residue from an RDD or other radiological incidents can have significant impacts on cleanup costs and restoration timelines. Concerns about limitations in these federal capabilities were expressed by many city, state, and federal regional office emergency management officials who responded to our survey. EPA officials informed us that its Office of Research and Development is currently developing a suite of decision support tools for the management of waste and debris from a variety of different events, including Radiological incidents. The National Science and Technology Council’s 2008 report also found that cities and states would need to rely heavily on a strong federal response to a radiological incident. Almost half of the respondents from the cities (6 of 13) indicated that these activities should be primarily a federal responsibility. The others stressed the need for shared responsibilities with the federal government. When asked to identify which federal agencies they would turn to for help in the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents, they provided inconsistent responses and frequently listed several federal agencies for the same activity. These responses seem to indicate that federal responsibility is the most appropriate course of action. This register provides information on the risks facing the country, including malicious attacks such as with an RDD. This threat information was previously held confidential by the government. The government reported that the release of this information is intended to encourage public debate on security. This register is designed to complement community risk registers that have been published by local emergency planners since passage of the 2004 civil protection legislation. The community risk register is based on local judgments of risks, and is published by the local emergency planning agency. address specific risks identified by representatives from local emergency services and public, private, and voluntary organizations. Local resilience forums are required to develop and maintain these registers that include a description of potential outcomes, likelihoods, impacts, and ratings for various risk categories and subcategories of events. One of the risk categories is an actual terrorist attack using an explosive device. The national government does not expect communities to directly track these risks, but rather to improve their own preparedness based on information from the national risk assessment. The United Kingdom has developed a comprehensive program to ensure an effective response to a range of disruptive emergencies. The country uses the term “resilience” as the ability of organizations, like individuals, to withstand or recover easily and quickly from hardships, such as major flooding or a terrorist attack. Community risk registers have been published by local emergency management planners since passage of the 2004 Civil Contingencies Act. These community risk registers are designed to help people plan and prepare for potential emergencies. register, which is based on this classified assessment and discusses the likelihood and potential impacts of a range of risks facing the country. This national risk register contains information that was previously held confidential within government but was published to encourage public debate on security and to help organizations, individuals, families, and communities prepare for encountering threats. The government reports that while there have been very few examples of attacks such as the 1995 release of Sarin gas in a Tokyo subway, it still recognizes the need to prepare and plan. was a responsibility of the local government. The national government has established ways to help cover the costs of such incidents. For large commercial concerns, the insurance industry offers terrorist insurance that is underwritten by the government. For smaller companies, terrorist insurance is offered for an additional 20 percent surcharge on an existing policy. Other funding is available for local governments if such an event would overwhelm their financial resources, such as applying for grants from the national government or European Union. In regard to its framework of specialized FEMA regional offices and almost all EPA regional offices expressed concerns about the capabilities of federal agencies. Respondents from several cities told us that they were concerned about how rapidly the federal government could provide this assistance. This is despite the strengthening of some capabilities since the terrorist attack of September 11, 2001. For example, one state was particularly concerned about the ability of the government to provide the assistance needed to complete the necessary analysis and environmental clean up activities in the event of RDD or IND incidents. All EPA and FEMA regional offices responded to our survey, except FEMA region 8. FEMA’s National Exercise Schedule database was used to identify the location and types of exercises. We tabulated the yes and no responses to each pertinent question from the city, state, and federal surveys. We conducted a content analysis of the explanatory statements accompanying many of the questions. We also visited EPA regional offices in San Francisco and Denver, and the FEMA regional office in Oakland, to develop questions to survey. We originally selected 13 high- and medium-risk cities and their 11 states to cover the mostly likely target cities for a terrorist attack. The cities included Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, Detroit, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Seattle, and St. Louis. While Washington, D.C., is considered a high-risk city, we excluded it from our survey because it is unlike other cities in its reliance on emergency management officials on government responsibilities and plans to fulfill them. the federal government and the agencies that would take over analysis and environmental remediation activities. Emergency management officials representing these cities and their states responded to our survey. After repeated attempts to include this city and the two states in our survey, we decided to drop them. We replaced Atlanta with Miami and the state of Florida, which are in the same federal region. We decided to retain Boston despite receiving no response from Massachusetts, and we ended up with 10 states in the survey. The survey is open to all U.S. citizens. The current predictive capability of various plume models is not sufficient, and may never be sufficient to reduce the time necessary to fully characterize the extent of contaminated areas after RDD or IND incidents. According to a senior official at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory’s Interagency Modeling and Atmospheric Assessment Center (IMAAC), the predictive capabilities of existing plumes models are not at the resolution necessary to produce this added value for urban areas. This official told us while there are data about debris dispersal from building.incidents. demolition and weapons testing, there is little research data on the likely dispersal patterns of concrete, asphalt, and glass that would result from use of an RDD or IND. Some federal agency officials question the need to improve the predictive capabilities of these plume models. NNSA officials informed us they are working with FEMA on a multiyear program to improve federal capabilities to model the release of material. The current state-of-the-art and plume modeling approach is sufficient for its primary purpose in directing the protective actions of first responders. during a radiological or nuclear incident. However, they contend that plume modeling will never replace the need for actual measurements for radioactive contamination. EPA agreed that characterization of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents would be challenging because existing plume models are not entirely applicable to urban areas. Other types of contamination, such as in the drinking water and wastewater infrastructure, would also involve very complex systems that would be difficult to model. There are some limitations in federal capabilities to complete laboratory validation. meeting the laboratory evaluation needs for an RDD scenario. In addition, while EPA did not conduct a detailed assessment of the national planning scenario for an IND incident, it determined that such an incident could contaminate 3,000 square miles and require potentially millions of samples for laboratory analysis. According to EPA documentation, the gap in laboratory capacity would result in the lack of timely, reliable, and interpretable data. EPA has documented that it is currently establishing an all-media Environmental Response Laboratory Network. generally agreed with our report findings and provided technical comments. EPA did not agree or disagree with the report findings, but offered technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. The report will be sent to the appropriate congressional committees as well as to the Secretaries of Homeland Security and Energy; the Administrators of NNSA and EPA; and other interested parties. Ned Woodward (Assistant Director), Nancy Crothers, James Espinoza, Tracey King, Thomas Laetz, Jay Smale, Vasiliki Theodoropoulos, and Keo Vongvanith are on the board of directors. The board is made up of seven members: the directors, the executive directors, and the chief operating officers. For more information on the Board of Directors, visit the board's website at: http://www.cnn.com/cnn/2013/01/29/politics/top-stories/topstories/stories/kennel-cnn-kenneline-kenny-lennon.html#storylink=cpy.

ROUGE-1: 78.10, ROUGE-2: 72.73, ROUGE-L: 23.91
BERTScore: 62.74

==============================================
==================== [33/100] ====================
Summary:
 WHD’s child labor compliance efforts comprise several strategies: enforcement, partnerships, education and outreach, and public awareness. Education and outreach activities are specifically targeted to groups that can have an impact on youth employment, such as teachers, parents, and employers. WHD headquarters officials told us that they devote a lot of their resources—both at the national and local level— to education and Outreach activities. The agency is working to develop methods of measuring the success of all of their child labor Compliance activities. 1996 to 2001, WHD conducted its “Work Safe This Summer’ initiative designed to reach children beginning summer jobs. WHD provided pamphlets and posters with information on the child labor provisions of FLSA. Public service announcement displayed on movie screens in 22 states and printed on 37 million shopping bags distributed by K-Mart. Labor’s newest national child labor initiative, “YouthRules!” announced by the Secretary in May 2002, is aimed at “educating young workers, parents and employers about workplace hazards. of children under age 18, and maintaining a Web site with information on the child labor provisions of FLSA and state child labor laws. WHD’s enforcement actions include on-site investigations of employers and other activities designed to bring employers into compliance with the law. The penalties for child labor violations depend on the severity of the violations, the number of times the violations occurred, and aggravating factors such as falsification of records and whether the employer has a record of previous child work. the injuries required them to miss more than 10 days. Since 1990, Labor has developed better goals for increasing employer compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA. Labor does not provide sufficient guidance and training to its regional and district offices on how to use their resources most effectively or help them consistently apply the Child Labor Act. The agency does not use all available data to plan its future efforts or measure its progress in improving employer compliance and ensuring that all working children are adequately protected under the law. Labor’s Wage and Hour Division (WHD) is responsible for enforcing the child labor provisions of FLSA. Despite the importance that WHD places on ensuring the safety of children who work, it faces difficulty in showing that its efforts have made a difference in improving the working conditions of children. GAO revised the report to reflect the goals contained in WHD's draft performance plan for fiscal year 2003. See app. II for a list of the legislative proposals introduced in the 107th Congress. Labor, which made several recommendations for changes to the orders. We believe that our report provides a comprehensive and balanced picture of Labor’s efforts to ensure compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA. We also noted that Labor was in the process of reviewing the report and deciding the actions it would take in response to NIOSH's recommendations. Neither of these plans were based on our review of WHD's fiscal year 2001 and 2002 annual performance plans. The information in our draft report was based onour review of the WHD’S fiscal year 2000 and 2001 annual performance plan. of FLSA is dependent, in part, upon the establishment of a sound performance management system. WHD has taken some steps towards developing such a system, as reflected in the program goals it has established and refined in recent years. However, WHD continues to lack goals for industries that have high rates of injuries and fatalities. The system does not allow managers to fully evaluate the effectiveness of their child labor compliance efforts and ensure that their limited resources are used in the most effective manner, the agency says. Labor: WHD had developed specific, measurable goals in its draft fiscal year 2003 annual performance plan. The draft plan includes goals for grocery stores, fast food restaurants, and full-service restaurants, industries in which children are most likely to work. WHD did not, however, establish goals for industries that we found that children were likely to be employed, we say. We think these are positive steps and have revised our report to reflect these efforts, we add. We have revised the information in our report and the associated recommendations. FLSA. Labor recently established specific goals for fiscal year 2003 for the industries in which children are most likely to work. WHD’s national goals in the early part of the decade focused on increasing the number of employers with prior child labor violations. More recently, WHD developed goals for improving overall employer compliance with FLSA in some low-wage industries, including compliance with the child labor provisions. We believe the most important indicator of compliance is the percentage of employers who are in compliance. Labor considered setting specific goals for industries in which many children worked and were likely to be injured. It decided not to based on the results it received from a survey of employers. We do not believe that the most important working in this industry does not factor in these high injury and fatality rates. In fact, some of the most serious child labor violations WHD found occurred in sawmills and companies that produce wood pallets. We commend WHD’s recent decision to conduct a second compliance survey of the grocery, full service restaurant, and fast-food restaurant industries. We believe that this approach reduces attention to some of the industries that pose significant risks to children. There are no specific goals for construction, which has high fatality and injury rates. Labor also disagreed with the conclusions supporting our recommendation to develop methods of measuring the success of its child labor compliance efforts. In this regard, Labor noted that it had recently decided to repeat its compliance survey of grocery stores, full-service restaurants, and fast food restaurants in fiscal year 2004. While there are sufficient numbers of children working in these industries to justify setting such goals.  WHD is correct in its statement that the number of investigator hours devoted to child labor enforcement in fiscal year 2001, 74,000 hours, represents the largest investment of investigator time by WHD in the last 5 years. However, our report, which focuses on WHD’s efforts since 1990, shows that this is lower than the resources dedicated to child labour enforcement in the first half of the decade. For example, in fiscal years 1990, 1991, and 1992, WHD investigators devoted 143,000hours, 83,000hour, and 105,000 hour, respectively. We continue to believe.ensure compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA. its child labor enforcement activities. Labor’s goals for fiscal years 1990 and 1992 focused on its plans to dramatically increase the number of child labor investigations. WHD measured the success of Operation Child Watch in the early 1990s by citing the large number of violations and penalties produced. In fiscal year 2000, illegally, such as manufacturing and construction, or for industries in which children have the highest rates of fatalities and nonfatal injuries. Such as construction, wholesale trade, and transportation and public utilities. It is not clear what factors led to the decrease in the number of violations. It could have resulted from an increased rate of compliance among employers. The number of investigator hours devoted to child labor investigations has declined from a high of 11 percent to 7 percent since Operation Child Watch began in 1994. The U.S. Department of Labor has a program that monitors child labor in the U.N. Children’s Rights Council has a similar program, but it is not as active as the Child Labor Watch program. We disagree with Labor’s statement that. the trends in the number of child labor violations found and the amount of penalties assessed are not valid indicators of WHD’S commitment to child labor compliance. In our conversations with WHD headquarters officials and in WHD publications, the. number of investigations, violations found, and civil monetary penalties were frequently cited as indicators of the. success of the WHD's child labor enforcement efforts. We don’t know what factors led to the changes in the numbers. In 2002, the maximum penalty for a child labor violation was raised from $10,000 to $11,000. In 2001, working children were as sizable a part of the U.S. labor force as they were in 1990. Most children worked in a variety of occupations concentrated in a few select industries. The penalties range from $275 for a record-keeping violation to $ 11,000 for a violation involving a serious injury or death. The number and characteristics of working children have not changed over the past decade. our estimates of illegally employed children showed greater numbers of children in the South to be illegally employed than in the Northeast. While these estimates do not prove that illegal child labor was a problem in the area of the state covered by that district office, it is an indication that potential violations exist undetected. WHD’s national office also does not provide specific guidance to regional and district offices on when to assess penalties for child labor violations. Labor disagreed with our recommendation to. provide training to all WHD staff on how to obtain information from the investigations database. found that district officials sometimes reduced the penalties for child labor violations. We also found that the average percentage of the penalties collected varied significantly among the district offices we visited. For example, one district office generally did not waive penalties forChild labor violations it found. Another district office waived many of the. penalties for the child labor Violations it found, including a violation of a Hazardous. Occupations Order involving a child who was working with dangerous equipment. The penalties collected by each district office varied significantly, from a small percentage to a high percentage. 2001, with a low of 5 percent in 1998. WHD headquarters officials use various factors to measure the success of their enforcement efforts. Officials told us they could tell their activities generate attention if WHD receives a lot of media inquires and that they count the number of times individuals access information from WHD’s Web site. However, WHD does not link its education and outreach activities with changes in employer behavior, we found. We recognize the inherent difficulties in assessing the impact on employer behavior. Much of the responsibility for planning and executing these efforts is left to WHD’s five regional offices and the 50 district offices that report directly to the regions. WHD headquarters officials do not use the quarterly reports prepared by these offices on their local initiatives to ensure that, nationwide, local child labor initiatives provide adequate protection for all children who work. The Child Labor Team Leader in the headquarters office is responsible for coordinating WHD's child labor compliance efforts, including disseminating information and guidance to regional and district offices. reports we reviewed for fiscal years 1999 through 2002 showed that, in some years, many districts had no child labor initiatives. For example, in fiscal year 2000, almost all of the district offices in the northeast region had at least one child labor initiative. Two regions had regionwide initiatives that required all of their district offices to conduct child labor investigations. Some districts in the southwest region, however, had no local child labor Initiatives planned for fiscal year 1999-2002. The number of child labor Initiative in each region varied significantly from one region to another.  WHD conducts child labor investigations either as a result of a receiving a complaint about a possible child labor violation or from a decision by a WHD office to conduct investigations of employers that focus specifically on children they employ. WHD officials told us that, although they review every complaint they receive, they do not receive many complaints about child labor. They also said that WHD’s national office does not require all district offices to conduct self-initiated child labour investigations. In fact, since Operation Child Watch, the only national initiative that required all district office to do so was the child labor compliance survey WHD conducted of the grocery and restaurant industries in 2000. The number of investigations conducted by each district office and by WHD’s five regions varied widely. A few district offices accounted for a large number of the child labor investigations and cases in which child labor violations were found. WHD headquarters officials were not able to a low of 49 percent of the original amount assessed to a high of 82 percent for investigations completed in fiscal years 2000 and 2001. Two of the five regional child labor coordinators and officials at two of the district offices we visited indicated that they had not been trained on how to obtain reports from WHD. had staff members with the skills needed to obtain reports from the investigations database. Officials at two of these offices said that they had only one person with these skills and that, if they lost this person, they would not be able to obtain the reports they need. By allowing and encouraging children to work, the nation acknowledges that children can derive many benefits from working, such as independence, confidence, and responsibility, the report says. The report was published by the Center for American Progress, a nonprofit that promotes free speech and equality. WHD staff on how to obtain information from the investigations database. Labor also provided technical comments and clarifications, which we incorporated in the report as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Labor, the Wage and Hour Administrator, the Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and other interested parties. Copies will be made available to others upon request. This report is also available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. 14-year-olds who work and NLSY97 does not have information on children born after 1984. We recognize, however, that collecting these data will require additional resources. Regional and district offices also need sufficient guidance and training to effectively carry out their mission. To provide WHD’s regional and district. offices with the information, consider expanding CPS to include 14-year olds or beginning additional cohorts of N.LSY at regular intervals, such as every five years. The goal is to ensure that all children nationwide are protected under the child labor provisions of FLSA. work and ensuring that students’ education should be everyone’s first priority. The initiative includes partnerships that WHD has formed with all levels of government as well as businesses, unions, and advocacy groups to provide training and educational materials. WHD does not use all of the data available to plan its future child labor compliance efforts or assess their success. The agency does not routinely use data from BLS to identify the industries and occupations in which children work, WHD said in a statement. Labor agreed with the remainder of our recommendations or agreed to take action on them. For example, it agreed to obtain and review data from the WHISARD database to better hold local offices accountable. WHD routinely uses BLS and NIOSH data to plan the allocation of its child labor resources. The district offices we visited confirmed that they do not receive this information to use in planning their local child labor efforts. Many states refuse to release this data to WHD because of privacy concerns. The department has no procedures for routinely obtaining data from BLS or NIOSH.  WHD’s national office does not provide regional and district offices with adequate guidance on how to target their child labor compliance efforts. WHD lacks a sound basis for determining, among other things, the extent to which it should devote resources to child labor investigations versus its education and outreach and other compliance assistance activities. Its resource allocation decisions are also hindered because WHD does not routinely use all of the data available from BLS and NIOSH to target its child labor Compliance efforts to the places that are most dangerous for children. which children work because the information is not easily accessible and because the data do not provide information at the local level that could be used to help plan local compliance efforts. CPS data is available at the regional level and we developed state-level information by combining several years of data. For example, by combining CPS data for 4 years (1998 to 2001) and comparing it to the provisions of FLSA, we estimated the number of children illegally employed in each state. WHD also does not utilize information from its own investigations database to evaluate the child labor compliance efforts of its regional and district offices. the past, used only limited data from its WHISARD investigations database to plan its enforcement efforts. In some cases, reports we requested from the database, such as reports that showed the source of investigations completed in fiscal years 2000 and 2001, was the first time that WHD had run such reports. We believe the anecdotal information on injuries and fatalities maintained by WHD’s national office does not provide enough information to be useful in making WHD's resource allocation decisions. The information on fatalities and serious injuries to children was provided to us in May. 2002 contained data on only 7 fatalities and 36 injuries reviewed by WHD in fiscal year 2001. We clarified our conclusions to acknowledge that collecting these data may require additional resources. We agree with Labor’s statement that our recommendation to consider enhancing the data collected on children who work by expanding CPS to include 14-year-olds or beginning additional cohorts of NLSY cannot be implemented without additional study and resources, which is why we recommended that the Secretary “consider” these actions. that limited resources are used in the most effective manner. The Secretary of Labor should establish additional specific, measurable goals for WHD’s child labor compliance efforts for industries in which children are most likely to be injured or killed. develop methods of measuring the success of WHD's child labor efforts, including its education and outreach activities. routinely obtain data from BLS and NIOSH on the industries, occupations, and locations in which. children work and sustain work-related injuries and use them to target WHD.  WHD does not routinely obtain information from BLS on the industries and occupations in which children work. WHD also does not use information from its investigations database or reports on local child labor initiatives to assess the results of the regional and district offices’ child labor compliance efforts. For example, we estimated that a significant proportion of illegally employed children worked in construction and manufacturing. We also found that children were more likely to be injured or killed while working in several industries in which WHD conducts few child labor investigations. We question how WHD determined that “many of these specialty trade contractors are so small that they do not meet the FLSA coverage criteria” because this information is not tracked in. 21. The injury rate for children who work in this industry was relatively high. We noted that the injury rate was higher than for children in the transportation and public utilities and wholesale trade industries. We also noted the fatality rates for the construction industry were higher than those for the wholesale trade industry. We questioned WHD’s decision to determine that these contractors were too small to be covered by FLSA because they were so small. WHD’s investigations database and we found no data on employer coverage under FLSA. We also found, in our discussions with WHD officials, that establishing coverage for employers in the construction industry was not a problem for some of the district offices we visited. 22. CPS data on occupations show that many children are employed as truck drivers. However, our draft report incorrectly indicated that 43 percent of all children who are employed illegally are employed in the truck industry. We clarified the report to show that the percentage of children who were employed illegally as a truck driver was 43 percent. high fatality rates for this industry, we found that the injury rate was high compared to other industries. It is not clear that establishing a goal for improving compliance in the transportation and public utilities industry would be unrealistic and counterproductive. Given the limitations of the estimates of illegal employment, we question the agency’s estimate that only 4,400 youth are employed illegally in this industry. The statistics cited by Labor on the number of violations found as evidence that violations are not prevalent are also questionable. truck drivers represents 42 percent of children who are employed in prohibited occupations. We continue to believe that the injury and fatality rates for children who work in the construction industry warrant WHD attention. WHD’s opinion that targeting additional resources on this industry would not be a wise resource investment and would have no impact on occupational injuries and fatalities for children. As noted in our report, manufacturing has one of the highest injury rates for kids. We commend WHD's efforts to fund research by NIOSH on the health and safety of young workers in the industry. Labor cites the drop in workplace injuries indicated by the BLS data from the Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses as evidence that “the workplace is becoming safer for young workers.” NIOSH data from emergency room records that indicates that workplace injuries to children are on the rise. Although we highlighted many of Labor’s efforts to improve child labor laws, we highlight many of their efforts to make the workplace safer for children as well as for adults. We also highlight the fact that Labor has been trying to improve the workplace for children for years. The primary sources of data on children who are injured or killed as a result of work-related injuries come from BLS and NIOSH. BLS reports all work- related fatalities, including those for children, in its Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries published each year. NIOSH collects data in its National Electronic Injury Surveillance System from a sample of emergency room records. The employment of working children is generally covered by FLSA and its implementing regulations, which limit the types of jobs, number of most children work part-time. The two primary sources of nationwide data on work-related injuries, one collected by BLS from employer records and the other collected by NIOSH from emergency room records, differ substantially in their estimates. For 1999, BLS reported that almost 13,000 children were injured on the job, while NIOSH estimated that over 80,000 kids were injured that year. Due to limitations of both data sources, it is difficult to determine the true extent of injuries to children who work. Both sets of data underreport injuries to kids. for all work-related injuries serious enough to cause children to miss at least one day of work. NIOSH’s estimate was based on records of injuries treated in emergency rooms. BLS data for 1992 to 2000 showed that sprains, strains, and tears were the most common injuries. The BLS and NIOSH data also, over time, indicate different trends in the numbers of work- related injuries to children. For example, certain types of injuries such as lacerations may be treated in. emergency rooms but not necessitate one or more days away from work. of the injuries occurred to boys, even though they accounted for only about half of all working children. During this period, children aged 16 and over sustained the vast majority of all work-related injuries. Most children (84 percent) were injured while working in the two industries in which children are most likely to work—retail trade and services. The risk of injury was highest in some industries with the smallest number of injuries to children, the study found. utilities, wholesale trade, transportation and public utilities, and manufacturing industries had the lowest injury rates. in wholesale trade, transportation and public utilities, and manufacturing had higher rates of injury than those working in retail trade or services. Injuries are caused by a variety of factors, but most frequently from coming into contact with an object or equipment. Other common accidents were overexertion, falls, and contact with hot objects. The causes of work-related nonfatal injuries were fairly constant over this period. In 1998 a 17-year-old worker fractured his hand when a piece of metal slipped off a power-driven machine he was operating. accidents, including highway collisions and nonhighway incidents, such as a fall from a moving vehicle. Other common events included being caught or compressed by equipment or being struck by a falling or flying object. Overall, the characteristics of children who died as a result of work- related injuries remained relatively constant. The characteristics of their fatalities remained relatively unchanged. The most common cause of death for children who worked in a supermarket was a cardboard box compactor, and another 16-year-old boy was crushed when the forklift he was operating flipped over. The number and characteristics of work-related fatalities and fatality rates for working children remained relatively constant from 1992 to 2000. The two primary sources of data on nonfatal injuries to working children—BLS and NIOSH—provide significantly different estimates of the number of children injured over the decade. Data from one of the two sources indicates that the characteristics of kids injured have changed little over the ten years. The number of 15- to 17-year-olds who died as a result of a work- related injury or sustained a non-fatal injury remained fairly constant. We used data from 108 monthly surveys to obtain the total number of hours worked by 15- to 17-year-olds between 1992 and 2000. In computing the rates for nonfatal injuries, we excluded children who worked for the government or were self-employed because they are excluded from the data. We totaled the hours worked each week by all children for each year. We did not aggregate the data on nonf fatal injuries over the decade because the number of injuries reported was large. We calculated fatality and injury rates by using the total amount of hours children worked. industries. Because the data sets for fatal and nonfatal injuries use different industry groupings than CPS, we combined industries. Because we were not able to obtain SOII data that only included 15- to 17-year-olds by industry, we calculated industry rates by dividing the total number of injuries to children under 18. Since CPS data do not include hours worked by children younger than 15, we were unable to include these children in our calculations. However, we did include them in our calculation of industry rates. worked in family businesses accounted for less than 1 percent of all working children. They accounted for about one-third of all fatalities. Children who worked for small employers—those with 10 employees or less—accounted for nearly two-thirds of the fatalities. About 90 percent of the children killed who work for an agricultural employer for which establishment size was reported worked for employers with 10 or fewer employees. The number of hours children work in each industry needs to be considered as well as the number of deaths. Exposure to risk, such as employment or hours worked. The number of hours worked is preferable because different workers spend variable hours on the job in a given time period. For the transportation and public utilities industry, Labor mentions only fatality rates and the number of fatalities. We believe it is particularly important to use the number. of children employed, to calculate injury and fatality. rates because so many children (87 percent) work part time. 18. In addition to employment and hours worked, there are other factors to consider. 62 and 73 children died from injuries sustained while working, a total of 613 children over the 9-year period. Most of the children killed were boys 16 years of age or older. Although girls were as likely as boys to work from 1992 to 2000, boys were almost eight times more likely to die as a result of a work- related injury than girls. Most children younger than age 15 who died as the result of an injury were employed in agriculture. About 50 percent of those who died while working in agriculture were 14 years old. Fatality data show that certain industries and types of businesses pose a greater danger to working children. During the decade, over 40 percent of the children killed as a result of work-related injuries worked in agriculture, primarily crop production. Retail trade and construction accounted for 20 percent and 14 percent of all fatalities, respectively. In both 1992 and 2000, 60 percent of children who died as a. result of a work- related injury were 16 and 17 years old, and 75 percent of. children killed for whom race was available were white. example, NLSY97 showed that 13 percent of all 14-year-olds worked for an employer in a particular week during the summer of 1996. The number and characteristics of children who die each year as a result of a work-related injury have changed little over the past decade. From 1992 to 2000, the number of fatalities and the fatality rates for working were the same as they were in the early 1990s. (See table 4 for more information) The number of children in the U.S. who die from a work related injury was the same in the 1990s as it was in the 1980s. In 2001, as in 1990, minority children and children from families with annual incomes below $25,000 were more likely than other children to work illegally. The percentage of children who worked illegally, either because they worked in occupations prohibited under the law or more hours than allowed, also did not change. Although most children worked in sales and services occupations, children who were employed in prohibited occupations were most commonly employed illegally in transportation-related occupations. In 2001, according to our estimates, over 40 percent of all children were employed illegally. 52,000 (2 percent) were self-employed and about 10,000 performed unpaid labor in a family business. Throughout the decade, children primarily worked in retail trade, in businesses such as department stores, grocery stores, and restaurants. In 2001, as in 1990, about 60 percent of all working children were employed in this industry, mostly in eating and drinking places. Children generally held jobs in sales occupations, such as running a cash register or clerking at a store, or in services such as waiting tables or cleaning hotel rooms. of employed 17-year-olds worked in retail trade, whereas 38 percent of employed 15-year old worked in this industry. Children from families with lower incomes are less likely to work than those from higher income families, and minority children are less Likely to Work than white children. In addition to age, family income and race are also related to children’s employment. About 1 in 5 children in the U.S. are employed in some form of retail trade or other industry, according to a recent study. worked in prohibited occupations worked as truck drivers. We determined that a child’s gender, race, and citizenship status were related to the likelihood that he or she worked in a prohibited occupation. There was no correlation, however, between family income and prohibited occupations. In 2001, boys were more likely than girls to work in prohibited jobs. In addition, black children were less likely than children of other races. Children who were not citizens were morelikely than those who were citizens to work. In 2001, as many as 3.7 million children between the ages of 15 and 17 worked. The percentage of children who worked in summer months fluctuated over the decade from a high of 36 percent in 1990 to a low of 30 percent in 2001. Although most children work for an employer, in 2001, about country.15 who are employed illegally. More children work during summer months when school is out of session than in school months, according to the study. The number of children working in agriculture has increased, from 17 percent to 30 percent. In 2001, children worked an average of 21 hours a week in summer months. This is similar to the number of hours they worked in both summer and school months in 1990. 87 percent of all working children worked part-time in 2001. Older children are more likely to work in the retail trade industry than younger children. In summer months in 2001, nearly 60 percent of children.aged 15 to 17 worked in summer. months, compared to 23 percent who worked in school months. In 2001, 17-year-olds worked a average of 23 hours a. week, 5 more hours aweek than 15- year-olds. 1990, their average hourly earnings increased by 10 percent. The older a child is, the more likely he or she is to work. In 1990, children paid an hourly salary earned an average of $5.70 an hour; in 2001, the average hourly salary was $6.36. The amount by which their earnings exceeded the minimum wage increased by $1.21. By 2001, children’s average hourly Earnings exceeded the Minimum Wage of $ 5.15 an hour. In school months in 2001, 15-year-olds in the South and West were almost 1.5 times more likely than their counterparts in the Northeast and Midwest to work more hours than allowed. The data on children who work has been collected in CPS for 50 years, and therefore provides useful information on children's work habits, the report says. The report also found that 15- year-olds who lived in metropolitan areas were 1.4 times more Likely to work. more hours. than those who lived. in nonmetropolitan areas. CPS does not capture information necessary to determine the number of 15-year-olds who work more hours than allowed on a daily basis or at prohibited times of day. CPS does not collect information on either the length of the workday, nor its starting and ending times. As with prohibited occupations, it was not possible to determine how much of our estimates are understated as a result of these limitations. However, we believe that the amount of this understatement is large because of the limitations. Most of the children who worked illegally were 15-year-olds who worked more hours than allowed under the child labor provisions of FLSA. Nearly 80 percent worked an excessive number of hours, on average, 10 hours more than the maximum hours allowed. Because of the hours restrictions for 15- year-olds in school months, they were much more likely to work illegally in schoolmonth than in summer months. Most children worked in the retail trade industry during the past decade, but a substantial percentage of the illegal employment number was actually worked each week. 17 percent of children in families with annual incomes below $25,000 a year worked in 2001. In 2001, 15 percent of black children and 17 percent of Hispanic children worked. Despite the fact that children from lower income families are less likely to work, when they do work, they tend to work more hours. As many as 4 percent of all 15- to 17-year-olds who worked in2001 worked illegally, either because they worked more hours than allowed under the law or because they work in prohibited hazardous occupations. NLSY cannot be used to show how the number and characteristics of all working children have changed over time because it only includes information on one group of children born from 1980 to 1984. The second set is the National Agricultural Workers Survey in which data are collected several times each year from a sample of crop agricultural workers. According to the data in this survey, the characteristics of children in crop agriculture changed somewhat over the decade. Although most children working incrop agriculture throughout the decade were boys aged 16 and 17, the percentage of boys increased. Most employment questions in NLSY deal with events that take place after the child’s 14th birthday. To determine employment for these children in 1996 and 1997, we identified those weeks that contained the 12th day of the month. We determined the frequency of employed children in each of the 16 weeks and averaged the result over the total number of months in each period. We coded children born in 1983 and 1984 as being 13 and 12 years of age, respectively. We used a different method to estimate employment for children younger than 14. volume of sales, or information that could be used to determine whether children work in interstate commerce. We used data from NLSY97, the survey of children born from 1980 to 1984, to estimate the number of 12- to 14-year-olds who work. The extent to which our estimates are overstated because not all children work under FLSA cannot be determined. We coded children noted in NLSy97 as being born in 1982 as being 12 to 14 years of age. Labor compiles two additional sources of nationally representative data on working children. The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) collects data on younger children who work. NLSY97 showed that about 24 percent of all 15-year-olds worked in a particular week during the summer of 1996,while CPS data showed that 18 percent of 15-years-old worked in that same period. For more information, go to Labor.gov/WorkingChildren or call 1-800-273-8255. While some data are collected directly from children who work, most of the information in CPS on working children is provided by an adult member of the household. Because the adult answering the questions may not be aware of the full extent of the child’s activities, information about the child's employment may be underreported or omitted. Another BLS survey, NLSY, collects information on children differently. In NLSy, children are directly asked by interviewers to describe their jobs as well as their activities at The Current Population Survey (CPS) is the primary source of information on the United States labor force. CPS provides data on where children work, the types of jobs they hold, and how many hours a week they work. In addition, it provides demographic information on children such as age, race, ethnicity, and family income. Because the data have been collected for over 50 years, they can be used to help identify working children in the U.S. The CPS is compiled monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Child labor compliance rates were relatively higher in these three industries than overall FLSA compliance rates. It would be a “serious mistake’ to compare the findings of the survey with compliance rates found in its surveys of other industries, the analysis said. At least 52,000 and as many as 220,000 children illegally employed in the three industries, according to the analysis. In addition, there were “still enormous child labor compliance issues that these industries need to address,” the analysis stated. who were self-employed and those who worked in agriculture from the data set. Key questions concerning child employment in a family business were not added to CPS until 1994. To obtain numbers of children who worked illegally, we averaged the results of the 2001 base population with the results from the 1990 base population. These children are not covered by FLSA, so we included them in the 2001 data set, even though they are not legally employed in the U.S. as a result of the law. we could not include them in our estimates. In developing our estimates, we worked with Douglas Kruse, Ph.D., a professor at Rutgers University’s School of Management and Labor Relations. We compared CPS data for 1990, 1996, and 2001 to the child labor provisions of FLSA by defining the base population and identifying illegal employment by occupation and hours. While recognizing these limitations, we continue to believe that our analysis provides the best estimates that can be made with available data. In fact, we used the same methods as those used to develop estimates cited by BLS and WHD.  limitations of the data affect our ability to accurately describe all children in the United States who work. In 1989, Labor stopped collecting data on 14-year-olds in CPS, although these children are allowed under FLSA and its implementing regulations to work in many jobs. The specific nature of child labor laws makes it difficult to reconcile them with generalized data sources. To estimate illegal employment in each state, we combined CPS data for 4 years (48 monthly surveys) from 1998 to 2001. The estimates presented in this report paint an incomplete picture of the employment patterns for younger children.  appendix discusses scope and methodology for estimating the number of working children in the United States who are employed illegally. Analysis showed that a large percentage of children working in this state worked in those industries where children were most likely to be injured. Most of the estimates in the report were calculated using data obtained from samples and, therefore, have sampling errors associated with them. All differences included in this report were tested for statistical significance at the 0.05 level. V. Because CPS does not capture data on children who work in occupations that are illegal under criminal statutes, such as drug dealing and prostitution, this report does not estimate the total number of children employed in these occupations. through the use of logistic regression for illegal occupations and cross- tabulations for hours. We used data from 36 monthly surveys from CPS for the following years: 1990, 1996 and 2001. Due to the small sample sizes of children identified in these groups, cross tabulations were not statistically significant at the 0.05 level. To determine demographic differences in the likelihood of working illegally, the following variables were included in the model: sex, race, urbanicity (metropolitan or non-metropolitan area), income, citizenship, and region. CPS treats ethnicity separately from race. A child can be identified in CPS as both “white” and “Hispanic.” To separately determine the effect of illegal employment on whites, blacks, and Hispanics, we coded the number of children who worked illegally in summer months. The number of illegal workers in the U.S. in the summer months was higher than in the school year, according to the CPS report. The CPS report was released on Tuesday. It is available online at www.cps.org. We used data for the four regions defined in CPS: Midwest, Northeast, South, and West. The states included in each region are Midwest: Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin. Northeast: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont. South: Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, andWest Virginia. West: Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming. hours, and times of day that children younger than 16 years of age can work. Once children reach age 16, they are only prohibited from working in jobs or with equipment covered by these Hazardous Occupations Orders. Children of any age may work an unlimited number of hours (outside of school hours) in nonhazardous jobs, either on a farm owned by their parents or on a noncommercial farm with the written consent of their parents. The child labor provisions of FLSA do not cover all children. The provisions also prohibit 14- and 15-year-olds from working during school hours. Several legislative proposals were introduced in the 107th Congress to strengthen the child labor provisions of FLSA. In July 2002, the Senate passed the Traveling Sales Crew Protection Act. The law includes provisions that prohibit children under age 18 from working in traveling sales work where they remain away from home for more than 24 hours. The number and characteristics of children who worked from 1990 to 2001 as tabulated from the Current Population Survey (CPS) data we obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) are detailed in the tables below. employers whose annual gross volume of sales is less than $500,000 and whose work cannot be linked to interstate commerce are not covered under FLSA. In addition, children who are self-employed are not subject to the child labor provisions of FLSA, although they may be covered under state child labor laws. Children who work for their parents are prohibited from working in occupations and operating equipment listed in the Hazardous Occupations Orders. When children reach age 18, they are no longer covered under the Child Labor Act. In 2001, several legislative proposals were submitted in the House of Representatives and the Senate that would strengthen the child labor provisions of FLSA. The proposals include the Children’s Act for Responsible Employment of 2001, which would increase the maximum penalties for child labor violations and prohibit children aged 16 and 17 from working in hazardous occupations in agriculture. The Young American Workers’ Bill of Rights would amend the FLSA to require employers to obtain work permits for all children age 18 and under who are still in school. Our estimates of illegal employment are both under- and overstated. It is not possible to determine whether each child who works in a prohibited occupation category is actually performing prohibited activities. For example, because work as a public messenger is expressly prohibited for15-year- olds, we included children who worked in the occupation category “mail carrier” in our estimates. It was not, however, possible for us to determine the extent to which our estimates ofillegal employment are under- or overstatement. Using methods developed in our previous report and refined by Douglas Kruse, we defined a list of 100 occupational codes that correspond to activities prohibited by the Hazardous Occupations Orders. Any child in the base population with one of these codes was included in our estimates of children employed illegally. We used a similar method to identify occupations specifically prohibited for 15-year-olds. In this instance, 216 occupational codes matched the descriptions of activities prohibited to children under 16. Any. child identified in the Base population with a code that matched this description was included. children whose race was identified as “white” or “black” and whose ethnicity wasidentified as ‘Hispanic,’ as ’Hispanic’ only. For children whose race. was identified. as � ‘black’ or ‘white,�’ and their ethnicity was identified ‘non-Hispanic,' we included them in the category of race identified. This resulted in four racial categories: white, black, Hispanic, and other. For 1996 and 2001, “Other” included Asians and Native Americans. In 2002, NIOSH completed a review of the Hazardous Occupations Orders for Labor. Its report, issued in July 2002, made several recommendations for changes to the orders. Labor is in the process of reviewing the report and deciding what actions it will take in response to the recommendations. For jobs in agriculture, the report says the orders should be amended to make it more difficult for children to work in the construction industry. The orders should also make it harder for children under 18 to work on ladders, scaffolds, trees, and other structures.

ROUGE-1: 66.41, ROUGE-2: 61.82, ROUGE-L: 19.98
BERTScore: 57.84

==============================================
==================== [34/100] ====================
Summary:
would have to consider what it was incentivizing through user fees. For example, if the fee was based on weight, he said, it might “incentivize even smaller planes and more planes,” thereby increasing demands on the ATC system’s capacity. Another issue that would have to be worked out, is how the common costs of air traffic services should be allocated. Whether users should pay only for the incremental costs of the services they use, as most users would argue, or whether some cross-subsidies are needed. A user fee system could be implemented in a government or a public-private type of air traffic services organization. Some method of controlling costs would have to be built into the system, one panelist said. Another panelist pointed out that implementing a user fee alone would not guarantee efficiency, because the air traffic service provider could simply raise the fee when costs increased and the users would be forced to pay, since the service is a monopoly. Most panelists correctly assumed that legislation would be required to institute auser fee system. act like a business when it is not really one, suggested that it was only at the margins that the creators of the ATO had replicated a business. Replacing airline ticket taxes with a user fee is a step that many panelists considered essential for the ATo’s success. While recognizing that such a fee would be controversial, since the costs for most users would likely increase, the panelists maintained that it would be essential for ATO's success. The ATO is still largely a government organization and therefore remains subject to most governmental constraints. “fatal” to implement the fee in any way that did not make the ATO financially independent of Congress, panelist says. Revenue bonding based on a new user fee stream would create an “alternative to capital starvation,” one panelist said. Even if the user fee streams initially produced no more revenue than the airlines are now paying in aviation-related taxes, he said, it would be an ‘alternative’ to “capital starvation” customer-servicing organization. While panelists generally favored a user fee system, they cautioned care in proposing and implementing one. As one panelist said, the fee question, once raised, would be all-consuming and would require the expenditure of political capital. In his view, it was critical that the ATO wait to achieve some successes before seeking auser fee system. Another panelist called for figuring out “not only what problem we’re solving, but what problems we might be likely to create” The budget procedure requiring that capital investments be funded out of annual appropriations means that major acquisitions generally take many years to implement. Particularly when annual appropriations fall short, projects’ development and deployment may be delayed and their costs may increase with time. Until the acquisitions are completed, the benefits of the new technologies are deferred, aging equipment may pose risks to users, and outdated software may require costly upgrades. By the time theisitions are fully deployed, by the time they’re completed, they may have outlived their usefulness. The firewall makes it difficult to see the relationship between software replacement (capital) and maintenance (operating) costs, panelists said. Decision to postpone purchases of new or upgraded software may save capital investment costs, but rising maintenance requirements may increase operating costs. Eventually, the maintenance costs may “far exceed” the replacement costs, one panelist said. The budget is not integrated to show what investments buy in, other panelists noted. It is also difficult to determine the impact of capital investment decisions on operating costs, they said. Project managers overpromise capabilities and underestimate costs to increase the chances that new projects will be accepted. After projects are accepted, they overestimate costs because they assume their requests will be cut. Although managers could include options in their budget submissions to indicate what could be accomplished at different funding levels, they do not do so. Finally, managers are reluctant to revise ongoing projects because they don't want to be seen to be cutting costs.seldom reduces. The budget process establishes incentives for unrealistic planning, a panelist pointed out. seen as fickle. Some panelists criticized the federal budget for failing to show priorities and relationships among proposed investments. By contrast, a private company that operates under a board of directors and obtains revenue from customers does not have incentives to play budget games to get projects approved. “Your money is your own money,” one panelist said. In the budget, “everything is as important as everything else.” Another panelist observed that the budget sets no capital investment priorities. According to a third panelist, a line item budget tears apart a highly layered, interdependent system. Panelists viewed the ATO’s apparent fiscal shortfall as a severe challenge. In terms of operations, this deficit was more likely to have a gradual than an immediately catastrophic onset. One panelist said he did not expect to see major system outages but predicted, instead, “a slow but sure increase in delays.” If the ATo did not carefully analyze demand and determine how that demand could be served, it would find itself facing what a third panelist referred to as a “disaster” “perfect storm,” reiterating a term the ATO itself has used. Severe reductions in the funding for ATC modernization, if required to address the currently projected shortfall, could exacerbate what one panelist described as the government’s traditional underfunding of the ATC system. They suggested, for example, that FAA may have to cut back on some of its air traffic control operations to make up for the shortfall. The government typically assumes such investments will last for 15 years, but a 7-year estimate would be more reasonable.  panelists maintained that the federal budget cycle is too long and inflexible to meet the needs of an ATC system. According to one panelist, it is “impossible’ to run the U.S. A TC system within the classic federal structure. Such a “dramatic,” ‘dynamic’ system requires “more managerial freedom, much more day-to-day, week- to-week, month-to.-month decision- making,’ he said. The panelists generally agreed that structural changes would increase the ATO’s chances of success. These changes would generally require legislative action and take time to implement. The ATO could make some progress in addressing its cultural, technical, and budgetary challenges under its current authorities, the panelists said. The panelists suggested that it be authorized to establish and manage user fees, rather than rely on appropriated tax receipts, and that it should be allowed to issue that it would produce a more predictable, reliable funding stream. ATO could reap a “transition dividend” during the first 5 or 10 years after the bonds are issued. The ATO could cut what the airlines pay and “still have a robust modernization program being financed by the revenue bonds.” He characterized this strategy as “money that’s lying on the sidewalk waiting to be picked up” and saw it as an opportunity to buy some new equipment in bulk and get it installed before it becomes obsolete. Such a ‘sensible’ approach would not allocate and compare costs and measure productivity. Each organizational unit and facility is developing applicable metrics for performance so that the ATO can compare costs, identify factors that affect costs, and use this information to improve performance. For example, each en route facility is determining its hourly cost to control flights. The ATO then compare and analyze these costs to identify positive and negative factors affecting performance and productivity. plan is a response to a congressional mandate, based on a recommendation we made in 2002, that FAA develop a plan for addressing an impending wave of controller retirements. outages—that is, on replacing equipment that would otherwise fail. This panelist also said that FAA needs a customer-oriented business strategy and a business plan. Improving controllers’ productivity would be another way to save money, a fourth panelist said. But he characterized his suggestion as “touch the ground” with the ATO’s operating costs, which account for about three-quarters of its total costs. He suggested that the upcoming wave of air traffic controller retirements would create “an opportunity to redistribute and even to trim the work force in some areas. FAA has not developed a business model or plans for managing the increased air traffic, panelists say. FAA asks for more than it can get and then carries the difference over from year to year, creating “a bow wave” of unfunded requests for capital projects that it doesn’t have the money for, one panelist says. FAA does not evaluate “the anatomy of demand” and determine how that demand will be served, another panelist adds. as training, staffing, pay disparities, and infrastructure. Using the Strategic Management Process to drive budget decisions will help to ensure the establishment and maintenance of a linkage between the capital and operating budgets. To gain a more complete understanding of its costs, FAA is revising its cost accounting practices and changing from a cash flow to a total. As steps toward that goal, the ATO expects everyone to learn the difference between cost and cash flow and get a better handle on unit costs as better cost accounting data become available. FAA plans to finish putting a new cost accounting system in place by 2006 that will allow it to assign, track, and better control costs. FAA updated its cost estimates in light of OMB’s revenue projections for the next 4 years and arrived at a cumulative shortfall for the period of $5 billion for the operating budget and $3.2billion for the capital budget. According to FAA, a business plan that the ATO was preparing at the time of this article was based on the OMB's revenue projections. have the numbers he needed to know where the ATO stood because FAA did not maintain basic information on the costs and value of existing systems. As a result, he spent most of his first year overseeing the implementation of a cost accounting system and collecting other key data. Their performance is constrained because their terms of employment and compensation are based largely on negotiated agreements rather than on performance. In addition, salary caps limit FAA’s ability to pay for technical expertise. As one panelist observed at the end of the panel, The panelists identified and discussed the impact of funding constraints and the federal budget process on ATC modernization. In their view, the most immediate issue is a critical shortage of funds to meet the current modernization program’s plans and users’ demands. The panelists suggested a number of steps that the ATO could currently take to address terms of productivity, safety, or environmental benefits. The ATO recognizes that capital expenditures directly affect operating costs over time, and therefore the two budgets must be developed together. ATO has spent most of its capital investment dollars on sustaining and maintaining existing systems. Only about 14 percent of its expenditures, he recalled, were for flight enhancement. “Who anywhere would have a capital investment plan that was predominantly about standing still?” he asked. Another panelist also considered the federal budget process incompatible with strategic planning. In his words, “it is absolutely a problem at FAA’ that “budget drives strategy and strategy does not drive budget.” Panelists identified options outside the budget process that the ATO could pursue under its current authorities. They said the ATo could pursue procedural and regulatory changes that would take advantage of existing technologies to increase capacity. The ATO also could obtain information on technologies and procedures developed in other countries that could be used in the United States. The panelist also recommended looking at longer term alternatives to annual appropriations that are available within the government and work well for other organizations, such as “working capital accounts and all kinds of industrial funding schemes” any requests for increased funding and would, instead, tell the ATO to find another way of doing business. Panelists noted that funding from annual appropriations is uncertain, and that this uncertainty is incompatible with strategic and capital planning. The amount of money available for appropriation each year cannot be predetermined, one panelist said, and the size of the appropriation may vary from year to year. This uncertainty focuses attention on which technology will receive the funding (the inputs) rather than on what improvements in safety or capacity the technology is supposed to deliver (the outputs) does not reveal synergies between projects. As a result, when the appropriators decide not to fund a project, they may not understand how their decision will affect other projects. Separation of capital and operating costs in FAA’s accounting system may lead, in some instances, to investments in technologies that end up in a warehouse because the ATO can’t afford to operate them. It discourages analyses of life-cycle costs and may lead to investments that are not needed. to the new executive. Technical as well as cultural factors have impeded ATC modernization. FAA does not have “the engineering technical capability to deal with an extremely complex, highly nonlinear adaptive system,” one speaker said. Another panelist further noted that an executive in the private sector replaced the top 200 people in his organization to achieve the transformation he was seeking, according to several of the panelists. In the view of this panelist, the COO’s hiring of only two new managers and reassignment of other managers would not be sufficient to turn the ATO's culture around. FAA lacks a rudder, in a technical sense, for modernization, panelists say. To help address its lack of technical expertise, ATO could obtain advice from an independent board or information from other countries, they say. “The system engineering organization in FAA is nothing more than a process organization,” another panelist said. It doesn’t matter what the systems engineering people do, their job is to keep doing plans and processes, they said. They think that meetings are products. FAA cannot do everything alone from the inside, because airplanes and airports, for example, need to be equipped with the technologies that will help realize the vision. Employing a team concept could help overcome resistance to the implementation of new technologies, according to another panelist. Putting engineers, finance people, controllers, and electronic technologists together, all on the same team, could unite them as they moved through the stages of implementation, the panelist said. When the time comes to field a technology, the focus would be on getting it up and running. utilizes its engineers to build systems rather than manage contractors. As a result, he said, it is now developing the systems it needs faster and at less cost. Maximizing the use of commercial inputs was the recommendation of another panelist, who said that FAA needs to get out of the business of designing systems. According to him, most companies no longer develop their own large, complex systems. Instead, they get other people to do that for them in the private sector, he added. The other employees also had difficulty adjusting and were still adjusting in some respects, he said. Getting management on the right page was the real challenge. Another panelist questioned why the ATO’s new COO had replaced only two top managers in theATO and simply reassigned other managers. Still another panelist suggested that cultural change within the AT o alone would not be sufficient to ensure the ATo’S success, because so much of its fate depends on other organizations, including FAA, DOT, the Office of FAA plans to train or hire people with needed skills to address shortfalls in technical expertise. Recognizing that cultural factors can play a critical role in an organization’s success, the ATO has initiated organizational changes that are designed to create. FAA is addressing some of the cultural and technical factors panelists identified as affecting ATC modernization. The ATO's COO also provides additional information from previous GAO reports and work in progress on how FAA is addressed some of these issues. FAA sent a large number of detailed e-mails in response to a call for recommendations to improve internal communications. FAA’s management culture was “intensely hierarchical, risk averse,” and “reactionary.” Now, FAA is attempting to foster “results-focused, proactive and innovative behavior” Changing the agency’‘s leadership model is also designed to replace a “personality-driven culture” with a sustainable, stable, viable organization. Managers have stopped seeing employees as a problem and have started to see them as part of the solution. The only way to bring about a cultural transformation is to replace those who resist change, either by allowing them to retire or by hiring others to take their places. In the corporate world, one panelist observed, a new executive brings in a new management team to support a cultural turnaround. The new team is then loyal to the company, the panelist said. The key to these positive results is psychological change, he said. The ATO's organizational placement, combined with its dependence on Congress for funding, limits the COO’s ability to make decisions and take actions, panelists said. The COO is not a Chief Executive Officer, as one of the panelists observed. Instead, he reports to his “owners’—who include the FAA Administrator and the DOT Secretary, who in turn receive direction from the administration and Congress. Consequently, there is no oversight group that is expected to provide constructive criticism of FAA, one panelist said. FAA does not get “the kind of constructive advice that you might hope for.” Europe’s Performance Review Commission provides such constructive advice for EUROCONTROL, the European air traffic management organization. The commission serves as a panel of independent advisers and costs about $2.5 million a year. According to several panelists, the ATO's COO lacks the management tools that would be available to a private-sector CEO. His ability to plan modernization projects, set program priorities, and implement new technologies is constrained. The ATO is charged with operating like a business but is not provided with the management tools available to a business, panelists say. In their view, the ATO’s chances for success are limited because the COO is being asked to turn the organization around without being given the tools to do so. One panelist, who said he was skeptical about the AT o's ability to transform itself, says he is skeptical about its ability to get the funding it needs to turn things around. panelists said, they may be out of date. The political process influences budget decisions in the administration as well as in Congress. Congress has generally supported FAA’s modernization program, but funding difficulties have ensued. Other panelists added that the ATO would have difficulty “deliver the bad news” Unless revenue increases are forthcoming. According to this panelist, OMB would deny funding for the modernization program if it were to be approved by the White House and Congress. The ATO will publish a business plan that projects deficit scenarios. Government altogether. For many, the steps taken thus far to create a performance-based organization were insufficient. The ATO still had a long way to go to achieve its goals. Some panelists were united in their desire for the ATO to succeed, but they generally agreed that its opportunities for success were constrained within a government system. At our request, the panelists concluded the panel with their parting thoughts on the day’s discussion, including any advice they had for FAA or for Congress. change can be an issue outside FAA as well as within it, panelists noted. For example, one panelist questioned how much support the ATO was getting from DOT, OMB, and congressional committees for changing “some extremely entrenched political fiefdoms” Another panelist said that he had found the congressional authorizing committees amenable to changes, but the appropriators liked things the way they were. In addition to having a vision, it is important for the ATo to tie that vision to what is expected of them, the panelists said. the ATO, as one panelist said, or “sacrifice the good for the better” in the words of another. Instead, taking a two-pronged approach would be the best way, in the view of most panelists, for the ATO to meet its immediate and longer term challenges. Clinton V. Oster, Jr. (Panel Moderator) Professor of Public and Environmental Affairs. Anthony J. Broderick Independent Consultant. Former FAA Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification. The panel was only an initial step in a possible long-term, evolving effort to develop and sustain discussion on ATC modernization. Because our scope was limited, we could not include a large number of leading experts, institutions, and networks involved in specialized efforts. Although many points of view were represented, the panel was not representative of all potential stakeholders. More thought, discussion, and research are needed to develop greater agreement on what we really know, what needs to be done, and how to do it. FAA is “very resistant” to having private organizations, rather than FAA, develop new procedures and systems for FAA to approve and institute, panelists say. Several panelists saw resistance to change as a consequence of federal employment. A government organization is insulated from changes, the panelists said. They identified multiple, currently available options for addressing these factors, but none are currently available. The FAA’s modernization program is expected to be completed by the end of the year. the economic pressures that the private sector faces, one of the panelists indicated. In his view, federal employees do not have the firsthand experience with layoffs and business failures to understand, as private aviation industry employees do. Other panelists emphasized the reluctance of management to change. According to a panelist with experience in restructuring a foreign air traffic organization, the senior and middle managers could not or would not adjust to the change and had to be let go within the first 2 years of the restructuring. The air traffic controllers’ union is “very political,” several panelists asserted. One panelist charged that it was “hindering the progress’ of a performance-based organization. The union delayed the adoption of technologies such as the User Request Evaluation Tool (URET) because some controllers saw them as a threat to its membership. Another panelist cited the union’s long-term opposition to the implementation of a software program that tracks productivity—a key measure. A change in management’s approach could go a long way toward overcoming controllers’ and other employees’ resistance to change. One foreign air traffic organization changed its whole approach to the unions and the staff, started talking to them as people. Union representatives and managers take the same courses together and address issues of affordability together, one panelist said. As a result, controllers�’ pay has increased, costs have dropped, and productivity has increased. The panelist implied that obstructing its implementation because it might threaten jobs was not a good idea. they believed would impede or prevent success. Among the obstacles they cited were the counterproductive incentives inherent in the budget process. It was important, one panelist said, to overcome this opposition by describing “the difference between how things are and how they might be” Still other panelists looked to the future, calling for international help to develop new air traffic technologies. The U.S. government’s refusal to allow newAir traffic technologies to be used, and opposition to organizational and technological change, were cited as obstacles. FAA: Plan Still Needed to Meet Challenges to Effectively Managing Air Traffic Controller Workforce. Air Traffic Control: FAA’s Modernization Efforts--Past, Present, and Future. National Airspace System: Reauthorizing FAA Provides Opportunities and Options to Address Challenges. Federal Aviation Administration: Challenges for Transforming Into a High-Performing Organization. FAA: Free Flight Tools Show Promise, but Implementation Challenges Remain. FAA has many Investment Management Capabilities in Place, but More Oversight of Operational Systems Is Needed. Steven R. Bussolari Assistant Division Head, Tactical Systems Division Manager, Air Traffic Control System Group, Lincoln Laboratory. John W. Crichton President and CEO, NAV Canada. Richard Golaszweski Executive Vice President, Gellman Research Associates (GRA), Inc. Ian Hall Director of Operations, National Air Traffic Services, United Kingdom. Thomas Imrich Chief Pilot, Research, Boeing Commercial Aircraft. Satish C. Fearnsides Professor of Public Policy, George Mason University Chief Strategist and Partner of MJF Strategies. In addition to the individual named above, Elizabeth Eisenstadt, Brandon Haller, Bert Japikse, Maren McAvoy, Beverly Norwood, and Richard Scott made key contributions to this special product. GAO-05-11. Air Traffic Control: FAA Needs to Ensure Better Coordination When Approving Air Traffic control systems. Washington, D.C.: November 17, 2004. Air traffic control: FAA’s Acquisition Management Has Improved, but Policies and Oversight Need Strengthening to Help. The panelists generally considered RNP a highly promising, low-cost option for the ATO to improve service. Two panelists expressed concerns about the government’s approach to regulating the use of onboard navigation equipment and the associated procedures needed to implement RNP. The panelists, who generally assumed that the private sector could provide flight service station services and other air traffic services more efficiently than the government, suggested that if contracting for flight service stations services proved to be effective, FAA could do the same. Airlines are “crying for” FAA to approve RNP, one of the panelists said. Aircraft equipped with RNP capabilities could then fly alternative rolling, moving routes to avoid weather delays. Implementing RNP could also eventually lower the ATO’s costs, another panelist said. RNP technologies have been installed on larger aircraft for so long that some aircraft equipped with them are already in service, panelists say. The FAA has not approved procedures for its use in the United States. the technologies have already been retired to the desert, one panelist said. In addition, pilots have been trained to use the technologies, and the technologies are already being used in some other countries, including Canada. As a first step toward obtaining FAA’s approval of procedures for using RNP, the ATO could make policy announcements to set a tone and direction. These announcements would enlist the user community's support at little or no cost, the panelists said, and could be made as early as next year. Area navigation (RNAV) allows operators of properly equipped aircraft to fly desired flight paths without requiring direct flight over ground-based navigation aids. This provides for more direct routing, avoiding suboptimal routes prescribed by conventional ‘highways in the sky’ RNAV and RNP could potentially increase the capacity of the ATC system to handle air traffic by reducing the required distance (separation) between aircraft equipped with advanced navigation capabilities if the aircraft can safely operate closer to one another. The procedure, invisible to passengers, is called Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum. It is expected to save airlines $400 million in fuel costs during the first year. As technology allows, FAA says, more flight altitude levels will be added. In January 2005, FAA doubled the airspace routes between 29,000 feet and 41,000ft by spacing aircraft 1,000 ft apart instead of 2,000 foot.. Five airports are developing RNP-based procedures in partnership with airlines that that are using the procedure. rational decisions that transcend changes in political leadership. The ATO is trying to better align FAA’s priorities and stakeholders’ interests by developing a strategy map. Called the Strategic Management Process, this effort borrows heavily from a private-sector model. According to FAA, the strategy map will enable owners and customers to clearly understand both the services that the ATo is providing and the effects of products in development on those services. The strategy map is expected to be completed by the end of the year. FAA's Strategic Management Process will ensure linkage between FAA’s operating and capital budgets. Future budgetary conversations will revolve around the desired level of service, instead of focusing on a product. Ultimately, the ATO wants to know how much every unit of output costs so that it can satisfy those needs with cost. The ATO created “value-based” performance metrics; that is, it defined its performance in terms of customers’ needs and connected efforts to satisfy those Needs with Cost. a foundation for cultural change and deliver benefits to customers efficiently. For example, the ATO established collaborative teams of technical experts and ATC system. It reorganized air traffic services and the research and acquisition organization along functional lines of business. It reduced layers of management from 11 to 7 to help address the hierarchical nature of the organization. It conducted an organizationwide activity value analysis to determine the full range of activities that ATO headquarters is engaged in, and the value customers place on those activities. Both the OEP and the JPDO’s plan are designed to help the NAS flow smoothly and meet future needs. The restructuring of U.S. air traffic services that has taken place thus far, through the establishment of a performance- based air traffic organization, constitutes “the first building block” of the longer term effort to transform the aviation system. According to the COO, this vision will incorporate both technologies and processes. However, he acknowledged that the ATO has not yet connected this long- term vision with the financial and other challenges it currently faces. JPDO’s long-term vision, thereby “tie the vision to the viability of the future.” The OEP will then be “not just a set of projects,” but a project plan with a vision and a strategy that goes out 20 years. But given the current budget constraints, he conceded, the path to that goal is not clear. In March 2004, FAA created the Air Traffic Safety Oversight Service (AOV), under FAA’S Office of Aviation Safety. OMB Director can revise his budget request and Congress can make further changes in the ATO’s budget. The 20-year vision of the Joint Planning and Development Office (JPDO) is at odds with the ATo, according to one panelist. Other panelists observed that the controllers’ union influences management’'s decisions. The COO lacks key financial data needed to determine, analyze, and manage the AT o's costs. When he was “parachuted” into theATO, as one panelists put it, he did not have the financial data he needed. improve its operations and financial management, FAA has worked to develop three longer term planning documents. FAA is participating in a multiagency effort, sponsored by the JPDO, to develop a national plan for aviation in 2025 and beyond. It has developed a rolling 10-year effort, called the Operational Evolution Plan (OEP), through which FAA plans to increase the capacity of the NAS by one- third. FAA has published its Flight Plan for 2005 through 2009, a multiyear strategic effort that sets a 5-year course for FAA. revenue bonds backed by these fees. To give the ATO greater decision-making authority, panelists proposed restructuring it to streamline and strengthen its management. restructuring could resolve the conflict of interest inherent in FAA’s dual responsibility as the regulator and the operator of air traffic services. These changes would allow theATO to implement a “sensible’ capital investment program and hire the technical expertise it needs, the panelists said. The changes would also achieve cost efficiencies and offer better, more responsive service. the ATO’s creation did not address the structural conflict of interest that exists because FAA is both the regulator and the operator of air traffic services. Another panelist noted that when his country restructured its air traffic organization, it immediately eliminated the same structural Conflict of interest. According to the first panelist, other countries that have reorganized their air traffic organizations have also done so. The regulator became more effective and the operators’ safety performance “significantly improved,” the second panelist said. instituted arms’ length regulation if they did not have it already. “We remain one of the few places that somehow thinks that self-regulation is a good idea, in spite of sort of overwhelming evidence in lots of arenas that it's not a very good idea," the ATO’s COO said. The ATO is developing a business plan that the FAA is developing to guide and monitor its operations. The FAA is addressing some of the structural changes that panelists proposed to improve the ATOs success over time. Disproportionate, he said, because it establishes the same safety standards for aircraft of all sizes. “We can’t keep treating airplanes that need 100 cubic miles of airspace the same from a cost and benefit point of view,” he said. He maintained that the role of regulatory management on the evolution of the ATC system has been underestimated and called for significant investment in understanding risk management. The other panelist who expressed concerns about the government’s regulatory. Safety oversight of FAA’s traffic function will be provided by a separate part of the agency. Although both organizations remain within FAA, under the FAA Administrator, they are less closely joined than they were previously. This step is a positive move toward providing “arm’S length’ safety oversight, although it doesn’t go as far as placing the two organizations in separate federal agencies or removing one of the agencies from the federal government. The establishment of the AOV responds directly to a recommendation by the 1997 National Civil Aviation Review Commission. got technical safety risk as a key technical parameter. FAA does not apply rigorous systems engineering expertise early in nonadvocate technical reviews of project proposals. As a result, a number of FAA’s programs had fundamental system engineering technical issues that were not identified early in the program. The risks were not mitigated, and the programs experienced significant cost growth, the panel said. The panel's findings were published in a report titled, “The Future of Air-to-Ground Communications.” relies on the early and ongoing investment of stakeholders, who review the progress of new projects regularly. Reviews of three projects with cost, schedule, and performance issues that our reports had identified led FAA to reduce the funding for them in FAA’s fiscal year 2005 budget request. The ATO says it plans to continue this phased approach to acquiring new systems. Now, during the first phase, FAA is focusing on the Local Area Augmentation System, Controller-Pilot Data Link Communications and Next-Generation Air-to-Ground Communications System. commercial systems have a shorter economic service life than the systems that FAA designs. The ATO could profitably take advantage of the experiences of other countries’ air traffic organizations, one panelist said. He maintained that the ATO should institute “a fundamental requirement and a cultural expectation” that it will review existing technologies before it buys or tries to develop its own. With a multibillion-dollar budget for software and other information technology, he said, the ATo has ample opportunity to save money. Air navigation service business worldwide spends $3 billion to $4 billion a year on writing code for air traffic management software. “We should be using and sharing” the technologies that have already been invented, one panelist said. At least half of that is writing code that “works just fine somewhere else.” on the systems that are used, he said. The ATO is seeking information on technologies and procedures that other countries have already developed, the panelists said. already running in countries, their performance, and their cost. Sharing information on technical standards with international organizations could also help the ATO avoid costly investments in technologies. A shared vision is crucial for a globally based air traffic system, one panelist said. If every country or continent had its own technical standards, an international system could not function effectively, an ATO official said. The following provides additional information from the ATo’s COO and from previous GAO reports and work in the field. approach argued that navigational technology is evolving and shifting from ground-based to cockpit-based systems. He suggested that the private sector could assume the cost of capitalizing the equipment, but “the government’s got to allow that technology to be used, and it hasn’t,” he said. One panelist emphasized the importance of conducting thorough technical evaluations, but said that the government should allow the ATO to change its policies on aircraft separation to allow the technology to do the job. technical benchmarks to promote efficient development, business models that take into account operational trends. As one panelist said, “we have to target the future mix of real operations that we’re really going to see, not build the world’s most perfect system from 1956” Despite their reservations, the panelists generally agreed that stakeholders should not “allow the concept of privatization to be the enemy of moving forward with the ATO,” they said. The ATO is a government organization. third rail of aviation politics. Another panelist emphasized the importance of starting to plan now to accommodate the airplanes that are being bought today to provide service for the next generation. For example, one panelist said that the ATO needed to understand the interconnections between ATC systems and break the big picture into nuggets so that it could clarify for the appropriators why they should not break apart the ATo’s capital investment plan and selectively fund only some components, he said. on technologies that they have already adopted. A technical advisory board made up of system engineers could review proposals for FAA and demand the kinds of data and tests needed to scrub the proposals. Hiring skilled engineers instead of relying on contractors might enable the ATO to develop systems more economically and efficiently, one panelist suggested. This panelist described how a foreign air traffic services organization develops new ATC systems in-house and seldom uses contractors. It now employs skilled engineers, rather than contractors, to develop the systems. stressed the importance of progressing by small steps within the existing system. Small steps might include obtaining good performance and cost information, scoping programs in accordance with current budget projections. It was critical, one panelist said, for the ATO to “have some small early practical successes” to enlist the political support of the user community and help tie the customers to theATO’s mission. Other panelists focused on the obstacles within the system that have been identified as a problem. contract for other air traffic services, such as oceanic, night, en route, or airways facilities services. The A-76 process would then serve not only as a way of saving money but also as “a pilot program for how things could get done,” one panelist said. In the view of another panelist, ongoing government oversight would ensure the safety of contracted operations. “staged outsourcing” of the NAS’s functions might build confidence in the private sector’S ability to provide air traffic. services safely and efficiently. that time will show, when completed, how large a funding gap the ATO faces and how far it will have to go to address that gap. FAA says that it is prepared to identify and eliminate redundancies in the NAS. FAA has already taken some steps to control the costs of ATC modernization. For example, it has adopted the phased approach to implementing new ATC systems that it used under Free Flight Phase 1, called “build a little, test a little.”

ROUGE-1: 82.09, ROUGE-2: 75.54, ROUGE-L: 22.31
BERTScore: 58.29

==============================================
==================== [35/100] ====================
Summary:
Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986 ( P.L. 99-433 ) reorganized DOD's command and control structure. There are 10 combatant commands: 6 geographic and 4 functional commands. SOCOM was the first combatant command endowed with acquisition authority and its own budget line for training and equipping its forces. The Fiscal Year (FY) 1987 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) gave SOCOM its own acquisition responsibilities. The FY2016 NDAA gives SOCOM acquisition responsibilities for the first time. military departments. 10 U.S.C. 2216 established a Defense Modernization Account and granted authority for its use to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretaries of the military departments. The FY2017 NDAA ( P.L. 114-328 , §2447d) granted a new reprogramming authority, referred to as a special transfer authority. This authority is intended to expedite the selection of prototype projects for production and rapid fielding. In the FY2018 NDAA, the Department of Defense was required to submit a report on the acquisition authorities available to the military department. Title 10 U.S.C. Section 164(c) grants SOCOM authority to validate and establish priorities for requirements. The military services are responsible for funding certain types of SOCOM training, service-common equipment, and professional services. If SOCOM wants to acquire a weapon system that is not special operations specific, the acquisition must be executed through one of the military departments. The Air Force provides SOCOM with C-130s and the Army provides the ammunition for service- common weapons to include the M4. SOCOM's statutory acquisition authorities are more limited than those of the military departments. SOCOM acquisition personnel are bound by and act with the same freedoms and restrictions as the military services and defense agencies. The definition of military departments, codified in 50 U.S.C. 3004, does not include SOCOM. As a result, SOCOM may not receive new acquisition authorities provided by Congress and must work through the Secretary of Defense to obtain these authorities or seek a legislative change. Each military service and many DOD components also have their own acquisition regulatory supplement that provides unique acquisition guidance. For example, the Army maintains the Army Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplements (AFARS) and the Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) maintains the DLA Directive. SOCOM has its own supplement to the DFARS, known as the SOCOM Federal acquisition Regulation Supplement (SOFARS) SOFARS Part 5601.101 defines the supplemental regulation's purpose as "provid[ing] the minimum essential implementation of the Federal acquisition regulation (FAR) and DOD FAR Supplement (DFARS)." SOCOM programs have lower dollar thresholds, so they don't receive the same level of scrutiny brought to bear on the more expensive programs. Another factor that potentially enables SOCOM's culture of innovation and risk-taking in its acquisition programs is its general ability to execute programs below statutory and regulatory dollar figures that require more rigorous oversight. This point has been highlighted by James "Hondo" Geurts, current Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development, and Acquisition (and former SOCOM Acquisition Executive) Congress may ask: To what extent do current acquisition-related laws and regulations promote or inhibit a more efficient, less bureaucratic, and more balanced approach to risk in acquisitions? In some instances SOCOM has fewer acquisition authorities than the military departments. This occurs where legislation grants acquisition authorities or flexibilities to the SOCOM branch. In some cases SOCOM may have less acquisition authority than military departments, such as in the case of the U.S. Air Force, which has less acquisition powers than the Army. SOCOM has unique acquisition authorities, Goldwater-Nichols report says. SOCOM can negotiate with military departments for systems to be provided to SOCOM, it says. The report also explores whether SOCOM hasunique characteristics that influence how it conducts acquisition, it adds. It concludes that SOCOM's acquisition authorities for unclassified acquisition programs are similar to those granted to the U.S. military departments. It also compares the military departments' and SOCom's chains of command, and the scope of acquisition activity and program oversight. size, culture, and close proximity to the warfighter as factors that can contribute to more effective acquisitions. The successful use of the Special Operations Command acquisition authority below the acquisition category (ACAT) 1 level illustrates the transformation benefits of having a joint buyer, close to the user, maintain a streamlined acquisition process to deliver low dollar threshold systems rapidly. In discussing the SOCOM acquisition culture and the benefits of a flatter organization, a number of current and former SOCOM officials have stated that the lack of bureaucratic overhead allows the organization to be more effective. all of the same oversight and policy as the rest of DOD. Our workforce operates professionally within the same DOD 5000 directives, the same Federal Acquisition Regulation and the same Financial Management Regulation. Give credit to our acquisition workforce for the results they achieve, and you might dismiss using USSOCOM as a benchmark for how to do acquisition. In some instances, SOCOM may in fact have fewer acquisition authorities and flexibilities than the military departments, as in cases where statute specifically provides acquisition authorities to the SOCOM. SOCOM's statutory restriction to procure strictly SOF-peculiar equipment, modifications, and services enables a more focused, operations-oriented acquisition culture. In a National Defense interview, James Smith reportedly stated the following: Our direct relationship to USSOCOM for the acquisition of only services and equipment that are unique to special operations gives us three primary advantages. First,USSOCOM is a combatant command with a more focus on special operations than other commands. Second, the SOF acquisition culture gives SOCOM the ability to execute acquisitions more efficiently and effectively. the Service Secretary, whereas in SOCOM the AE reports to the Commander. The method SOCOM uses for acquisitions is similar to the acquisition processes used by the military services. SOCOM benefits from being a smaller organization with a more focused mission set and limited scope of acquisition authorities. Other SOCOM attributes, such as delegating more decisionmaking to lower levels and promoting a more risk-taking culture, may be transferable to the services. The services must manage acquisition programs across domains, using multiple acquisition processes, and to use different acquisition competencies. size and scope of the acquisition efforts result in SOCOM having a substantially smaller acquisition workforce than the services. SOCOM's acquisition workforce consists of approximately 500 civilian and military personnel, less than 1% of the total DOD acquisition workforce of 156,000. A number of analysts and government officials have argued that SOCOM benefits from its size relative to the military services. The current SOCOM Acquisition Executive also reiterated this point when he reportedly stated that "[SOCOM's] ability to move relatively fast is a function of scale" SOF AT&L is the organization within SOCOM that leads internal major procurement efforts. The SOCOM Commander is directly responsible for all portions of the command and the Acquisition Executive (AE) reports directly to the Commander. Falling under the AE are the Program Executive Offices (PEOs) and Directorates. This direct chain of command allows for rapid communication on purpose, intent, and decisionmaking (see Figure 1 ). The structure's design is similar to that of the other services, which also follow a Secretary/Commander-AE-PEO-PM structure. modified to include SOCOM? Appendix A. Comparison of Chains of Command with SOCOM. Appendix B. Comparison between SOCOM and other chains of command. Appendix C. Discussion of SOCOM's role in the U.S. national security state. Appendix D. Discussion about SOCOM as a part of the military-industrial-security complex. Appendix E. Discussion on the role of the United States military in the global security environment. Appendix F. discussion on SOCOM in the military. an extremely relevant ongoing mission. We're fully co-located and integrated with the staff here. We have a firsthand understanding of priorities and urgency that gives us a different appreciation for schedule emphasis. It's not a cliché to say that our operators will often accept the "80 percent" solution if we can get that solution into the fight sooner. The services, on the other hand, have a much broader acquisition mandate, including the acquisition of business systems, weapon procurement programs that must be integrated into joint operations. one of SOCOM's largest with a total estimated procurement cost through FY2023 of at $391.7 million. FY2017 actual procurement funding budget for the program was $34 million. In comparison, the military services have numerous major programs with significantly higher procurement appropriations. The Navy's 2017 appropriation for the Virginia Class submarine program ($5.39 billion) is 250% larger than SOCom's entire FY2017 procurement appropriation ($2.08 billion). In FY2017, the SOCOM procurement appropriation was 1.5% of DOD's total procurement appropriation of $132.2 billion. The Nunn-McCurdy Act requires DOD to report to Congress when an MDAP experiences cost overruns of 15% or more. There are currently more than 150 MDAPs in DOD; many of these programs have a larger budget in a single year than SOCOM's entire procurement budget for FY2017. If SOCOM’s current CAT II program (Silent Knight Radar) experienced 100% cost growth (from approximately $391 million to $782 million), it would still not require a Nunn/McCurdy notification to Congress. CVN-78 Gerald R. Ford aircraft carrier was approximately 70% of SOCOM's entire FY2017 procurement budget ($2.0 billion) Some analysts believe that these lower dollar thresholds allow SOCOM to operate below the radar. Despite these perceived organizational advantages, SOCOM has experienced challenges in executing its acquisition programs. The Advanced SEAL Delivery System Program, intended to develop a covert submersible insertion vehicle, was documented by both the Government Accountability Office and RAND as experiencing considerable cost, schedule, and performance issues. programs are given an Acquisition Category (ACAT) designation based on dollar figures and program scope. These designations determine the level of oversight required for the program. SOCOM and the military departments adhere to the same oversight standards and dollar threshold for categorizing programs. According to officials, SOCOM has a total of six programs that exceed the category II dollar thresholds. Currently, the Silent Knight Radar program is developing a SOF-common terrain following/terrain avoidance radar system for use in SOF fixed wing and rotary wing aircraft. small business. Many analysts argue that small businesses and organizations can be more nimble, more innovative, and more adaptable than large enterprises. Sir Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group, reportedly stated, "Small businesses are nimble and bold and can often teach much larger companies a thing or two about innovations that can change entire industries" A 2004 congressional report identified SOCOM's unique capabilities. A number of analysts also argue thatsmall organizations are more effective in communication, innovation and redesign, customer service, and risk-taking.

ROUGE-1: 77.98, ROUGE-2: 72.17, ROUGE-L: 31.79
BERTScore: 74.79

==============================================
==================== [36/100] ====================
Summary:
implementing the controls needed to advance the federal government’s efforts to reduce and prevent improper payments. Proactively preventing improper payments increases public confidence in the administration of benefit programs. addressing program design issues that are a factor in causing improper payments may be an effective preventive strategy to be aspects of recovering overpayments. Effective monitoring and reporting can also help detect emerging issues. In addition, agencies can also enhance detective controls to for provider enrollment, contribute to improper payments would lend insight to developing effective strategies for enhancing compliance. Many agencies and programs are in the process of implementing preventive controls to avoid improper payments, including overpayments and underpayments. Preventive controls may involve a variety of activities such as upfront validation of eligibility, predictive analytic tests, training programs, and timely resolution of audit findings. Data sharing allows entities that make payments—to contractors, vendors, participants—to share information. Further, addressing program design issues that are a factor in causing improper payments may be an effective preventive strategy to be considered. in benefit programs, and others—to compare information from different sources to help ensure that payments are appropriate. Data sharing can be particularly useful in confirming initial or continuing eligibility of participants in benefit programs. Analyses and reporting on the extent to which agencies are participating in data sharing activities is another important element needed to advance the federal government’s efforts to reduce improper payments. For example, the U.S. Department of Labor (Labor) reported that it had shared data with the Department of Health and Human Services. that its Unemployment Insurance Program utilizes HHS’s National Directory of New Hires Databaseto individuals who claim benefits after returning to work. In June 2011, Labor established the mandatory use of the database for state benefit payment control no later than December 2011. In another case, to address the issue of inaccuracy of self-reported financial income on applications for student aid, the Labor Department issued a program letter that included recommended operating procedures for cross-matching activity. to improve the ability to detect overpayments. Department of Education implemented a 6-month pilot version of an IRS data retrieval tool in January 2010 for its Pell Grant Program. Tool allows student aid applicants and, as needed, parents of applicants to transfer certain tax return information from the IRS directly to Education’s online application. Education reported that nearly 3.5 million students used the data exchange tool, representing approximately 21 percent of the applications submitted for the 2011 - 2012 academic year. Predictive analytic technologies. The analytic technologies used by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Data mining is a computer-based control activity that analyzes diverse data. The central repository of data commonly used to perform data mining is called a data warehouse. Data warehouses store tables of historical and current information that are logically grouped. As a tool in managing improper payments, applying data mining to aData warehouse allows an organization to efficiently query the system to identify potential improper payments. For more information on data mining, visit datamining.considered.com or go to www.datamining.com. The Small Business Jobs Act of 2010 requires CMS to use predictive modeling and other analytic techniques. The goal is to identify and to prevent improper payments under the Medicare fee-for-service program.technologies will be used to analyze and identify Medicare provider networks, billing patterns, and beneficiary utilization patterns and detect those that represent a high risk of fraudulent activity. Through such analysis, unusual or suspicious patterns or abnormalities can be identified and used to prioritize additional review of suspicious transactions before payment is made.are examples of preventive techniques that may be useful for other programs. legislation required that contractors selected begin using these technologies on July 1, 2011, in the 10 states identified by CMS as having the highest risk of fraud, waste, or abuse in Medicare fee- for-service payments. Training can be a key element in any effort to prevent improper payments from occurring. This can include both training staff on how to use these technologies and training providers and beneficiaries on how they should use them to prevent fraud. These predictive analytic contractors began using the technologies to screen all fee-for-service claims nationwide prior to payment as of June 30, 2011. example, in the Medicare and Medicaid program, data on claims are stored in geographically disbursed systems and databases. CMS has been working for most of the past decade to consolidate program integrity data and analytical tools for detecting fraud, waste, and abuse. The agency’s efforts led to the initiation of the Integrated Data Repository (IDR) program, which is intended to provide CMS and its program integrity contractors with a centralized source that contains Medicaid and Medicare data from the many disparate and dispersed legacy systems. the One Program Integrity (One PI) program, a web-based portal and set of analytical tools by which these data can be accessed and analyzed. Recovery auditing is used to identify and recover overpayments. The Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 required CMS to implement a national Medicare recovery audit contractor (RAC) program by January 1, 2010. In fiscal year 2011, HHS reported that the Medicare Fee-for-Service recovery audit program identified more than $1 billion in improper payments. how to prevent and detect improper payments and training providers or beneficiaries on program requirements. The Medicaid Integrity Institute, an initiative of CMS’s Medicaid Integrity Group (MIG), trains state-level staff and facilitates networking by sponsoring free workshops for states. The MIG sponsors education programs for providers and beneficiaries, such as for pharmacy providers, to promote best prescribing practices and appropriate prescribing guidelines based on Food and Drug Administration labeling. GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government, GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (Washington, D.C: Nov. 1999). $961 million in overpayments and recovered $797 million nationwide. The Medicaid RAC program was established by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Each state must contract with a RAC, which is tasked with identifying and recovering Medicaid over payments and identifying underpayments. Similar to the Medicare RACs, Medicaid Racs will be paid on a contingency fee basis—a percentage of any recovered over Payments plus incentive payments for the detection of under payments. It is important to note that some agencies have reported statutory or regulatory problems. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For fiscal year 2011, two agency auditors reported on compliance issues with IPIA and IPERA. USDA auditors identified noncompliance with the requirements of IPERA regarding the design of program internal controls related to improper payments. HHS did not report an improper payment estimate for its TANF and CHIP programs. A number of actions are under way across the federal government to help advance improper payment reduction goals. The governmentwide improper payment estimates are not complete until DOD fully and effectively implements astatistically valid estimating process. Fiscal year 2011 marked the eighth year of implementation of the Improper Payments Information Act of 2002 (IPIA) IPIA requires executive branch agencies to annually review all programs and activities to identify those that are susceptible to significant improper payments. IPERA, enacted July 22, 2010, amended IPIA by expanding the scope of the IPIA. The act was enacted to reduce improper payments for programs with estimates that exceed $10 million. It was also the first year of Implementation for theimproperpayments Elimination and Recovery Act of 2010. on the previous requirements for identifying, estimating, and reporting on programs and activities susceptible to significant improper payments. IPERA included a new, broader requirement for agencies to conduct recovery audits, where cost effective, for each program and activity with at least $1 million in annual program outlays. This IPERA provision significantly lowers the threshold for required recovery audits from $500 millionprograms and activities. Another new IP ERA provision calls for federal agencies’ inspectors general to annually determine whether their respective agencies are in compliance with key IPERA requirements. Under Office of Management and Budget (OMB) implementing guidance, these reports are required to be completed within 120 days of the publication of the federal agencies’ annual PAR or AFR, with the fiscal year 2011 reports for most agencies due on March 15, 2012. OMB has established guidance for federal agencies on reporting, reducing, and recovering improper payments has established various work groups responsible for developing work groups.and to report on their determinations. The scope for recovery audits to all OMB continues to play a key role in the oversight of the governmentwide improper payments problem. in the law to receive that type of information from financial institutions. Treasury has drafted language to address the issue and is working to publish a notice of proposed rulemaking to amend its regulation. In another instance, USDA reported that Section 281 of the Department of Agriculture Reorganization Act of 1994 precluded the use of recovery auditing techniques. Section 281 provides that 90 days after the decision of a state, county, or an area committee is final, no action may be taken to recover the amounts found to have been erroneously disbursed. Barriers that affect their ability to pursue recovery auditing. Only the Social Security Administration, Railroad Retirement Board, and the Department of Veterans’ Affairs may receive the information necessary to identify the withdrawer. OPM reported that based on current law and Treasury’s regulations, financial institutions are barred from providing OPM with the information needed to recover various overpayments. The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) reported that it faces regulatory barriers that restrict its ability to recover over payments for its Retirement Program. the decision unless the participant had reason to believe that the decision was erroneous. This statute is commonly referred to as the Finality Rule. Federal-state incentives. Another area for further exploration is the broader use of incentives for states to implement effective preventive and detective controls. Agencies have applied limited incentives and penalties for encouraging improved state administration to reduce improper payments. Incentives and penalties can be helpful to create management reform and to ensure adherence to performance standards. Chairman Platts and Ranking Member Towns, this completes my prepared statement. Payments and Remaining Challenges. Washington, D.C.: April 15, 2011. Improper Payments: Status of Fiscal Year 2010 Federal Improper payments Reporting. Opportunities to Reduce Potential Duplication in Government Programs, Save Tax Dollars, and Enhance Revenue. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The full report can be found at: http://www.geo.org/government/improper-payments. Treasury. 2011 Financial Report of the United States Government. Washington, D.C.: December 23, 2011, pp. 211-231. Medicaid Program Integrity: Expanded Federal Role Presents Challenges to and Opportunities for Assisting States. DOD Financial Management: Weaknesses in Controls over the Use of Public Funds and Related Improper Payments. GAO-11-950T. Washington: September 22, 2011. Improper payments: Reported Medicare Estimates and Key Remediation Strategies.GAO-12-288T. For more information regarding this testimony, please contact Beryl H. Davis, Director, Financial Management and Assurance, at (202) 512-2623 or by e-mail at DavisBH@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony included Jack Warner, Assistant Director; W. Tyler Benson; Francine Delvecchio; Crystal Lazcano; Kerry Porter; and Carrie Wehrly. Treasury reported that the fiscal year 2011 Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) program’s estimated improper payment amount decreased from at least $2 billion by the end of fiscal year 2012. Despite reported progress, the federal government continues to face challenges in determining the full extent of improper payments. We have also found that internal control weaknesses exist, heightening the risk of improper Payments occurring. Until federal agencies are able to implement effective processes to completely and accurately identify the root causes of the current improper payment estimates is necessary for agencies to target effective corrective actions and implement preventive measures. An estimated $115.3 billion in reported improper payments was reported in fiscal year 2011. The root causes of estimated improper payments were classified into three categories. The categories were documentation and administrative errors, authentication and medical necessity errors, and verification errors. For instance, enhancing incentives for grantees, such as state and local governments, could help increase attention to preventing, identifying, and recovering improper payments, the OMB says. The agency says it is working with agencies to identify and recover overpayments. OMB identified 40 federal agency programs, or about 50 percent of the total programs about $9 billion. Three additional programs providing estimates in fiscal year 2011 were not included in the governmentwide totals because their estimation methodologies were still under development. A number of federal agencies have reported progress in reducing improper payment error rates in some programs and activities, OMB says. The three excluded programs were the: Department of Education’s Direct Loan, Department of Defense”s Defense Finance and Accounting Service Commercial Pay, and Army Corps of Engineers Commercial Pay. extent of improper payments and implement appropriate corrective actions to effectively reduce improper payments. We found that not all agencies have developed improper payment estimates for all of the programs and activities they identified as susceptible. We are currently working on engagements related to improper payment reporting at both DOD and HHS. Additional analysis is needed to assess the root causes of improper Payments, a key factor in identifying and implementing effective corrective actions. The federal government will not have reasonable assurance that the use of taxpayer funds is adequately safeguarded. DOD assessed its commercial payment program as low risk because DOD management has concluded that it had a highly effective pre-payment examination process. That process includes a software tool that tests for potential improper payments before disbursement. However, the DOD IG has reported that the tool had a false positive rate of more than 95 percent and that its use was not standardized across payment systems. The DOD IG reported that DOD’s risk of making improper payments was high and identified deficiencies in DOD's estimate of high-dollar overpayments. other programs, including statistically valid random sampling or reviewing 100 percent of payments. In its fiscal year 2011 agency financial report, DOD stated that it plans to begin statistical sampling of the Commercial Pay program in fiscal year 2012. Both GAO and the DOD Inspector General (IG) have previously reported on weaknesses in DOD’s payment controls, including weaknesses in its process for assessing the risk of improper payments and reporting estimated amounts. Nonetheless, the DOD Comptroller testified in May 2011 that the agency plans to start statistical sampling in 2012. Three federal entities did not report fiscal year 2011 estimated improper payment amounts for four risk-susceptible programs. HHS cited statutory limitations for its state-administered Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program. Despite these limitations, HHS officials stated that they will continue to work with states and explore options to allow for future estimates for the TANF program. To see the full report, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2011/01/30/healthcare/fiscal-year-2011/federal-financial-reports/index.html. For fiscal year 2011, the TANF program reported outlays of about $17 billion. For another program, HHS cited the Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2009 as prohibiting HHS from calculating or publishing any national or state- specific payment error rates. The new payment error rate measurement rule became effective on September 10, 2010. According to its fiscalyear 2011 agency financial report, HHS plans to report estimated improper payment amounts for CHIP in fiscal year 2012. For fiscal year2011, the CHIP program reported federal outlays in excess of $20 billion. recommendations aimed at improving federal financial management activities related to reducing improper payments. Federal agencies reported improper payment estimates totaling $115.3 billion in fiscal year 2011, a decrease of $5.3billion from 2010. OMB, Circular No. A-136 Revised, Financial Reporting Requirements (Oct. 27, 2011); OMB Memorandum M-11-16, Issuance of Revised Parts I and II to Appendix C of OMB Circular A-123 (Apr. 14, 2011) the revised prior year reported estimate of $120.6 billion. Based on the agencies’ estimates, OMB estimated that fiscal year 2011 improper payments comprised about 4.7 percent of the $2.5 trillion in total spending. The decrease is attributed primarily to decreases in program outlays for the Department of Labor’s Unemployment Insurance program, and decreases in reported error rates for fiscalyear 2011 (compared to fiscal year 2010) OMB estimates improper payments totaled about $120 billion in fiscal year2011. For fiscal year 2011, OMB reported that governmentwide agencies recaptured $1.25 billion in overpayments to contractors and vendors. Over half of this amount, $797 million, can be attributed to the Medicare recovery audit contractor program which identifies improper Medicare payments in all 50 states. Cumulatively, the President’s goal of recapturing.overall improper payments by $50 billion, and recapture at least $2 billion in improper contract payments by the end of fiscal year 2012. The $115.3 billion in estimated federal improper payments reported for fiscal year 2011 was attributable to 79 programs spread among 17 agencies. Ten of these 79 programs account for most of the reported improper payments. The 10 programs with the highest error rates had rates ranging from 11.0 percent to 28.4 percent. Since the implementation of IPIA in 2004, federal agencies have continued to identify new programs or activities as risk-susceptible and report estimated improper payment amounts. The HHS Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit (Part D) program had the highest estimate. the fiscal year 2010 amount of $16.9 billion to $15.2 billion, which represented a decrease in the error rate from 26.3 percent to 23.5 percent. Treasury reported that corrective actions taken to reduce improper payments primarily focused on completing examinations on tax returns that claimed the EITC. HHS reported that the fiscal year 2011 estimated improper payment amount for the Medicare Advantage (Part C) program decreased from $14.7 million to $13.8 million, representing a decrease of $1 billion. the fiscal year 2010 reported amount of $13.6 billion to $12.4 billion, which represented a decrease in the error rate from 14.1 percent to 11.0 percent. In 2010, the President set goals, as part of the Accountable Government Initiative, for federal agencies to reduce payment errors. HHS reported that it reduced payment errors by continuing to routinely implement controls in its payment system to ensure accurate and timely payments. In addition, agencies have further developed the use of recovery audits to recapture improper payments.

ROUGE-1: 79.83, ROUGE-2: 73.69, ROUGE-L: 30.25
BERTScore: 55.50

==============================================
==================== [37/100] ====================
Summary:
In 1994, the Army decided to terminate the final year of the FMTV production contract. The contractor had to stop new production for 5 months and produced only 175 new trucks during the other 4 months. The Army found that the first 4,955 trucks produced did not meet the requirements for FMTV. The combination of inexperience and an aggressive production schedule were major contributors to the contractor’s production problems and schedule delays. The contract extension added an estimated $85 million to the original contract price. fleet of older, less reliable trucks. First 4,955 trucks produced did not meet the FMTV corrosion protection requirements. The Army’s decision to award a $1.2-billion FMTV contract to a company that was not experienced in truck production, did not have truck production facilities, and was not affiliated with an experienced producer. Further, the Army contract contained an aggressive production schedule, considering an inexperienced contractor, that further added to the cost of replacing the older trucks. At a projected cost of $15.7 billion, the FMTV program is one of the Army’s largest acquisition programs. The Army plans to purchase 85,488 FMTV trucks to replace its aging medium truck fleet. Under the program, the Army will purchase a family of 2.5- and 5-ton trucks based on a common truck cab and chassis. The trucks will consist of cargo, long wheel base cargo, dump, fuel tanker, and trailer variants, among others. as of December 31, 1997. To accomplish this, we first determined operating tempo for the older M35 2.5-ton and M809 5-ton trucks. A project office official said that the older trucks were the trucks the FMTV trucks would be replacing. The FMTV project office provided a 3-year average operating and support cost per mile for the Older trucks. It also provided an estimated operating andsupport costs permile forFMTV trucks. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. This provided the monthly additional operating and support costs to operate the older 2.5- and 5-ton trucks. We did not independently verify the accuracy of material receiving and shipping report data obtained from the Defense Finance and Accounting Service. We multiplied the delay in months by the number of FMTV trucks delivered late. This gave us an estimate of the additional costs that the Army might have incurred as of December 31, 1997, because of delayed FMTV truck deliveries. We then multiplied that product by the monthly Additional Operating and Support costs for the older trucks. truck average was based on the trucks used in three Army major commands. We determined an average operating tempo for each truck. This information was reported by the U.S. Cost and Economic Analysis Center in its fiscal year 1996 tactical systems cost report, which was updated as of October 27, 1997. We computed monthly operating and support costs for the older trucks and FMTV trucks using the operating tempo. We then computed the difference between the cost for the Older and theFMTV trucks.. database that used the same original source documentation. The Defense Finance and Accounting Service also relies on its database to make payments to the contractor for delivered vehicles. We also did not verify the accuracy of operating and support cost factors and operating tempo for the older 2.5- and 5-ton trucks and FMTV trucks provided by the U.S. Army Cost and Economic Analysis Center. This data is part of the operating and. support management information system managed by the Army. It is the Army’s source of historical operating andsupport cost information for more. was extended 2 years. Stewart & Stevenson completed production under the contract in November 1998. The initial production contract does not include the 5-ton fuel tanker, 5- ton van, and both trailers. These vehicles will be included in future production contracts. In our November 1998 report, we found that the Army had not (1) instituted safeguards to ensure that existing production problems did not occur in follow-on production contracts and (2) performed a cost and benefit analysis of its plan to develop a second source for the trucks. contract, it established a source selection board, which evaluated the proposals of the three competing contractors. The Army gave highest consideration to the technical and cost factors of the proposals. Stewart & Stevenson was selected because its proposal offered the best value for meeting the Army’s overall requirements and receives the highest score for the technical factor and was the lowest cost. The board considered the government's previous experience with the prototype contractors as part of the Army's overall production readiness evaluation. This evaluation noted that Stewart and Stevenson had no prior experience in high volume production of combat. tractor, van, and wrecker—and a 5-ton trailer. In the prototype phase, three companies were awarded contracts to develop and produce prototype trucks for evaluation and testing. On October 11, 1991, the Army awarded the winning contractor a $1.2 billion, 5-year fixed-price production contract for the first 10,843 FMTV trucks. The fifth year of the contract was subsequently restructured and the contract an experienced truck producer was awarded. Stewart & Stevenson was a distribution and service company for various products. or tactical vehicles, (2) needed to convert European engineering drawings to U.S. specifications and standards, and (3) had unsatisfactory delivery performance on past low dollar purchase orders. The contractor, which was inexperienced in truck production, had difficulties in both establishing a production line and producing trucks that would pass test requirements. To acquire FMTV truck production capability, Stewart & Stevenson purchased a plant from an oil-drilling equipment manufacturer, configured the plant for truck production and established a tactical truck division. Stewart.& Stevenson was affiliated with an experienced military truck producer (Steyr-Daimler-Puch, AG. of Austria). Stewart & Stevenson subcontracted with Steyr to design and develop FMTV prototypes based on the design of a truck Steyr produced for the Austrian army. Steyr completed its subcontract work before Stewart &. Stevenson submitted its production proposal and was not included in the production phase of the program. When the Army issued the solicitation for the production, Steyr was not selected. The Army did not execute a low-risk acquisition strategy. To reduce the time to develop and field FMTV trucks, the Army streamlined its strategy. The Army believed this strategy would be low- risk partly because the contractors participating in the prototype competition either had produced military trucks in the past or were affiliated with an experienced military truck producer. The production contract solicitation did not require the contractor to be experienced in truck production or affiliated with a military truck company. It also did not perform a cost and benefit analysis of its second source plans before continuing with them. The Army used a streamlined acquisition strategy to reduce the time required to develop and field FMTV trucks. The reduction in time was to be achieved by combining the demonstration and validation phase and the engineering and manufacturing development phase into a single prototype competition phase and by conducting concurrent tests. The Army and contractor agreed to accelerate truck production during testing even though the trucks were not meeting test requirements. These problems resulted in substantial delays in delivering the trucks. In response to the schedule delays, the Army agreed to accelerated truck production. officials and reviewed various FMTV program documents. For early historical data, we had to rely mainly on oral testimony because many documents dealing with the early program were unavailable. To determine the impact of delays in delivering FMTV trucks, we calculated additional operating and support costs the Army might have incurred. We were able to obtain some of the earlier documents, mostly those dealing with FMTV truck testing, by reviewing our workpapers from previous reviews of the program. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. The Army did not include experience or affiliation with an experienced truck producer as a requirement in the production contract solicitation. The contract contained an aggressive production schedule that did not take into account the contractor’s inexperience. The contractor had been affiliated with a truck producer during the prototype phase but did not maintain its affiliation. The inexperienced contractor was awarded the FMTV multiyear production contract to a contractor that was neither experienced in truck production nor affiliated with an experience truck producer. The Army awarded the contract to an inexperienced contractor. schedule to an inexperienced truck producer, who had no affiliation with an experienced truck producer. DOD noted that the decision was based on funding demands from higher priority programs. DOD also said that the FMTV program’s schedule and production problems weakened its ability to compete with other programs for funds. The decision was made to terminate the final year of theFMTV contract, which was set to expire in 2015. The contract was supposed to be a low-risk acquisition strategy, DOD said. to galvanized steel. In commenting on a draft of this report, DOD generally agreed that it identified lessons learned from a historical perspective. DOD included with its written comments an enclosure providing additional contextual information for some of the issues in the report. In the enclosure, DOD stated that it believed the acquisition strategy for the FMTV program has been appropriate. According to DOD, the competitive source selection took into account a balance of factors, including the contractor’s assessed production capabilities. We did not find the combination of awarding a contract with an aggressive production. The contractor took much longer than expected to deliver trucks capable of passing production qualification and operational tests. Production qualification testing was originally scheduled to be completed in August 1993; the test was not completed until December 1994. The trucks failed the test because they did not meet reliability and some performance requirements. The Army identified over 90 problems that the contractor was required to correct.and did not deliver 85 trucks until March 1994. Operational testing of the new trucks began in April 1995 and the Army completed both tests in June 1995. They were assessed as having met the FMTV requirements in both tests. that passed the tests, the contractor did not receive approval to begin full-rate production until August 1995. The first unit was not equipped with FMTV trucks until January 1996, 2 years and 3 months later than planned. The trucks that were produced could not meet FMTV technical and operational requirements. About 1,474 trucks had to be disassembled to their frames and remanufactured. This additional work delayed the production of new trucks during the 1995-96 period. The production contract allowed the contractor to deliver up to 150 trucks a month until the testing phase was completed. For example, the FMTV data package provided by Steyr was in German and used metric measurements. Stewart & Stevenson did not accurately translate the instructions or convert the measurements. Production disruptions occurred when instructions did not work as intended and when subcontractor parts, produced using drawings furnished by the contractor, did not fit. As a result, the contractor was late in delivering trucks for testing. The contract required the contractor to deliver a minimum of 85 trucks by October 1992 for production qualification testing, initial operational testing, and technical manual verification. House Committees on Government Reform, Armed Services, and Appropriations; the Secretaries of Defense and the Army; and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix II. Please contact me on (202) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, orders should be mailed to: accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (202?) 512-6061. We conducted our review between July 1997 and November 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier. At that time, we will send copies of the report to the Chairmen and Ranking Minority Members of the Senate Committees on Governmental Affairs, Armed Services, and Appropriations and of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service, Columbus, Ohio. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. disprove the contractor’s claim. The Army and the contractor concluded that using galvanized (zinc coated) steel to produce the cabs may be the only way to meet the 10-year corrosion protection requirement. They also believed that galvanization would likely provide more than 10 years of corrosion protection. Because the galvanized cab has the potential to protect against corrosion beyond the contract requirement, the Army agreed to share the cost of the cab. The contractor continues to be required to meet corrosion protection requirements. The FMTV project office first became aware that FMTV trucks had corrosion problems in late 1995. The Army later tested the corrosion repairs made on two cabs and found the repairs unacceptable. The contractor offered to provide a 10-year corrosion protection warranty on the cabs, cargo beds, frame rails, and crossmembers truck was corroded in 60 areas. Army officials said that since the Army had specified the material to be used in 20 of the areas, it agreed to pay for necessary changes in these areas. Army agreed to the warranty and again began accepting trucks with corrosion repairs. At the same time, the Army agreed to release to the contractor all funding previously withheld because of corrosion problems. The modifications set a ceiling of $7 million on the Army’s share of costs. The contractor produced 3,751 trucks with galvanized cabs under the first production contract. The Army is designing a new corrosion test to determine the number of years of protection the new design will provide. They also said that the corrosion protection enhancements and the corrosion test of these enhancements will be included as requirements in future FMTV truck production contracts. corrosion protection requirements, the contractor agreed to repair the corroded trucks. The contractor produced 2,491 trucks under these new procedures. The Army and the contractor ultimately concluded that galvanized steel cabs may be needed to fully meet the truck’s 10-year corrosion prevention requirement. The contract was subsequently modified to require the galvanizedsteel cabs. It did not test or require the contractor to provide a corrosion warranty on the 2,492 trucks produced prior to the switch. The Army surveyed all of the trucks in storage and discovered corrosion on other truck cabs. They determined that the main causes of the corrosion were inadequate cleaning and painting procedures by the cab subcontractor, McLaughlin Body Company. McLaughlin subsequently improved its procedures at no cost to the Army. These improvements would be reflected in trucks produced after February 28, 1997. The Army withheld $1,000 or $2,000 per truck, depending on type, pending the contractor’s corrective action plan. than 400 systems deployed in tactical units. We based our estimate of the potential cost of replacing all of the cabs on trucks covered by the corrosion warranty on an Army estimate. The Army used a replacement cost of $8,000 per air drop cab and $6,000per standard cab to develop its estimate. We were not able to determine the number of air drop and standard trucks in the 2,091 trucks not included in the Army’s estimate. To produce a conservative estimate, we multiplied the standard cab cost by 2,000 trucks.

ROUGE-1: 70.70, ROUGE-2: 66.71, ROUGE-L: 28.22
BERTScore: 65.93

==============================================
==================== [38/100] ====================
Summary:
the downsizing took place at DOD. As shown in table 2, DOD absorbed nearly three-quarters of the FTE reductions in fiscal year 1994. In fiscal year 1997, DOD is expected to absorb all of theFTE reductions made that year. Although federal employment levels have declined steadily in recent years, the workforce has been reduced with comparatively few RIFs, in part because of the buyouts. The non-DOD workforce is expected. to increase by a net total of 0.2 percent, according to the President’s fiscal year. year to year because of such factors as the state of the economy, the availability of separation incentives, and employees’ personal considerations, federal attrition has typically run considerably higher than 1.5 percent. In fiscal years 1982 through 1992 (the year before buyouts began at DOD), CPDF data shows that the average annual quit rate was about 8 percent. Experience has shown that some agencies may need to pare down their workforces more than others as budgets are reduced, programs are dropped. DOD, though subject to the act’s governmentwide FTE ceilings, has the authority, under earlier legislation, to offer buyouts through September 30, 1999. For both DOD and non-DOD agencies, the buyout payment was the lesser of $25,000. According to OPM data, more than 112,500 buyouts had been paid governmentwide. DOD was responsible for about 71 percent of these buyouts. The federal workforce is being reduced at a faster pace than was called for by the Workforce Restructuring Act. From September 30, 1994, through March 1995, the on-board executive branch civilian workforce dropped from 2,164,727 employees to 2,032,440 employees, a reduction of 6 percent. CPDF data show that of the 132,287 reductions in on- board personnel that took place during this time period, 48 percent involved buyouts and 6 percent came from RIFs. The remaining 46 percent involved separations without buyouts or the basis for separation was not identified in the CPDF. 2,043,300 FTE positions for fiscal year 1995. This would have resulted in a reduction of 4.5 percent from the actual fiscal year 1993 level. By the end of fiscal year 1997, the administration’s budget calls for the federal workforce to be nearly 53,000 positions below the ceiling called for by the act. At that rate of reduction, executive branch civilian agencies could meet the fiscal year 1999 FTE ceiling while still hiring nearly 28,000 new full-time employees. Act of 1994 (P.L. 103-226) placed annual ceilings on executive branch full-time equivalent (FTE) positions from fiscal years 1994 through 1999. If implemented as intended, these ceilings will result in downsizing the federal workforce from 2.08 million FTE positions during fiscal year 1994 to 1.88 million F TE positions in fiscal year 1999. To help accomplish this downsizing, the act allowed non-Department of Defense (DOD) executive branch agencies to pay buyouts to employees who agreed to resign or retire. on the assumption that positions vacated by separating employees would not be refilled by government or contractor personnel. Projected savings would be reduced if this occurred. These positions have not been reduced as a proportion of the workforce as called for by NPR. With regard to future workforce reductions, our analysis showed that in terms of absolute numbers—and given historical quit rates—the remaining annual FTE employment ceilings probably could be achieved governmentwide through attrition. Nevertheless, some agencies may be required to downsize more than others. employees who were paid buyouts from fiscal year 1993 through March 31, 1995, 52 percent were white males. The percentage of women in the workforce increased from 43.4 percent at the end of fiscal year 1992 to 44.6 percent by March 1, 1995. Total governmentwide FTE levels to date are well below the annual ceilings mandated by the Workforce Restructuring Act. Our estimates indicate that the act’s final fiscal year 1999 target for FTE ceilings could be exceeded. The percentage of supervisors at DOD agencies dipped from 12.7 percent of the workforce to 11.9 percent. All but one of the other designated management control positions increased somewhat. Non-DOD agencies came only slightly closer to meeting the NPR goals. Although it was not an explicit goal of the buyout legislation, the buyouts appeared to have helped agencies downsize without adversely affecting workforce diversity. Of the nearly 83,000 employees who delayed their separations so that they could receive a buyout. administration recommended that agencies direct their workforce reductions at specific “management control’ positions. Such positions included those held by managers and supervisors and employees in headquarters, personnel, budget, procurement, and accounting occupations. By fiscal year 1999, the administration called on agencies to increase managers’ and supervisors’ span of control over other employees from a ratio of 1:7 to 1:15, and to cut management control positions by half. In our draft report on agencies’ use of buyouts that we are preparing for this Subcommittee, we present preliminary data. reductions-in-force (RIF) We obtained information on the results of federal downsizing activities by analyzing workforce data contained in the Office of Personnel Management’s (OPM) Central Personnel Data File (CPDF) for fiscal year 1992 through November of fiscal year 1996. Our estimate of the extent to which mandated workforce reduction goals can be achieved by attrition was based on workforce trends data in the President's fiscal year 1997 federal budget. The costs and savings of buyouts and RIFs were analyzed using past studies by us, the Congressional Budget Office and other federal agencies. Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee: We are pleased to be here today to discuss the progress being made in downsizing the federal workforce and agencies’ use of buyouts. As agreed with your office, our statement includes information on the results to date of federal downsizing efforts. We estimate that the statutorily mandated workforce reduction goals could be met through attrition, and the cost and savings implications of buy outs versus attrition. We also discuss the demographic results of the buyouts and the extent to which we estimate that they could be achieved through attrition. and/or missions are changed. In such circumstances, some agencies may not be able to meet workforce reduction goals through attrition, and other downsizing strategies, such as buyouts or RIFs, may be necessary. If it were to reduce at this pace, NASA has said that it would anticipate that Rifs would be needed. Although this downsizing proposal may or may not. be implemented, it illustrates the potential magnitude of workforce reductions being considered at some individual agencies. do so 3 years earlier. Study: Over a 5-year period, buyouts would generally result in more savings to taxpayers than RIFs. This is because buyouts usually result in the separation of employees with higher salaries and benefits. Study: Buyouts could generate up to 50 percent more in net savings than Rifs over the 5- year period following separation. But results would change if bumping and retreating did not occur in a RIF and the separated employees were eligible for retirement, authors say. such situations, buyouts or RIFs may be necessary. In comparing the costs and savings of buyouts and Rifs, our analysis showed that buyouts offered greater savings than RIF's, except when RIFed employees do not bump and retreat and are eligible to retire. This concludes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to answer any questions you or Members of the Subcommittee may have. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006. from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army on 866-856-7273.

ROUGE-1: 78.43, ROUGE-2: 73.04, ROUGE-L: 39.92
BERTScore: 60.11

==============================================
==================== [39/100] ====================
Summary:
utilities officials, and others; congressional and other oversight of the hundreds of millions of dollars DOE is spending on these technologies; and policymakers’ ability to assess the maturity of CCS. The agency recently issued a improve coal plant efficiency and asked them a set of standard questions. During these interviews, we asked stakeholders to describe the mature of technologies in terms of a scale we developed, based on Technology Readiness Levels (TRL). TRLs are a tool developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Technology Readiness Assessment Guide lays out three key steps to conducting technology readiness assessments during the contracting process. Although use of the Guide is not mandatory, DOE’s Office of Environmental Management uses the Guide as part of managing its procurement activities. The Office of Nuclear Energy has begun using TRLs to measure and communicate risks associated with nuclear technology. The Guide is a result of a GAO recommendation and is available for download on the Department of Energy's website at: http://www.doe.gov/technologyreadinessassessment. Using TRLs we developed for these technologies, we found consensus among stakeholders that CCS is less mature than efficiency technologies. We found that DOE’s Office of Fossil Energy does not systematically assess the maturity of key coal technologies as they progress toward commercialization. The lack of such benchmarks or an assessment of the maturity and whether they are achieving planned or desired results limits the ability of DOE to provide a clear picture of these technologies to policymakers, the authors say. The authors say the lack of benchmarks limits DOE's ability to provide an accurate picture to policymakers. In the absence of an assessment from DOE, we asked stakeholders to gauge the maturity of coal technologies using a scale we developed based on TRLs. For example, ultrasupercritical plants ranging from 600 to more than 1,000 MW have been built or are under construction in and used by various federal agencies to rate the extent to which technologies have been demonstrated to work as intended. We applied these benchmarks to a coal power plant that has already been demonstrated commercially. However, this plant does not produce electricity. Assistant Secretary concurred with our recommendation, stating that DOE could improve its process for providing a clearer picture of technology maturity. EPA and NERC provided technical comments, which we have incorporated as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies of the report to the offices of the Assistant Secretary for Energy and the Secretary of the Department of Energy. Neither the proposed rule nor the final rule will address liability for unintended releases of stored CO emissions in lieu of more efficient coal plants. Some higher efficiency plant designs also face technical challenges in that they require more advanced materials than are currently available. For example, “advanced” ultrasupercritical plants require development of metal alloys to withstand steam temperatures that could be 300 to 500 degrees Fahrenheit higher than today’s ultrasu percritical plants. Most stakeholders reported that making efficiency upgrades to the existing fleet of coal power plants was limited by legal issues. commercial scale power plant, which we defined as 500 megawatts (MW) and emitting about 3 millions tons of carbon dioxide (CO) annually. We based this definition on some of the key reports we reviewed, which used 500 MW as a standard power plant. Such a plant would emit about 3 million tons of CO emissions from a power plant can vary based on a variety of factors. We also reviewed available data on the use of key coal technologies compiled by IEA and the Global CCS. Commercial deployment of CCS within 10 to 15 years is possible according to DOE and other stakeholders. Many technologies to improve plant efficiency have been used and are available for commercial use now, but still face challenges. There are five IGCC plants in operation around the world, including two in the U.S.Europe and Asia, and there are four IGCCs in operation in North America and two in South America. Injections of hazardous wastes, industrial nonhazardous wastes, municipal wastewater can be permitted as Class I or Class V wells. Most stakeholders told us that CCS would increase electricity prices, and key reports raise similar concerns. MIT estimated that plants with post-combustion capture have 61 percent higher cost of electricity. DOE has also raised concerns about CCS and water consumption. Some utility officials also said CCS could lead to a decline in the ability of individual plants to operate reliably because a power plant might need to shut down if any of the three components (capture, transport, and storage) of CCS became unavailable. IEA estimated that CCS technologies could meet 20 percent of reductions needed to reduce global CO. Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) researchers called CCS the “critical enabling technology” to reduce CO emissions while allowing continued use of coal in the future. In 2009, NAS reported that if C CS technologies are not demonstrated commercially in the next decade, the electricity sector could move more.in greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, CCS could allow coal to remain part of the nation’s diverse fuel mix. projects involving advanced coal technologies. To identify stakeholders’ views on these technologies, we conducted initial scoping interviews with power plant operators, technology vendors, and federal officials. We selected a group of 19 stakeholders with expertise in carbon capture and storage (CCS) or technologies to participate in the project. We reviewed key reports including those from the Department of Energy’s (DOE) national laboratories, the National Academy of Sciences, International Energy Agency (IEA), Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Global CCS Institute. electricity sources would need to make up for the higher parasitic load associated with CCS. The National Coal Council has also reported temporary declines in reliability during past deployments of new coal technologies. We provided a draft of our report to the Secretary of Energy and the Administrator of EPA for review and comment. We received written comments from DOE’s Assistant Secretary of the Office of Fossil Energy, which are reproduced in appendix III. We also provided selected slides on reliability of electricity supply to NERC for comment. the prospect of triggering the Clean Air Act’s New Source Review (NSR) requirements. Technologies to improve plant efficiency offer potential near-term reductions, but also raise some concerns. According to key reports and stakeholders, the successful deployment of CCS technologies is critical to helping the United States meet potential Limits to Emissions. The U.S. is the largest producer of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the world, followed by Germany, France, Italy, Spain and the Netherlands. this report to the appropriate congressional committees, Secretary of Energy, Administrator of EPA, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. all U.S. emissions of COCO2 is the most prevalent greenhouse gas (GHG) program. If you or your staffs have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. GAO responds to Department of Energy's letter dated June 4, 2010. GAO's comments are based on the department's letter to the U.S. Energy Department. The report was written by Jon Ludwigson, Chloe Brown, Scott Heacock, Alison O’Neill, Kiki Theodoropoulos, and Jarrod West. It was also edited by Chuck Bausell, Nirmal Chaudhary, Cindy Gilbert, Madhav Panwar, and Jeanette Soares. and interviewed senior DOE staff on these Visited coal power plants and research facilities in three selected states—AL, MD, and WV4 We conducted this performance audit from July 2009 through May 2010, in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We selected this nonprobability sample of states because they contained a large number of coal-fired power plants, research facilities and other facilities. Well operators will only be liable under the SDWA if they violate or fail to comply with EPA orders in situations where an imminent and substantial endangerment to health is posed by a contaminant that is in or likely to enter an underground source of drinking water. EPA plans to finalize the geologic sequestration rule in fall. The rule will apply to well operators who meet all the closure and post-closure requirements and EPA approves site closure of the well. In the U.S., the rule applies to wells that have been in operation for at least five years.

ROUGE-1: 77.77, ROUGE-2: 69.74, ROUGE-L: 35.58
BERTScore: 73.31

==============================================
==================== [40/100] ====================
Summary:
loan subsidy known as a special allowance payment(SAP) The SAP amount is determined on a quarterly basis by a statutory formula which is tied to a financial index. The SAP is designed to compensate lenders for the difference between the below-market,statutorily set interest rate charged to borrowers and a market set interest rates that is intended as fairmarket compensation on the loan asset. In some instances lenders receive interest income from borrowers exceeding the amountcalled for by the SAP calculation. The amount of income lenders receive above the government SAPrate is often called "floor income" The SAP affords lenders necessary protection in high interest environments during which thestatutorily established borrower rate may provide lenders insufficient below-market rate returns. Some argue that since the SAP is designed to approximate fair market compensation it isunnecessary to compensate lenders at levels that exceed the SAP rate. It is often noted that in anearlier period, "excess interest provisions" were adopted that essentially installed the SAP in the system. SAP rate as thesole lender reimbursement rate for loans. Some FFEL program loans provide lenders a guaranteed interest rate of atleast 9.5% (hereafter, these loans are referred to as 9. 5% floor loans). This guarantee is provided inthe SAP formula applied to these loans, which requires the federal government to supplementborrower interest payments. Several recent proposals have called for reducing federalsubsidy costs by establishing the SAP rate asThe SAP rate is the sole lender reimbursed rate. 9.5% floor loans comprise a relatively small percentage of all outstanding loans. They have accounted for a very large proportion of federal SAP subsidies. In recent years lenders havebeen using a variety of refinancing techniques, and also invested earnings from existing 9. 5% floorloans to make or purchase new ones. There appear to be a number of ways for banks to finance 9.5%, including by using the proceeds from the sale of existing loans and by using earnings from new loans. A consolidation loan may be comprised of one underlying loan or multipleunderlying loans. A borrower who consolidateswhile in the grace period can secure a 2.88% interest rate. Over the last two years, in which very lowrates have been available, an estimated $63 billion in loan volume has been consolidated. This has enabled a largenumber of borrowers to secure a valuable refinance benefit.not exceed 9%. The average interest rate on a consolidation loan is 1.9%. periods for extended and graduated repayment plans vary with the size of the loan. It is likely that some attention may be devoted to adopting more comparable repaymentoptions across the two programs. Some interest exists in adding a new "interest only"repayment option. Under such an option, a borrower would have low "interest-only" payments intheir initial years after graduation, but would also delay the point at which they begin paying downloan principal. In general, the debate pertaining to the fixed rate an extension of the debate on thefixed rate benefit. Proponents of the existing rate setting formulas say it provides important repayment relief and sends a signal to students and potentialstudents that repayment will be manageable. Opponents say eliminating the opportunity to lock in a fixed rate would be tantamount to taking away a benefit that was available when borrowers received their Stafford loans. The removal of this benefit in a low interest environment would amount to dropping a large share of the interest subsidy currently available to borrowers. Those opposed to sustaining theexisting rate setting formula suggest it would be detrimental to the economy. to undergraduate and graduate students. The interest rates onsubsidized and unsubsidized Stafford loans adjust annually, based on a statutorily established,market-indexed, rate setting formula, and may not exceed 8.25%. To qualify for a subsidized Stafford loan, astudent must establish financial need. The federal government pays the interest on the borrower'sbehalf on the subsidized Stafford loans while the borrower is in school (on at least a half-time basis)and during grace periods and deferment periods. As of July 2006, new Stafford and PLUS loans will carry fixed interest rates. The desirability of thisplanned switch has been the subject of considerable debate. Student loan interest rates were a focal issue in the 1998 reauthorization. The statutory ratesetting formulas were used to establish rates for loans disbursed from July 1, 1998 through June 30, 2006. They were initially enacted in June 1998 and extended in the HEA amendments of June 2000. They are used to set rates for Stafford and Plus loans. The current rate setting formulas were adopted as a result of deliberations that centered on replacing so called "comparable maturity rates" that were set to take effect July 1, 1998. The formula for calculating interest rates on Stafford loans is based on the 91-day Treasury bill rate plus 1.7% while the borrower is in school. Stafford rates are capped at 8.25%. The formula in effect for calculatingInterest rates on PLUS loans isbased on the 90-day treasury bill rate and 3.1% PLUS rates are caps at 9%. rate structure before it tookeffect. This led to the adoption of the rate setting formulas currently in effect. However, due to costconsiderations under prevailing budget scoring rules, the HEA amendments of 1998 were only able to install the current formula until June 30, 2003. The interest rate issue was revisited in 2002 with the passage of P.L. 107-139. This measureextended the existing variable rate setting formula through June 30,. 2006. Additionally, it installedfixed interest rates of 6.8% for Stafford loans and 7.9% for PLUS loans disbursed thereafter. the upcoming reauthorization of the HEA it is likely that borrower interest rates will onceagain receive consideration. Some feel that the 6.8% fixed rate set to take effect for new loans made on or after July 1, 2006 is a good rate in comparison to historical borrower rates. Others feel that a borrower is better served under a variable rate formula where the borrower is able to take advantage of low market rates when available (such as the 3.37%repayment rate being charged) benefit centers on its cost. As the consolidation loan interest rate formula has been modified byCongress, consolidation loans have evolved into a refinance benefit as well. The current consolidation loaninterest rate formula affords borrowers the opportunity tosecure a fixed rate equal to the weighted average interest rate on the loans at the time of origination. It also enables a borrower to pursue a better interest rate than the current weighted averageinterest rate on loans at origination of $1.5 million. It was originally intended to simplify repayment for borrowers and simplify loan repayments.  FFEL borrowers are allowed to choose among standard, graduated, and income sensitive repayment plans. In DL, standard repayment offers a 10-year term. Under the income contingent repayment plan, repayment must occur over a period not to exceed 25 years. Income contingent repayment is available to all DL unsubsidized and subsidized Stafford borrowers. In FFEL, all repayment plans offer a10-year repayment term with the exception of extended repayment under which repayments must occur within a time period not-to-exceed 25 years, for example. this year) but still receive protection against high rates thanks to the8.25% interest cap. Part of the debate is likelyto focus on enhancing or preserving borrower benefits. There will also likely be concerns about thefederal subsidy cost. This is because, in the FFEL program, lenders are provided a federal interestsubsidy payment (discussed later) In the DL program, where the federal government acts as lender, federalsubsidy costs increase when repayment revenues are reduced. Across both consolidated. The FFEL and DL programs disburse the same set of loans, but loan terms and conditions are notperfectly parallel across the two programs. In the DL program,where the government acts as lender, federal subsidy costs are increased when borrower fees orrepayment revenues paid to the government are reduced. Several proposals have beenforwarded recently that call for reductions in borrower fees. More generousborrower benefits generally increase federal costs. Lenders may opt to pay a 3% origination fee. of1%, capped at 8.25%. (4) It is generally thecase that enhancements to borrower benefits increase federal subsidy costs. For instance, in theFFEL program, where the government insures and subsidizes loans made by private lenders, federalsubsidy costs increase when less revenue is derived from borrower fees and when interest subsidypayments to lenders are increased. (5) There are underlying tensions inherent in the current design of the loan programs that affect many of the reauthorization issues considered in this report. FFEL borrowers may be required to pay a 1%insurance premium. This fee goes to guaranty agencies to help offset loan insurance costs. Guarantors may wave the fee, and if the fee is assessed lenders may opt to pay the fee or a portion of the fee on the borrower's behalf. It is likely that a reduction in borrower origination fees (particularly for student borrowers)will be considered in reauthorization. Helping students by reducing charges is a goal upon whichmany can agree, but finding offsetting costs can be difficult. revenues from other sources is often a challenge. In FY2003,borrower origination fees generated approximately $1.3 billion in revenue across the two programs. attention may be devoted to examining the comparability of borrower fees chargedacross and within the two loan programs. Loan Limits. To limit the federal government'ssubsidy costs, and to limit the amount of debt incurred by borrowers, annual and aggregate Staffordborrowing caps have been established. Considerable interest has surfaced in the adequacy of theexisting loan limits. Dependency status is a key determinant of a student's personal borrowinglimits. Dependent students are therefore afforded lower personalborrowing limits than independent students. Parents of dependent students areafforded the opportunity to take out federal PLUS loans to support dependent students. Some have questioned,however, whether dependent students in particular are being provided adequate borrowingopportunities if they have to self-fund their education. The HEA, Section 428 (20 U.S.C. Â§ 1078) provides the funding for the Stafford loan program. finance their studies. In general, those in favor of expanding loan limits suggest loan limits have not kept pace withtuition increases and thus constrain students' ability to finance their education. Those opposed suggest it is undesirable for students to incurmore debt, and question whether the expansion of borrowing opportunities will have any positiveeffect on access, choice or persistence. Also at issue arefederal subsidy costs, because as borrowing opportunities are expanded so are federal subsidy costs. Repayment Plans. Issues concerning repaymentplans that surface with some regularity relate to differences offers an overlygenerous borrower benefit that is costly to the point of placing future aid in jeopardy. They alsoquestion whether it is necessary to offer a refinance benefit when the rate is already subsidized onStafford loans. Further they question whether a benefit received in the years after postsecondaryschooling contributes in any way to students' postsecondary access, persistence, or choice. They notethe repayment period subsidy is provided without regard to need, over a lengthy period potentiallyextending up to 30 years beyond schooling, and disproportionately benefits students who attendedfour-year private institutions and/or graduate programs. state authorities are able to raise "low cost"funds, and then re-lend the funds at higher rates. The 1980 HEA amendmentstook steps to curb the profitability of tax-exempt loans by reducing by half the SAP rate on loans. The amendments also established minimum SAPs,for loans disbursed on or after October 1, 1980, which ensure a minimum return of $1,000,000. The student bond volume began to grow rapidly, andconcerns about the profits of tax exempt student loans surfaced. 9.5% on theseloans. (16) The discourse on the profitability of tax-exempt student loans continued through the 1980son into the early 1990s. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 ( P.L. 103-66 ) contained a provision eliminating the floor on tax- exempt loans supported through tax- exempted financing forissuances on or after October 1, 1993. These loans were afforded the same SAP rates as wereavailable for taxable loans. for lenders. There seems to bebroad Congressional support for curbing this rate guarantee for future loans. The legislativedevelopments that led to the enactment of the guarantee are briefly described below. As part of an effort to ensure the FFEL program would be fully capitalized in the program'searly years, provisions that served to encourage the issuance of tax-exempt student loan bonds were included in the Tax Reform Act of 1976. Such bonds are exempt from federal taxation, and are usedby states to finance below market interest rate loans for students. The federal government operates two major student loan programs: the Federal FamilyEducation Loan (FFEL) program and the WilliamD. Ford Direct Loan (DL) program. In FY2003, these programsprovided $45.8 billion in new loans to students and their parents. The FFEL and DL programs provide the following types of loans: Stafford loans (subsidized and unsubsidized): Lowinterest, variable rate loans available. Low-cost, high-interest, fixed-rate loans are also available. The Higher Education Act of 1965 (HEA) is being considered for reauthorization. Title IV of the act authorizes the major federal student aid programs. In FY2003, the federal student loan programs provided $45.8 billion in new loans tostudents and their parents. This report discusses issues concerning theStudent loan programs that are likely to be considered during reauthorisation. The report is organized in the following manner. First it discusses the issues that may be considered when the HEA is reauthorized. provided by private lenders, and the federalgovernment guarantees lenders against loss through borrower default, death, permanent disability,or, in limited instances, bankruptcy. Under the DL program, operated through the U.S. Departmentof Education, the federal government provides the loans to students and their families. The two programs rely on different sources ofcapital and different administrative structures, but essentially disburse the same set of loans. The DL program was intended to streamline the student loan deliverysystem and achieve cost savings. rate-setting formula was initially enacted in the Student Loan Reform Act of 1993. The formula afforded the Secretary of Education a great deal of latitude in establishing borrower rates. The decision to move toward a comparable maturity rate was made in 1993 within thecontext of the assumption that the DL program would be phased in over a series of years and eventually replace the guaranteed loan system. (7) In years following the enactment of the SLRA,Congressional support emerged for sustaining both loan programs and, within this context,considerable attention was devoted to replacing the comparable maturity. Multiple refinanceopportunities (i.e., offering borrowers with relatively high fixed rates the prospect of securing abetter rate) Any added interest benefit for a borrower would likely expand federal subsidycosts. Another way to address this is to eliminate consolidation loans' fixed rate benefit. It is likely that proposals calling for the elimination of provisions that constrain borrowers'choice among consolidators will receive consideration during reauthorization. Some FFEL lenders object to making a change in this area, asserting they offersome up front discounts on Stafford and PLUS loans. Borrowers seeking a FFEL consolidation loan are eligible to pursueconsolidation when the borrowers have entered the repayment or grace period on each loan they areseeking to consolidate. In contrast, borrowers seeking a DL consolidation loan may consolidate anyeligible loans that have been fully disbursed. Married persons, each of whom has eligible loans, are eligible for a joint consolidation loan. Borrowers with less than $7,500 in outstanding loans seeking to consolidate in FFEL may receive a maximum repayment term of 10 years. A 12-year repaymentterm is available to borrowers with that level of debt in DL. one of the borrowers mustmeet the full set of individual eligibility requirements for a new consolidation loan. However, eachagrees to become jointly and severally liable for repayment of the note regardless of any changes inmarital status. It is likely that proposals to eliminate joint consolidations will receive consideration in the reauthorization. While joint consolidation can simplify repayment for a married couple, concerns have beenraised in recent years about disadvantages that may be associated with joint consolidation for someborrowers. For instance, borrowers with a joint consolidation loan must both meet the requirementsfor a deferment or forbearance in order to receive those benefits. There is some debate about how best to phase out theguarantee for nonprofit lenders. The Taxpayer-Teacher Protection Act of 2004 ( P.L. 108-409 );signed October 30, 2004, curbs growth in 9.5% loans, for one year. It does not curtail the guaranteeon new loans stemming from "recycling"of proceeds from outstanding 9. 5% loans. These loans were issued on orafter October 1, 1980 and prior toOctober 1, 1993. A phase out of the 9.5% guarantee would produce savings in mandatory spending. Thesesavings could be used to offset new expenditures. Proceeds from the sale of the bank would be used for new 9.4% loans. The proceeds from the sales of the Bank of Canada’s stake in the Bank for International Settlements (BOCS) would also be used as a source of funding for the Bank. The BOCS is a joint venture between the BSC and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (BRC). sharing" approach. Under this approach, uses ofreserves are restricted, and guarantors are afforded flexibility in the use of their operating funds. There is a clearer distinction between reserves and operating funds, and clearer direction about wherevarious revenue streams are to be deposited -- and ultimately about how these sources of revenueare to be used. It is likely that some attention will be devoted to the issue of how the federal government will manage its reserves in the event of an economic downturn in the U.S. solvency of Federal Funds (i.e., locallyheld federal reserve funds) and the size of Operating Funds -- which can be used to support agencyoperations and also for discretionary student financial aid expenditures. Some concerns have been raised aboutshrinking reserves and robust Operating Funds. Some proposals have already called for mandatinginsurance premiums to strengthen reserves. Some observers have suggested guarantor fees for loancollections and defaulted loan rehabilitation work may be too high thus inflating operating funds. Had the loans not been joined, eachborrower could qualify for these benefits based upon their own status. Concerns have been raised about complications that may ensue for unsuccessful marriages given that both partiesagree to be liable for the total repayment of the joint consolidation loan. Also, in instances involving a spouse who becomes permanently disabled, a disability discharge is provided for that spouse but each spouse remains liable for repayment of remaining loan amount. Guaranty agenciesadminister the federal government's loan guarantee. The role guarantors play within the FFELprogram has evolved a good deal since the program's inception. Initially, the federal governmentintended to encourage the growth of state loan insurance programs. Over time the federalgovernment assumed the role of providing the insurance and now guaranty agencies service the federal guarantee and perform various program administrative tasks. Changes adopted during the 1998 reauthorization focused on strengthening therelationship between revenues and activities, and improving efficiency. The 1998 amendments adopted a "risk-based" approach to the FFEL program, with the aim of making it more efficient.

ROUGE-1: 77.49, ROUGE-2: 70.16, ROUGE-L: 36.62
BERTScore: 55.54

==============================================
==================== [41/100] ====================
Summary:
The amount of federal funds authorized for demonstration projects has grown since 1982. In 1991, we found that for 66 projects reviewed, the federal funding and state matching funds together accounted for only 37 percent of the projects’ total anticipated costs. Future finances could be drained if extra federal funds are needed to cover the cost of completing the projects. Demonstration projects can yield a low payoff for a variety of reasons, including that they frequently are not aligned with the states’ transportation priorities, can languish in the early stages of project development. Under the first alternative, 33 states would receive an average of $64 million more than they were apportioned in fiscal year 1995. 17 states, along with the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, would lose $111 million on average. Under the second alternative, a slightly different redistribution pattern would emerge. One indicator of need that we intentionally omitted from the above discussion is that of the states’ contributions to the federal Highway Trust Fund. These contributions have a special status because they align with two key objectives of the highway. would receive less funding than they did in fiscal year 1995. For these recipients, the average loss would be $82 million. In total, about 9 percent of the highway funds would be redistributed. While many social objectives are probably best addressed through means other than the highway apportionment formula. A portion of highway funds might nonetheless be retained to advance specific objectives and/or to counterbalance some of the potential disadvantages of the principal formula factors. For instance, a certain percentage of funds—10 percent, for example—could be set aside before the remaining funds were. 27 states would receive more funds than they were apportioned in fiscal year 1995. The average dollar gain would be about $68 million. 23 states, along with the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, would receive less funding. For these recipients, the average loss would be $73 million. Under the third alternative, all funds would be returned to the states, including funds for Interstate Construction and demonstration projects along with other program funding. (State-by-state details are provided in app. VII.) considered three different alternatives, which are summarized in table 3.2. Under the first alternative, $17.8 billion of the total $19.1 billion would be returned to the source. This amount would represent all the funds distributed to the states in fiscal year 1995, except funds for Interstate Construction. These funds were excluded since the Interstate Construction program’s final apportionment was made at the beginning of fiscal year1995. Under this alternative, 24 states would receive more funds than they would have received otherwise. This alternative recognizes the full $19.1 billion distributed to the states in fiscal year 1995. Under this alternative, 24 states would gain an average of $86 million, while 26 states along with the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico would lose anAverage of $74 million. (State-by-state details are provided in app. VIII.) As mentioned previously, the first two formula components discussed above can be combined. A significant advantage of blending these components is that programs of particular concern (notably, the NHS) could receive special attention through the use of this formula. and preserving the Interstate Highway system and on maintaining other federal-aid highways as well as bridges eligible for federal funds. While these goals remain a part of the overall surface transportation program, ISTEA broadened the goals and included new programs, planning processes, and management systems. For example, the Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement Program (CMAQ) directs funds to transportation projects in clean air nonattainment areas. The goal is to ensure that the states’ transportation plans are intermodal (that is, coordinate various modes of transportation) and environmentally sound. is the existing Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement (CMAQ) program, which directs funds to states with particularly severe problems in air quality. CMAQ is focused on investment in airquality improvements and provides funds for projects that expand or initiate transportation services. It is directed to those states that are classified as nonattainment areas for ozone and carbon monoxide. Every state, regardless of its air quality status, is guaranteed an annual minimum apportionment of 0.5 percent of the program’s program. construction, to the possible detriment of adequately preserving the existing network and of considering air quality. Several actions could be taken to counterbalance such tendencies. First, as part of the third component of the formula framework, set-asides could be established to reward those states that meet certain preservation or maintenance goals. Second, greater use of performance measures geared to preserving theexisting infrastructure would help FHWA ensure that the states do not neglect needed preservation and maintenance. As we noted in our July 1994 testimony before the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works, performance measures are important. total funding.) The advantage of such a program is that it focuses funding on precisely those areas with the greatest needs. The disadvantage is that, as occurs with the needs-based formula factors discussed earlier in this chapter, directing funding to states with specific needs can foster a perverse incentive. Questions have been raised about the wisdom of essentially rewarding states for their nonattainment status, particularly given that a state loses CMAQ funding if it makes “too much progress” in improving air quality. A second approach to directing set-aside funding towards specific goals is The funding for four programs is interdependent since a state’s total share of funding is fixed. Later steps provide additional funding to certain states; these funding categories are legislatively designated as equity adjustments. Equity adjustments generally address the concerns of states that contribute a greater share of highway user taxes than they receive in federal-aid highway funds. The Minimum Allocation guarantees a state an amount such that its percentage of the total apportionments and prior-year allocations is not less than 90 percent of certain highway funding categories. The Congress has used funding adjustments to improve equity among the states. Alternative factors, such as lane miles, are more closely aligned with highway needs. In fiscal year 1995, the equity funding categories increased the amount of federal highway funds apportioned to 41 states and the District of Columbia. The amount of funding that the majority of states received through the the basis of the funding for the programs alone was ultimately increased by equity adjustments. The total amount ofFederal highway funding apportioning in fiscal year1995 was ultimatelyincreased by equityadjustments. DOT has proposed changes to the existing equity adjustments and program categories. In fiscal year 1995, these equity adjustments represented 16 percent of the total funds apportioned. The changes, proposed in DOT’s fiscal year 1996 budget justification, were preceded by the statement that if less federal money will be invested in transportation, state and local governments need to have greater authority and flexibility to decide which projects are most important. DOT has stated that it will not change the funding it has received in the past. The calculations that determine the level of funding that each state receives for the various funding categories occur in a strict sequence. All of the equity adjustments come into play late in the sequential calculation. These adjustments essentially increase the funding calculated for a state up to that point. For example, if a state is hypothetically entitled to a total apportionment of of Illinois, and 4.36 for Massachusetts, these adjustments increase the state’s total funding to that amount by 1.5%. This is the case for Illinois. $500 million on the basis of the Hold Harmless provision, it will receive that amount regardless of whether all the calculations up to that point yielded a total of $200 million, $300 million, or $400 million. In fiscal year 1995, equity adjustments accounted for $2.8 billion (16 percent) of the approximately $18 billion distributed to the states. Only nine states—Colorado, Connecticut, Hawaii, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Virginia, and Washington—and Puerto Rico did not receive funding through equity adjustments. period of time during the transition to a new funding amount. If the existing, intricate equity adjustments were replaced with a single, simple cap, the funds devoted to these equity adjustments in fiscal year 1995 would more than offset the states’ combined losses in that year. The scenario resulting in the greatest adverse impact on the states—alternative 1 of the needs proxy approach—produced a combined loss of $2.4 billion. Alternatively, other scenarios could be used to shield the states from severe losses. Each state’s ultimate share of funding for all four programs is fixed. With a few minor adjustments, these fixed shares derive from the shares of funds that the states received, on average, during fiscal years 1987-91 for the predecessor programs. The states’ funding levels for the other three programs are independently calculated on the basis of factors specific to each program. The final program included in the four-part calculation, the STP,behaves as an adjuster for the states. This means that any annual increase or decrease in a state’s funding for the Interstate Maintenance Program, Bridge Program, or NHS must be offset by a corresponding, reciprocal change in the STP funds the state receives for that same year. Figure 2.2 illustrates this zero-sum game through a hypothetical example involving 2 years and two states. In the example, both State A and State B experience shifts in their apportioned funding between fiscal years 1993 and 1994. However, for both states these shifts are rendered irrelevant because they are offset. of the funds. Funding is provided for eight programs, including the NHS and STP, and for five separate mechanisms to raise individual states’ funding levels to achieve certain goals for equity among the states. The calculations that determine the level of funding that each state receives for these various categories occur in a strict sequence, as illustrated in figure 2.1. During the first step of the calculation, for example, funding is provided to complete the construction of the Interstate Highway System. Funding for the other program categories is also based on separate calculations. The current funding level for the STP represents about 40 percent of the total funds authorized for these programs. The two alternatives outlined blend needs-based and return-to-origin approaches. For purposes of illustration, the following two hypothetical distributions blend the two approaches along the existing split between STP and two other primary highway programs—Interstate Maintenance and the NHS. In contrast, a return- to-origin approach might be more appropriate for theSTP, which already has characteristics that resemble those of a block grant program. distributed to the states. Payments drawn from this set-aside could be used to provide bonuses to advance quality-of-life objectives, to reward improvements in the condition of highway infrastructure above a certain defined floor, and to advance highway safety. These and similar objectives are all laudable; however, constraint in selecting the objectives may be warranted to prevent the dilution of funds that could result from attempting to meet numerous objectives. A prime example of this approach would be to direct set- aside funds to those states suffering from unique or concentrated needs in certain areas. to treat the funds as incentive payments. Incentive payments, as the name implies, do not redress shortcomings, but instead reward desired behaviors or accomplishments. For example, shared set-aside funding could be used to reward states that make notable and measurable improvements in the percentage of the state’s pavement condition rated as “good” under FHWA’S classification system. To emphasize the condition of the nation's most heavily traveled highways, such rewards could be further refined. a component designed to place a cap on the maximum percentage of loss that any individual state would be expected to bear as a result of the changes. For example, a maximum-loss cap of 20 percent might be established. If a new formula calculation caused a given state’s funding to fall by 50 percent from the level it would otherwise be, the cap would come into effect and funding for the state in question would be reinstated to 80 percent of what the state would otherwise have received. aid was apportioned to Interstate, primary, secondary, and urban highways. The NHS is the centerpiece of ISTEA, and the system is expected to be the major focus for the federal-aid highway program into the 21st century. In a speech on December 9, 1993, the Administrator of FHWA noted that since the Interstate was begun in 1956, the nation’s population has grown and shifted, the economy has changed, and needs are different. To serve these needs, the NHS must be expanded. foundation for the nation to compete in the global economy, and move people and goods in an energy-efficient manner. Section 1098 of ISTEA tasked us with reviewing the process for distributing highway funds to the states. In discussion with the congressional committees identified in section 1098, we agreed to address (1) the way the formula works and the relevancy of the data used for the formula. The NHS is expected to reflect this emphasis and will provide links in a seamless intermodal network that will enhance economic growth and national security. needs—to extend the benefits of the Interstate system to areas not served directly by it. The NHS was conceived as a way of focusing federal resources on the nation’s most important highways. DOT, working cooperatively with state and local officials as well as the private sector, proposed to the Congress in December 1993 an NHS network of about 159,000 miles. This network is about 17 percent of the approximately 950,000-mile federal-aid network and includes only 4 percent of about 4 million miles of public roads. A well-maintained system is the necessary foundation for pursuing the myriad goals for the system. Without such a foundation, system enhancements such as alleviating congestion and improving the efficient movement of goods may not be fully realized. While measures of a system’s extent provide part of the story on highway needs, the condition of the road is also an important element. Condition can be captured by measures of the use of the system, as well as by the state of the highway itself. Federal highway funds are provided to the states through the Federal Highway Administration. The money is distributed to states through various formula calculations and, to a lesser extent, through congressionally designated projects. The fund is divided into a highway account and a mass transit account. DOT forecasts that the income to the highway account will total $20.5 billion in fiscal year 1996. For more information on the Highway Trust Fund, go to: http://www. highwaytrustfund.org/ or call 1-800-273-8255. In fiscal year 1995, 70 percent of the funding under the formula went to the four largest programs. Separate calculations determine each state’s share of funds for the Interstate projects had been authorized 4 years earlier. Figure 2.3 depicts the funding to each state for highway programs, and, if applicable, any modifications to that funding realized through either equity adjustments or funding for demonstration projects provided under ISTEA in fiscal year1995. The formula authorized approximately $120 billion for highway construction and repair over 6 years. state transportation officials, ISTEA’s myriad objectives for highways can be placed into four overarching categories. The first two objectives translate into formula components that are at the core of the distribution process. Addressing the states’ highway needs, such as the miles of highway in need of repair and the deterioration of the highway associated with traffic loads, is a primary objective in the distribution of highway funds. The second objective is returning the majority of funds to the state where the revenue was generated, and the third is fostering social benefits. SISTEA authorized funding to sustain and enhance the nation’s surface transportation infrastructure. The act provided an unprecedented authorization of $122 billion for highways, bridges, and related activities for fiscal years 1992-97. The Congress can further adjust the federal highway funds a state receives by authorizing specific projects, commonly referred to as demonstration projects. Funding for these demonstration projects is not distributed by formula. Rather, the Congress requires that particular projects receive a specified amount of funding. The formula for apportioning federal-aid highway funds established in ISTEA is a complex arithmetic tool used by FHWA. Reauthorization of the federal-aid highway program presents Congress with the opportunity to review the objectives associated with providing federal highway funds. A review of the program’s objectives could be structured to recognize differences among highways and the federal role associated with important highways, such as those included in the NHS. There are no perfect factors that embrace the breadth of ISTEA”s diverse objectives as well as its role in the health care system, says Tom Zoellner, president of the Center for American Progress. The existing federal-aid highway formula is the vehicle for distributing billions of dollars annually for highway construction and repair. Since the mid-1980s, a number of organizations (including GAO) have suggested fundamental changes in the formula. Section 1098 of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 (ISTEA) tasked GAO with reviewing the process for distributing highway funds. The formula is based on outdated data, according to GAO's review of the highway funding formula. The states are the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. over 70 percent of all commercial truck traffic. For other roads eligible for federal assistance, a program with the characteristics of a block grant, the Surface Transportation Program (STP), provides financial assistance. ISTEA continued authorizations for a separate Bridge Replacement and Rehabilitation Program and Interstate Maintenance Program and an array of other separate highway program initiatives as well as funding categories addressing various equity issues, such as each state’s share of funding as compared with what it received in past years. Previously, the federal-aid highway program had focused on completing projects. ISTEA expanded the use of equity adjustments for the apportionment of federal-aid funds among the states. It also created “hold harmless’ funding, which establishes the state’s share of overall federal highway apportionments. ISTEA also embodied quality-of-life objectives, stating that the nation”s transportation system should be economically efficient and environmentally sound, provide the elderly, disabled, and economically disadvantaged with access to transportation. The bill was signed into law on July 1, 2013. is brought up to the level of return for those states with the next highest level of returns. This process is repeated successively for each state until the funds authorized for this funding category in that fiscal year are exhausted. Finally, a fourth adjustment category, referred to as Hold Harmless, addresses a different objective—preserving the states’ historical funding share. For example, this legislatively prescribed funding percentage is 1.74 for Alabama, 0.41 for Delaware and 0.69 for Idaho. highway programs—the NHS and STP—essentially remained the same. Each state’s funding was to be based on the historical share of funds the state received from major programs before ISTEA was enacted. Locking in the status quo on the basis of historical funding averages has also been supported through two other funding avenues. The Hold Harmless equity adjustment category serves to raise the states’ ultimate level of annual funding to a predetermined percentage share of the total funding available. These percentage shares are fixed over the life of ISTEA. Each state’s share of funds is calculated annually for each of these separate programs. These separate calculations are essentially meaningless since the total funding for the four programs is fixed over the 6-year authorization period for ISTEA. The data underlying the distribution of highway funds to the states are generally outdated, unresponsive to changing conditions, and often not reflective of the nation's highway system or its usage. On the basis of our analysis and discussions with federal and federal and state officials, we believe that the current system is not working as intended. Population figures for formula use were derived every 10 years from the census. As a result, changes in the states’ populations were accounted for only at 10-year intervals. This problem has been exacerbated under ISTEA, since the population data underlying the states' historical shares for ISTEA’s major funding calculations are, in part, based on 1980 population data, not the more current 1990 data. In our March 1986 report, we also identified those factors previously and identified those that are still relevant today. Until the reliability of these data is improved, their use as an indicator for distributing federal highway funds would be suspect and arbitrary. An alternative measure, the International Roughness Index, is a more objective measure of pavement condition (roughness) FHWA expects this data source to play a more prominent role in the future. In 1993, the most recent year for which data are available on pavement condition, 37 states used the Internationalroughness Index to measure pavement condition on Interstate highways. The remaining 13 states continued to rely on the Present Serviceability Index. states on the condition and performance of their roadways are not always reliable, making it more difficult to equitably distribute such incentive payments. In subcommittee hearings for the House Committee on Appropriations in fiscal year 1994, FHWA was questioned on significant swings in the percentage of Interstate pavement rated in poor condition, as illustrated by table 3.4. FH WA explained that the data were based on the use of an index, referred to as the Present Serviceability Index. This index, however, represents a subjective measure of the pavement’s ride quality and can be arrived at differently. Fuel consumption patterns may differ across states because of the urban-rural population mix, the amount of travel done under congested conditions, and fuel purchases by transients in those states with lower fuel taxes. While vehicle miles traveled and motor fuel consumption correlate well with system usage, they do have some drawbacks. Vehicle miles traveled measure the vehicles moved rather than the people and do not account for different vehicle classifications. Both factors are largely at odds with air quality objectives, and the principle of air quality. rewarding motor fuel consumption with more highway funding also conflicts with the goal of encouraging energy conservation. New Jersey transportation officials, for instance, noted that such factors reward energy consumption and air pollution and penalize those who successfully enact measures to reduce the use of single-occupant vehicles. Congress has previously rejected the notion of giving vehicle miles traveled greater weight in apportioning funds, in part because of the strong environmental objections raised. As in the case of the factors related to the system’s extent, the disadvantages associated with measures of are similar. distinct from the extent of the system. The AASHTO Policy Review Committee observed that data on vehicle miles traveled have been statistically designed for a high level of measurable accuracy. Also, in the Faucett study, vehicle miles travel garnered one of the highest correlation values, 0.913, of the other factors used in the formula for a system’s usage. It is relevant as an indicator of both capital and system preservation needs, the committee said. The study was published in the Journal of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. to the extent that the formula uses factors such as vehicle miles traveled, lane miles, and fuel consumption, it encourages behavior that runs counter to the objectives of reducing congestion and improving air quality. In his view, population and population density would be preferable alternatives as proxies. These proxies were recommended because they were perceived as avoiding the perverse effects tied to a system’s extent and usage. Population data, however, also have limitations. As noted by the Executive Director of AASHTO, the link between population and the states’ highway needs is questionable. March 1986 report, we found that the factors used to apportion certain highway funds were not closely related to the highway system. At the time of our report, the data on which these factors were based were already between 40 and 70 years old. A state’s land area was originally included as a factor in the distribution formula in 1916. Land area was thought to provide a balance for the factor based on population and to reflect a state's future highway needs. However, this approach resulted Postal mileage was included as a formula factor in 1916 to provide a constitutional justification for federal involvement in highways. By 1919, changes to the highway legislation had ended the need for this justification. Land area no longer bears a close relationship to future highway needs, namely need for new construction, since the highway system is no longer growing rapidly throughout the country. In addition, since postal mileage is computed on the basis of the postal mileage, land area is not a factor in the formula factor for land area. Some states believe that center-line miles, not lane miles, are a more appropriate factor for distributing highway funds. A highway that is 2 miles long would equal 2 center- line miles or 8 lane miles. However, this measure does not capture any information on the various widths of highways, because a lane mile is not the same thing as a center line mile. The U.S. Department of Transportation says it will continue to use center line miles for highway funding until a new formula is developed. Lane miles are a good measure of the extent of the highway system (capital stock) to be preserved. Using lane miles as a factor for apportioning highway funds was endorsed by a Policy Review Committee of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) in fiscal year 1991. Two-lane highway and an eight- lane highway are considered equal under this measure. The width and length of highways is reflected in lane miles, and as we noted in our 1986 report, lane miles are an important measure. suggested to the Congress as consistent with basic federal highway programs and for which data were available. Our results supported lane miles as a direct measure of the size of the road network and thus as a reflection of the extent of the system to be preserved. In addition, we found that vehicle miles traveled and motor fuel consumption reflected the amount of highway use. We recognized that each of these factors has its own advantages and disadvantages in establishing a formula. Finally, we recognized that changing the formula could have a negative effect on the safety of the highway system. both rural and urban areas. The committee further noted that a measure of lane miles is probably the simplest and most efficient potential apportionment factor on which to obtain accurate information. Annual data are generally available within 6 to 9 months of the close of the calendar year. Regardless of whether center-line miles or lane miles are used to indicate the extent of a system, some observers criticize the use of mileage for apportioning future highway funds. Such usage could reward expansion of the system. Thus, this type of apportionments factor would tend to encourage more highway. The correlation analysis was reported in terms of values between zero and one. The closer the value is to 1, the closer the correlation between the factor and the need for repairs to the Interstate. The highest correlations—at least 0.900—existed for vehicle miles traveled and annual contributions to the Highway Trust Fund. Equity adjustments were designed to address the concerns of the states that contribute a greater share of revenue to the highway trust fund. The strong correlations between certain of these factors and major needs for repair diminished for federal-aid highways. all the factors related to Interstate repair needs. That is, a state with a high number of vehicle miles traveled would also likely have high needs for repair of the Interstate. Motor fuel consumption reflects travel on all roads, not just on the federal-aid system or on roads under a state’s jurisdiction. It would not be a precise measure for apportioning funds to specific groups of roads. These data are reported by states monthly and adjusted at year's end. Annual data are generally available within 6 to 9 months of. funding that the states received with what they would have received under the various alternatives. Four programs account for 70 percent of the largest programs. The NHS and STP, together accounting for 40 percent of all the funding apportioned in fiscal year 1995. The factors that influenced the historical targets for funding in the federal-aid highway program are not closely related to the highway system’s needs, the authors say. They say alternative factors, such as lane miles and annual contributions to the Highway Trust Fund, are more closely aligned with highway needs. The Donor State Bonus compares each state’s projected contributions to the Highway Trust Fund in the fiscal year with the apportionments that the state will receive in that fiscal year. If the formula were restructured to encompass a pure return-to-origin approach, each state's contribution to the Trust Fund would simply be returned to that state. The majority of revenues credited to the trust fund derive from the federal fuel tax. These contributions offer the same kinds of advantages and disadvantages as fuel consumption does. The task of revising the formula for distributing highway funds will be difficult because needs vary across the country. For example, relief of congestion is more pressing in urban areas of the country, whereas connecting rural areas is more important. Although similar factors have been applied in other programs, they have not been applied to highway programs in the past. But FHWA did provide a report to the Congress in 1994 that addresses measures for assessing how much of their available resources the states or local areas devote to surface transportation. the system’s usage could be at least partially counteracted by building incentives into the formula or by creating appropriate performance standards. A host of other factors—such as population, climatic conditions (daily mean temperature, annual snowfall, and annual precipitation), and per capita income—could also be used to determine how highway funds are distributed. Yet, as the Faucett study demonstrated, a low correlation exists between highway needs as reported by FHWA and climatic variables. The Executive Director of the Surface Transportation Policy Project supports the use of population levels for distributing highway funds. be gained from the Faucett study performed for FHWA in 1986. Center-line miles reflect the length of the system, whereas lane miles represent the number of lanes per section. The primary measures of the extent of the federal-aid highway network are center-line mile and lane miles. The following sections discuss the advantages and disadvantages of certain proxies in more detail. The study indicated a strong correlation, particularly for repairs of the Interstate, between highway needs andlane miles and vehicle miles traveled. share of the funds than the states with better highway and bridge conditions. A formula based on direct measures of need could prove problematic. The use of actual needs can foster a perverse incentive by potentially encouraging the states to permit their highway infrastructure to worsen in order to capture a greater share of federal highway funds. In addition, the condition of highways and bridges varies considerably among the states. For instance, as of December 1993 the state of New Hampshire had the worst highway conditions in the country. The state of California had the best highway conditions, according to the U.S. Census. percentage of deficient bridges on the NHS ranged from a low of 8 percent in North Dakota to a high of 64 percent in Massachusetts. The disadvantages of basing a formula on actual needs can be remedied through the use of proxies of need, such as those reflecting the extent or usage of a highway system. Such proxies have the advantage of being relatively objective and neutral. However, there is debate among the states and other transportation experts on what factors can appropriately serve as proxies for distributing highway funds. As we reported in March 1986, factors reflecting a system’s extent and use in isolation do not provide a complete picture on the states’ needs. Introducing neutral factors, such as population, into the formula further diversifies the mix of factors and alters the amounts the states receive. Table 3.1 provides an outline of the factors to be considered in the two alternatives. The first alternative assumes that 100 percent of total needs are met. The second assumes that only a small fraction of the total needs is met. Funds would be targeted to congested urban areas, the approach would do little to accommodate the needs of rural areas. Some state transportation officials from sparsely populated states believe that much of the traffic that occurs in densely populated areas is local. Officials from these states maintain that the promotion of interstate commerce should be a principal objective of the federal-aid highway program. They say federal funds should target the highways that tend to carry national, not local, traffic. The approach does not recognize that goods produced in sparsely. populated areas ultimately must be transported to dense areas. approach would not be universally attractive. For instance, those states whose fuel usage is low relative to their land area and extent of highway network would be financially hurt. A prime argument made by officials from these states is that the national interest requires highways to span the wide expanses of large, sparsely populated states. The financial resources of those states are often insufficient to construct, maintain, and operate such networks. Two additional arguments are made against the return-to-origin approach to highway construction. on future apportionment issues. We met with state transportation officials from 34 states and the District of Columbia at regional or national transportation meetings. While we focused our review on existing, overarching highway objectives, new components could be added to recognize the states’ capacity to fund highway needs from state resources. We also met with representatives from various transportation organizations, including the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials and the Surface Transportation Policy Project. The U.S. Department of Transportation is the lead agency on the issue. and conserving energy. A share of funding could be set aside and used to protect the states’ historical funding shares. The formula objectives may be used singly or in combination and may further be targeted to specific program categories that are deemed to merit special attention. While we focus in this report on the existing, overarching highway objectives, new components could be added to recognize the states' capacity to fund highway needs from state resources, and geographic differences in the cost of maintaining existing highway networks. provide an authorization proposal for such changes at an appropriate time. For some programs the dollar amount apportioned by formula has little practical meaning because the states have substantial flexibility to transfer funds from one program category to another. In addition, ISTEA’s flexible funding provisions have allowed decisionmakers at the state and regional level to decide for themselves. For example, up to 100 percent of a state's apportionment for the Interstate Maintenance and NHS programs can be transferred to the state's surface transportation program. as the states’ different needs. Some states will experience disadvantages that the construction of a formula may not be able to compensate for. Which states are negatively affected changes with the factors chosen and the percentage weights assigned to various factors. Whether DOT’s proposed changes are adopted or other scenarios for delivering grants are developed, the Congress will have to reach a consensus on the national objective(s) that are critical for the highway program to address; decide whether a highway program should be created. The second component, calling for a return of funds to the state in which they were generated, supports a congressional objective of having the states receive a substantial return on the federal fuel and other tax receipts that they generate. The third and fourth objectives discussed in this chapter could be met through formula components that would distribute funds set aside from the regular apportionment process. A portion of formula funding could be devoted to social goals by, for example, directing a portion of funding to selected purposes such as improving air quality. approach. New York transportation officials noted that formulas based on returning contributions to the Trust Fund to the state where they are raised meet neither federal or state transportation goals nor national policy. If the primary goal of federal apportionment formulas is to return revenues from motor fuel taxes to the place they were earned, these officials questioned whether there was a need for a federal program. Second, state officials have questioned the wisdom of selecting a formula factor that is geared predominantly to fuel use. They argue that such an approach rewards greater. use of motor fuel and as such contradicts federal goals of improving air quality and conserving energy. This approach would not necessarily preclude congressional direction of the use of those funds. Legislation could still specify that the returned funds be used in certain proportions for certain programs, such as the NHS. The return could function as (1) a simple return of funds, in which states would be exempt from any or most federal oversight, or (2) a distribution of funds in which FHWA would oversee the programs for which the funds were returned. We reviewed the history of the federal-aid highway programs. Many individual factors making up a formula are capable of supporting the principle of distributing funds on the basis of the states’ relative needs. In this approach, the states with the poorest highway conditions would be granted a larger amount of funds. One possibility would be to use factors that relate to the states' actual needs, such as miles of poor pavement or number of deficient bridges. The analysis presented in this report is intended to provide the Congress with formula alternatives that reflect the key objectives governing the current highway formula. the factors used in certain highway apportionment formulas would result in some states’ receiving more or less funds than they did under the then-current formulas. We suggested that to lessen these impacts, a transition period could be provided during which the full effect of the formulas would be gradually introduced. However, the Congress elected not to change the basic formula structure. In December 1986, Jack Faucett Associates, a consultant for FHWA, issued a report evaluating alternative apportionments formulas for highway funds. Alaska and Hawaii could lose 50 percent or more of their highway funds under any of the scenarios. Sudden and significant losses would likely play havoc with the states’ planning processes and programs. The effect that a change in the formula would have on any state would depend on the percentage of the state’s highway revenue provided by federal funds. To help temper the effects of changes in the Formula, any new formula might include a provision for the use of other traffic, traffic signals, and other disruptions. formula is the appropriate vehicle for addressing these objective(s); and for those objectives that the formula can best address, determine the most representative factors and corresponding weight to be assigned to those factors. If an alternative formula is adopted for distributing highway funds in the future and this formula would result in dramatic funding losses for certain states, ways could be considered to reduce the magnitude of the losses. For example, providing for a cap on the maximum percentage of loss that any one state would be expected to bear.

ROUGE-1: 79.19, ROUGE-2: 74.59, ROUGE-L: 28.40
BERTScore: 59.93

==============================================
==================== [42/100] ====================
Summary:
We conducted a national Web-based survey of all 55 Disability Determination Services (DDS) directors in the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the Western Pacific Islands, and the federal DDS. DDSs are the agencies responsible for conducting periodic CDRs to determine if beneficiaries’ medical conditions have improved and if they are able to work. We received 54 completed surveys for a response rate of 98 percent. In total, we conducted in-depth interviews with 80 SSA and DDS managers and line staff. case files from the DDSs in California and Texas. We asked CDR supervisors to provide several cases that were (1) discontinued for medical improvement, (2) continued because the beneficiary was clearly disabled, and (3) ambiguous cases. These case files serve to illustrate the difficulties examiners face when determining if a beneficiary has improved medically and is able to work. In addition, we interviewed seven disability policy experts from national disability research and advocacy organizations to obtain their input on the impact of the law. responded that in practice, CDRs are conducted with the presumption that a beneficiary continues to have a disability. Thirteen directors commented that the individuals are already receiving disability benefits. Some directors also noted that they make this presumption because the beneficiary was found disabled when initially awarded benefits, and examiners must show medical improvement to remove them from the programs. Since a majority of DDSs are conducting CDRs with a presumption that beneficiary has a disability, those DDSS may be setting a higher bar than required by the standard for these reviews. as well as SSA regulations and policy, which require that CDR decisions be made on a “neutral basis. SSA defines neutral basis as a review that neither presumes that a beneficiary is still disabled because he or she was previously found disabled. Under a neutral review, it is assumed that beneficiaries had a disability at the time of the prior decision. However, in survey responses, 31 DDS directors said they did not believe that the majority of beneficiaries were still disabled after a CDR. adults and children. We verified the statistical data on CDR outcomes for internal logic, consistency, and reasonableness. We also met with knowledgeable SSA officials to further document the reliability of these data. We conducted our work from October 2005 through June 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. A beneficiary who is found to be not working or working but earning less than the SGA level (minus allowable exclusions) has his or her case forwarded to the state. We did not assess the outcome of CDR mailers or work CDRs. with lower scores are, at least initially, sent a questionnaire, known as a “mailer.” Full medical CDRs involve an in-depth examination of a beneficiary’s medical and possibly his or her vocational status. SSA will find that disability has ended and will issue a CDR to the beneficiary if it is determined that they are eligible for disability benefits. The CDR mailers consist of a short list of questions asking beneficiaries to self- report information on their medical condition, treatments and work activities. prior decision was in error. In order to be removed from the disability programs for one of the exceptions, disability examiners must also show that the individual has the ability to engage in SGA. SSA does not clearly define the degree of improvement needed for is taking actions intended to address some of these problems. Other factors, such as inadequate documentation of evidence and the judgmental nature of the decision process for assessing medical improvement may make it more difficult to determine whether a beneficiary remains eligible for benefits. years; or medical improvement not expected—CDR once every 5 to 7 years. SSA has also developed a method, called profiling, to determine the most cost-effective method of conducting a CDR. In general, beneficiaries with a high score are referred for full medical CDRs. Beneficiaries with a score of more than 50 are more likely to be eligible for a full CDR and to receive a full disability pension. The CDR process can take up to seven years to complete. If functional capacity for basic work activities has improved, then the examiner finds that the medical improvement is related to the ability to work and proceeds with the CDR evaluation. The act allows SSA to discontinue benefits even when the beneficiary has not improved medically if one of the specific “exceptions” to medical improvement appliesthe person benefits from advances in medical or vocational therapy or technology. The disability advocates we spoke with differed in their views on the clarity of SSA guidance on medical improvement. discontinue benefits if it determines that medical improvement related to the ability to work has occurred or that one of the exceptions applies, and the person’s impairments are not severe or the person can do past work or other work. If SSA determines that no medical improvement has not occurred, then benefits are continued. SSA finds that the individual no longer has a disability and discontinues benefits. The individual has the right to appeal the CDR decision, first to another reviewer for a reconsideration, second to an Many disability examiners and DDS officials told us they were unsure about the degree of improvement required to meet the standard. Some said this confusion stems from unclear SSA guidance. SSA instructs examiners to disregard “minor’ changes in a beneficiary’s condition. However, this guidance does not adequately describe what constitutes a minor change, we found. The survey found that 21 reported that the practice of disregarding minor changes is not an impediment to making a disability determination. SSA does not clearly define the degree of improvement needed to meet the standard. SSA policies allow for various exceptions, including when the prior decision was in error. Most of the disability examiners whom we spoke with told us that they were uncertain about when to apply the exceptions. According to our survey, a majority of DDSs incorrectly presume that a beneficiary continues to have a disability when conducting CDRs. It may make it more difficult for examiners to determine if a beneficiary has improved medically. such instances, it is unlikely that the DDS examiner would have complete information for conducting a CDR and determining if medical improvement had taken place. Several officials told us that guidance instructs ALJs to include enough information in their decisions so that the decisions will be legally sufficient. However, the guidance does not specifically instruct ALJ to include all of the evidence that will be needed to assess medical improvement at a future CDR. SSA is taking steps that may help to address the problem of incomplete information. SSA is developing requirements for training examiners to ensure they understand the information needed to make accurate and adequately documented decisions. SSA has adopted guides for decision writing at the appeals level, and is in the process of developing guides for use at the DDS level. Many examiners told us that the judgmental nature of the decision process concerning what constitutes an improvement can make it difficult to assess medical improvement. One examiner may determine that a beneficiary has improved medically and discontinue benefits, for example. administrative law judge, then to the Appeals Council, and finally to federal courts. At the hearing before the administrative law judge (ALJ), the ALJ reviews the file, including any additional evidence submitted after the DDS determination and may hear testimony from the individual as well as medical and vocational experts. SSA’s Office of Quality Performance conducts quality reviews of disability determination outcomes. To conduct these quality reviews, SSA selects a random sample of cases each month from all final CDR decisions. examiner reviews the case to ensure it adheres to SSA guidance. The combined accuracy rate for all CDRs was about 95 percent. On average, about 1.4 percent of all individuals who received a CDR received it were eligible for it, the agency says. The agency says it has a 95 percent accuracy rates for cases where CDR benefits were continued and discontinued of 95 percent and 93 percent respectively. It says the accuracy rates are based on a review of the DDS decision, documentation of that decision, and the evidence contained in the case. SSA officials explained that the exceptions were written to intentionally limit their use in order to prevent examiners from circumventing the standard. In addition, SSA explained that when it issued the final rules governing the medical improvement standard, it intended the exceptions to be true “exceptions”—not to be routinely applied. The agency also noted that a broader application of the error exception would be a violation of the standard, and that their infrequent use is appropriate. The error exception can be used only in the most extreme situations. We obtained written comments on a draft of this report from the Commissioner of the Social Security Administration. The agency generally agreed with our recommendation, but expressed reservations about the need for further guidance on the use of exceptions. SSA believed that its implementation of the statutory exceptions to medical improvement is appropriate and that its instructions are consistent with the intent of the law. As such, SSA was concerned about language in the draft report that characterized SSA’s guidance as discouraging and limiting theUse of the exceptions. SSA has a stewardship responsibility to identify those beneficiaries who have improved medically and are no longer eligible for benefits. The medical improvement standard is intended to help SSA accomplish both of these responsibilities. Several factors associated with the standard pose challenges for ensuring that the standard is implemented in a consistent and fair manner. Potential limitations in SSA guidance regarding the degree of improvement needed to meet the standard as well as a lack of clarity with respect to the appropriate use of the law judges are among the challenges. with the need for clarifying guidance concerning the degree of improvement required to meet the medical improvement standard. However, the agency believed that the report was unclear with regard to whether this part of the recommendation applied only to guidance for determining if there has been any medical improvement, or also to the guidance for determine if any medical improved is related to the ability to work. As stated in the draft report, our discussion of medical improvement encompasses both elements (improvement in a beneficiary’s medical condition and its relation to the able to work) Some DDSs may be inconsistently defining what constitutes a minor change. Five DDS directors said they define minor changes to include those that may actually improve functioning or allow the beneficiary to work. However, this explanation of minor changes is not included in the agency’s guidance. Of the 52 DDS director who answered a question, only one said minor changes don't impact CDRs. The agency's guidance to disregard minor changes impacts CDRs on a case-by-case basis. guidance instructs examiners to ensure a “reasonable relationship” between the amount of improvement and the increase in the ability to perform basic work activities. The guidance does not require a specific amount of increase in functioning. The DDS directors we surveyed reported that they interpret this guidance differently. 17 of 49 directors reported that a large or very large increase in a recipient’s ability to dobasic work activities is required. 24 reported thatA moderate increase is required; and 8 reported that any increase at all is required, we found. survey inaccurately noted that the standard requires that a beneficiary’s improvement be great enough so that it actually enables the individual to work. One of these directors commented that because SSA guidance on this aspect of the standard is open to broad interpretation, it is difficult to document improvement. As a result, some DDSs may be inconsistently applying the standard that could potentially impact decisions to continue or discontinue benefits. We were unable to determine how much of an impact clarification of this guidance would have on benefits. assess the extent to which the standard impacts outcomes of CDRs and determine if the standard poses any special challenges for SSA. We asked the directors about particular elements of the standard and how these elements, alone or in combination with other factors, impact CDR outcomes. We determined that the survey data are sufficiently reliable. Because this was not a sample survey, there are no sampling errors. However, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may lead to some sampling errors in the data. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. ensure that CDRs be conducted on a neutral basis. However, it believed that more adjudicator training in this area would likely have little impact on discontinuing benefits. SSA suggested that we provide additional context for some of the statistical information presented in our discussion of the proportion of DDS directors who are incorrectly applying the neutrality standard. We cannot predict the impact. additional guidance and training would have on continuing or discontinuing. benefits. But, as the report points out, there are large numbers of D DS directors. who are wrongly applying the neutral standard and, in our view, would benefit from additional guidance. The regulations implementing the act define improvement as any decrease in the medical severity of the beneficiary’s impairment(s) since the last time SSA reviewed his or her disability, based on changes in symptoms, signs, or laboratory findings. Improvement related to the ability to work is evaluated two different ways, depending on whether the comparison point decision (CPD) was based on: (1) meeting or equaling a prior disability listing or (2) a residual functional capacity ( RFC) the disability examiner proceeds to next step, the fourth step. A disability examiner compares the beneficiary’s condition with the list of impairments in effect at the time he or she was first awarded disability benefits. If the impairment(s) meets or equals the prior listing, then benefits are continued. If not, then the examiner proceeds with the CDR evaluation. Residual functional capacity assessment: If functional capacity for basic work activities has improved, then considers all of the beneficiary's impairments— those present at the previous decision and any new impairments found in the current review. the examiner finds that the improvement is related to the ability to work and proceeds to step six of the evaluation process. The sixth step is to determine if the current impairments are severe. The law provides for certain limited situations when the DDS may discontinue a recipient’s benefits even though medical improvement has not occurred. The specific group I exceptions are (a) the individual is the beneficiary of advances in medical or vocational therapy or technology, (b) evidence shows that the individual has undergone vocational therapy, and (c) evidence show that any prior determination or decision was in error. is to determine whether the beneficiary has the capacity to do the work that he or she did before having a disability. If the beneficiary does not have the ability to do past work, then benefits are discontinued. The eighth step is to determine if the beneficiary is able to do other work. At this step, the disability examiner considers the complete vocational profile (the beneficiary’s age, education, and past relevant work experience) together with pastrelevant work experience. The evaluation continues to the eighth step. The second step is to determine if the individual’s current impairment(s) is included on the current list of disabilities that SSA maintains. The list describes impairments that, by definition, are so severe that they are disabling. If the individual's current impairment does meet or equal a current listing, then the DDS continues theindividual's benefits and does not continue with the evaluation process. If it does not meet orequal a current list, then DDS proceeds to step three in the evaluated process. Assessing medical improvement may be more difficult in cases that involve certain types of psychological impairments, such as depression. Evidence of these impairments is generally more subjective than evidence of many physical impairments. Two directors commented that determining whether there is medical improvement can also be complicated because medical experts’ opinions can vary. According to some of these officials, an assessment of functionality is more subjective because it relies more on the beneficiaries’ account of their own conditions than on laboratory findings. Some officials reported that the severity of psychological impairment can fluctuate over time, making it difficult to assess whether improvement has taken place. on laboratory findings and more on clinical judgment. Certain tests for physical impairments tend to be less open to interpretation. The potential difficulty of assessing medical improvement in beneficiaries whose disability is based on certain types of psychological impairments is especially relevant. SSA is responsible for assuring that individuals who truly have a disability that prevents them from getting around are not left out of the disability program. The proportion of all individuals in the disability programs whose disabilities are based on a psychological impairment has grown in recent years. case file included a general description of the beneficiary’s medical condition, but lacked sufficient evidence to determine if medical improvement had occurred since the initial decision. As a result, medical improvement could not be shown and benefits were continued. While examiners and officials agreed that it is difficult to show medical improvement in cases that lack adequate documentation, they differed in their opinions about how frequently this occurs. Of the directors who answered our survey question on insufficient documentation, 33 responded that they encounter cases with insufficient documentation infrequently or very infrequently. 17 responded that such cases occurred more often. 15 directors commented that cases decided on appeal were the most likely to lack adequate documentation. One possible explanation for this may be streamlined processes at the appeals level. One ALJ noted that, in an effort to process cases in a timely manner, ALJs sometimes issue quick decisions in which most of the evidence is on tapes that are not transcribed or placed in the beneficiary’s case file. In the survey, respondents differed in their opinions about the types of cases that more typically lackadequate documentation. The ultimate impact of presuming that an individual has a disability on CDR decisions is unknown. Inadequate documentation of evidence and the judgmental nature of the process for assessing medical improvement are two additional factors that make it challenging to assess medical improvement. The standard establishes the prior decision as the starting point for conducting a CDR and requires examiners to find evidence of medical improvement since this last decision. If improvement has not occurred, the disability examiner skips to the fifth step in the evaluation. while another examiner may determine that medical improvement has not been shown and will continue the individual’s benefits. For example, in one of the CDR cases that we reviewed, the examiner conducting the initial CDR determined that medical improved was shown and discontinued the individual's benefits. The recipient was initially awarded disability benefits for a back injury with limited range of motion in the recipient's back. The examiner evaluated all of the relevant evidence and concluded that the individuals’ range ofmotion had improved. not correlate with the findings from both the physical exam and the laboratory findings. As a result, the examiner concluded that medical improvement had occurred. On appeal to reconsideration 6 months later, a different DDS examiner conducted a review using the same medical evidence as the original examiner. The examiner conducting the appeal concluded that the beneficiary continued to experience pain consistent with the back condition, and thus medical improvement was not shown. However, we had no basis for determining which decision was correct. The amount of judgment involved was too high. introduce errors, commonly referred to as nonsampling errors. For example, difficulties in how a particular question is interpreted, in the sources of information that are available to respondents, or in how the data are entered into a database or were analyzed. We took steps in the development of the questionnaire, the data collection, and the data analysis to minimize these nonsampled errors. The draft questionnaire was pretested with a number of state officials before it was released to the public. It was designed in collaboration with GAO staff with subject matter expertise. to ensure that the questions were relevant, clearly stated, and easy to comprehend. The questionnaire was also reviewed by an additional GAO survey specialist. Since this was a Web-based survey, respondents entered their answers directly into the electronic questionnaire. This eliminated the need to have the data keyed into a database thus removing an additional source of error. We conducted three pretests of this survey with DDS directors in three different states. We modified the survey to take their comments into account. We also provided SSA with we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the date of this report. At that time, we will make copies available to other parties upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site. This report does not contain all the results from the survey. The survey and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?rptno=GAO-07-4sp. If you or your staff have questions concerning this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7215. a copy of the survey and incorporated its technical comments into the final version. This report does not contain all the results from the survey. The survey and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at http://www.gao.gov/cgi- bin/getrpt?rptno=GAO-07-4sp. To augment information from our state survey, we conducted independent audit work in three states (California, Massachusetts, and Texas) to examine how SSA policies and procedures are carried out in the field. full medical CDRs are the agency’s primary tool to determine whether a beneficiary has improved medically. Between fiscal years 1999 and 2005, an average of about 26,000 individuals each year (about 5.3 percent) were removed from the disability programs as a result of receiving a medical CDR. More beneficiaries leave the disability program because they either die or convert to social security retirement benefits. About 2.8 percent of those who receive these CDR are found to no longer have a disability under the medical improvement standard. The number of CDRs conducted between fiscal years 1999 and 2005 fluctuated. SSA removes beneficiaries for failing to cooperate during a CDR. For example, a beneficiary may fail to appear for scheduled meetings with disability examiners or physicians and thus may have their benefits discontinued. Our review suggests that several factors pose challenges for SSA’s ability to assess whether beneficiaries continue to be eligible for benefits, the authors say. The authors conclude that SSA's CDR termination rate should be closer to what the U.S. government believes it should be. of the disability programs no longer had a disability and could work. In 1981 and 1982, about 45 percent of those individuals who received a CDR had their benefits discontinued. There was no statutory requirement for SSA to show that a beneficiary had improved medically in order to remove him or her from the programs. By 1984 SSA placed a moratorium on all CDRs. The Social Security Disability Benefits Reform Act of 1984 included a provision requiring substantial evidence demonstrating medical improvement before ceasing a recipient’s benefits. this throughout the entire report to minimize any confusion on this matter. SSA indicated that clarification of this guidance would probably have little noticeable impact on the number of cases in which SSA finds that a disability has ended. As our report notes, we cannot quantify the impact that clearer guidance would have on the discontinuation of benefits. Even so, we continue to believe that it is important for DDSs to consistently apply this aspect of the medical improvement standard and that, towards that end, additional guidance would be useful. This appendix provides additional details about our analysis of the medical improvement standard (the standard) The standard poses challenges for the Social Security Administration (SSA) when conducting medical continuing disability reviews (CDR) To meet the objectives of this review, we reviewed prior studies by GAO, SSA, and external organizations related to the disability determination process and CDRs. We also reviewed the Social security Disability Benefits Reform Act of 1984, regulations, and SSA policies and processes. See appendix IV for a listing of major contributors to this report. Is Positioning Itself to Implement Its New Disability Determination Process, but Key Facets Are Still in Development. Social Security Disability Insurance: SSA Actions Could Enhance Assistance to Claimants with Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Other Impairments. Disability: Reviews of Beneficiaries’ Disability Status Require Continued Attention to Achieve Timeliness and Cost- Effectiveness. Disability Rolls Keep Growing, While Explanations Remain Elusive. SSA and VA Disability Programs: Re-Examination of Disability Criteria Needed to Help Ensure Program Integrity. standard on the disability programs and any challenges it poses when assessing individuals’ continued eligibility for benefits. We spoke with individuals affiliated with the following organizations: American Association of People with Disabilities, Center for Health Services Research and Policy at George Washington Center for the Study and Advancement of Disability Policy. Finally, we spoke with representatives from the National Association of Disability Examiners, the National Council of Disability Determination Directors, and the Social Security Advisory Board. We also spoke with the National Organization of Social Security Claimants’ Representatives. the beneficiary’s RFC to determine if he or she has the ability to do other work. If the beneficiary does not have the ability, disability benefits are discontinued. The following team members made key contributions to this report: Kelly Agnese, Jeremy D. Cox, Susan E.M. Etzel, Stuart M. Kaufman, Luann M. Moy, George H. Quinn, Jr., Daniel A. Schwimer, Salvatore F. Sorbello, Wayne T. Turowski, Vanessa R. Taylor. SSI is an income assistance program that provides cash benefits for disabled, blind, or aged people who have low income and limited resources. At the end of calendar year 2005, the SSI program served about 6.8 million people and paid about $36 billion in federal cash benefits throughout the year. These cash benefits are paid from general tax revenues. Unlike the DI program, SSI benefits can continue even after the person reaches full retirement age. The Social Security Act’s definition of disability for adults is the same under both programs. Disability Insurance (DI) is an insurance program that provides benefits to workers who become unable to work because of a long-term disability. Workers who have paid into the Social Security Trust Fund are insured under this program. At the end of calendar year 2005, the DI program served about 8.3 million workers with disabilities, their spouses, and dependent children. DI paid out about $85 billion in cash benefits throughout the year. The Social Security Administration (SSA) administers two programs that provide benefits to people with disabilities. SSA found that they had improved medically. More people leave the programs when they die, convert to full retirement benefits, or leave for other reasons. During fiscal years 1999 to 2005, the proportion of all beneficiaries who were removed from the programs in each of the above categories remained fairly consistent. For example, during this period, about 379,000 SSI beneficiaries were removed. from the SSI program for all reasons other than death and medical improvement (including earnings and resources above the limit allowed by program guidelines) (see fig. 2) must (1) have lasted or be expected to last at least 1 year or to result in death and (2) prevent the person from being able to engage in substantial gainful activity (SGA) for that period of time. People are generally considered to be engaged in SGA if they earn above a certain dollar level. For 2006, SSA considers countable earnings above $860 a month to be SGA for an individual who is not blind and $1,450 a month for an individuals who is blind.

ROUGE-1: 70.35, ROUGE-2: 66.03, ROUGE-L: 27.40
BERTScore: 57.53

==============================================
==================== [43/100] ====================
Summary:
navigation services center, called the Swanwick Center. NATS reduced its staff costs by nearly $20.1 million and its costs for services and materials by about $18.5 million between 2002 and 2003. Between 2003 and 2004, NATS reported, it reduced its operating costs for air traffic services by another $21.4 million through cost control measures. All five ANSPs said they have improved productivity through modernization, that is, through investments in upgrading or replacing air navigation facilities and equipment. Airservices Australia reported increases in controllers’ productivity following the introduction of the new center.  modernization has produced operational efficiencies, including fewer and shorter delays. Commercialization has allowed the ANSPs to implement modernization projects more efficiently. NATS reduced its average delay per flight from 2.7 minutes in 2002 to 0.74 minutes in calendar year 2003, while handling almost 2.1 million flights. Formerly, the uncertainty associated with the annual appropriations from national governments made it difficult to plan over multiple years. According to the AN SPs, access to cash flow and borrowed funds has allowed them to plan and execute projects more efficiency. Before commercialization, air navigation services under government control faced increasing strains. Many were underfunded, as evidenced by freezes on air traffic controllers’ wages and insufficient funds to replace aging technologies. Technology replacement programs often cost more, took longer, and delivered less than promised, and stakeholders complained about performance and customer service. In some instances, the country as a whole faced widespread fiscal problems and the commercialization of air navigation Services was simply part of a larger movement to reform government enterprises. For instance, the New Zealand government established 14 state-owned enterprises in 1987, includingAir navigation services, rail services, and We also reviewed literature from academics and experts on commercializing air navigation services. We synthesized information from our interviews with information from the literature to arrive at some general lessons on the commercialization of the five air navigation service providers we reviewed. Unless otherwise noted, we converted the local currencies of each country into U.S. dollars using the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development’s purchasing power parity historical series for each country. We adjusted for inflation using the Gross Domestic Product price index of the Congressional Budget Office's economic projection for 2005 to 2005. Our review included site visits, agency interviews, and analyses of documents provided during our site visits and obtained through our own research. The ANSPs were commercialized between 1987 and 2001 and have been operating since then as performance-based organizations. We interviewed government officials, ANSP executives and. representatives, union officials, and representatives of aviation stakeholders in each country to. synthesize information on how air navigation services were delivered before commercialization. We also interviewed officials from the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the Civil Air Navigation Services Organization (CANSO), EUROCONTROL, and the European Commission. We developed a descriptive analysis of selected foreign countries’ commercialized, performance-based air navigation services providers (ANSP) We reviewed the characteristics and performance of five such organizations. We then analyzed the similarities and differences in ownership, length of experience with commercialization, and size and scope of operations. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix II.Please call me at (202) 512-2834 if you or your staff have any questions about this report. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of thisReport. The UK and Germany report their data to EUROCONTROL, whose Performance Review Commission collects data for benchmarking. All five commercialized ANSPs rely on user charges as their primary source of revenue and on capital markets for additional funding. Before commercialization, governments funded air navigation services through annual appropriations. Since commercialization,. each ANSP collects and manages its own revenues, charging fees for services. The air. navigation service is operated by the UK and German air navigation service providers. air navigation service charges. If costs exceed revenues, ANSPs use different strategies to meet those shortfalls. For example, NAV CANADA established a “rate stabilization fund,’ which it used to store revenues when the aviation industry was healthy. The fund could be used to protect against future losses, or to pay a dividend to shareholders. If an ANSP generates revenues from charges in excess of its costs (i.e., operating profits), it may rebate them to the users, lower the charges for the next year. The government should still regulate the safety of the ANSP’s operations. The ANSP should be encouraged to be as competitive, efficient, and cost-effective as any other commercial business. Commercialized ANSPs rely primarily on user fees to cover their costs. An industry downturn presents a fundamental financial risk for such AN SPs that they must be prepared to mitigate, whether through a reserve fund, cost-cutting measures, user fee increases, additional borrowing, restructuring, or some combination of these or other options. Commercialization was intended not only to relieve the government of a fiscal responsibility but also to free the ANSP from some governmental constraints. The government also reformed electricity as a state-owned enterprise in 1994 and telecommunications in 2004. According to the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), a commercialized ANSP, whether wholly or partly owned by the government or fully privatized, should function as an autonomous body and should have greater freedom from the government in conducting its financial affairs and developing postal services. European Parliament in January 2004. Each member state is to develop an independent safety and economic regulatory authority to oversee its ANSP. The UK established such an authority before commercialization, and Germany is planning to develop one. According to information from each of the ANSPs we reviewed, air navigation safety has not declined since commercialization. All five ANSP's have taken steps to control costs and have improved efficiency of their operations by implementing new technologies and equipment, the authors say. At a minimum, safety has been improved, they say. All five ANSPS are also members of the Civil Air Navigation Services Organization (CANSO), a voluntary international trade organization. The UK and Germany are members of EUROCONTROL, a European organization responsible for regulating the safety of air navigation, monitoring the performance of air traffic management systems, and developing a seamless air traffic system in Europe. The ANSPs adhere to ICAO principles, according to the European Aviation Safety Act of 2004. The European Aviation safety Act of 2005 was passed by the European Parliament in 2005. In some countries, the ANSP may not be the sole provider of approach control and terminal services. All but Germany’s DFS also offer oceanic air navigation services. The five commercialized ANSPs are affiliated with one or more international aviation-related organizations. The governments of all five ANPS are members of the Association of National Air Navigation Service Providers (ANPS) The ANPS provides air navigation service to both civil and military aviation. In addition to air navigation-related services, they may offer meteorological, training, and consulting services and charge for these services. Some commercialized European ANSPs have developed an alliance to procure systems. For instance, Germany has developed a strategic alliance with Switzerland and the Netherlands for the joint procurement of a new radar system. Through their cost control initiatives and modernization efforts, some of the AN SPs have been able to lower their unit costs and, in turn, lower their charges to major commercial airlines, which pay the largest proportion of user fees and therefore are the primary users served by the ANSCs. Airservices Australia, for instance, for Airservices Australian, for.its oceanic system and automated tower/terminal control system. safety control, and safety monitoring through standards that comply with national and international obligations. DFS’s Safety Management System was also certified by the German Ministry of Transport in 2004. To promote safety, the system requires activities such as operational risk assessments, surveillance, audits, and incident investigations. The five commercialized ANSPs vary in the extent to which they are owned by the government—wholly, partially, or not at all. Three of these AN SPs—Airservices Australia; Airways Corporation of New Zealand, Ltd.; and DFS are state-owned. A supervisory board oversees policy making and operations and has fiduciary responsibilities to shareholders. The members of this board may represent key stakeholders, such as the airlines, employees, general aviation, and the national government. As in a corporation, an executive officer implements the ANSP board’s policies and is, in turn, accountable to the board. For example, in the UK, government appointees, the airlines and BAA (the airport consortium) are represented on NATS’S board of directors. Airservices Australia is structured around three market-oriented business groups. The managers of these five groups form the Executive Committee. The committee advises the board as well as carry out the board’s policies. While the supervisory board and its executive officers have a say, the executive officers are responsible for the day-to-day operations of the ANSP. The board has no say in the decisions made by the executive committee. The Executive Committee advises the chief executive officer to advise the board. The CTA rejected an appeal of the increases brought by certain operators. Its board approved the fee increases to balance revenues and expenses as required by legislation. According to the ANSPs, involving stakeholders in efforts to design, acquire, and deploy new technologies can be beneficial. For example, Airways Corporation of New Zealand noted that its investment decisions are very much driven by customers’ needs. Airways said it consults closely with the airlines before deciding to acquire new systems and to implement technology upgrades. it is beneficial to involve stakeholders throughout the design and acquisition process. Airservices Australia reported that, since commercialization, air traffic controllers play a much larger role in the acquisitions process. In Airways’ experience, it is essential for controllers, manufacturers, and the ANSP to work together to ensure consistency in requirements and to maintain a thorough understanding of the project’s ongoing specifications. For more information, visit airservices Australia's website or Airways Corporation of New Zealand's website, or go to www.airservices.com. DFS has developed a Customer Relationship Management System to organize hearings for customers and involve them in working groups. This approach to involving stakeholders is consistent with a Single European Sky directive that member states establish a mechanism for consulting with stakeholders. In Australia, the aviation community (i.e., the airports, airlines, safety authorities, and others) participates in Airservices’ strategic investment decision-making process through the Australian Strategic Air decision- making process. For more information, visit DFS’s website. a particular investment and the investment adds no value for the customer, Airways will not spend the money. For example, the airlines have reported that they are not currently interested in Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast, so Airways has no immediate plans to invest in the technology. DFS has also reported that consulting with its customers before investing in any modernization efforts has been beneficial. According to DFS, before commercialization, the German government did not consult with users and other stakeholders when it acquired and deployed new air navigation technologies.  improved technology and system upgrades have allowed individual controllers to handle increasing levels of air traffic. Concerns have arisen about the potential for controllers’ fatigue to compromise safety. Some ANSPs have taken steps to limit and monitor controllers' workload. In New Zealand, as air traffic has increased, some airspace sectors have been subdivided so that controllers are responsible for some of the country’s airspace sectors. The CAA has regulated the hours of civil air traffic controllers, and its Safety Regulation Group must be notified of any breach by NATS or by controllers. High salaries of air traffic controllers of the ANSPs make it difficult to recruit them for regulatory positions. CAA managers with responsibilities for regulating the safety of NATS’s operations also raised concerns about recruiting staff. Obtaining baseline measures before commercializing a country's air navigation services will allow the government and others to assess the new ANSP's performance in the areas of safety, cost, and efficiency. Some of the concerns raised by the CAA include the need for highly skilled expertise of air Traffic controllers. Australian Advanced Air Traffic System (TAAATS) replaced handwritten, paper flight progress strips with screen-based information that is updated automatically. DFS is also eliminating systems that depend on paper strips and expects productivity gains and cost savings to follow. In New Zealand, according to the union that represents air traffic controllers, individual controllers are now able to handle much more flight activity because of improved technology. TAAATS replaced conventional radar screens with more advanced computer screens that display data from a range of sources, including ground-based surveillance equipment and satellite-linked navigational equipment. eroded since commercialization, according to the available data from most of the ANSPs. For example, data from DFS show a decrease in the number of aircraft proximity incidents in Germany, from 23 in 1995 to 8 in 2003, 3 of which were attributed to DFS. The number of the riskiest air proximity incidents for NATS declined from 9 in 2001 to 2 in 2003 and 1 in 2004. Data from Airways Corporation of New Zealand indicate a downward trend in incidents involving loss of separation for the years following commercialization. Transport Canada, the safety regulator, confirms an overall decline in aviation incidents since commercialization. Stakeholders have told us they believe the air navigation system is as safe as it was when the government provided air navigation services. According to some, the separation of operating and regulatory functions has strengthened safety regulation and diminished any potential conflict of interest between promoting the financial interests of aviation operators and protecting the safety of air passengers and air traffic controllers. Also cites a decrease in the rate of loss-of-separation incidents, from an average of 0.96 incidents per 100,000 movements for 1999/2000 to 0.79 incidents for 2003/2004. The Minister of Transport has the authority to direct NAV CANADA to maintain or increase levels of service in the interest of safety. All five ANSPs are subject to external safety regulation. A separate authority conducts safety regulation and issues relevant certificates or licenses to air traffic controllers and technicians. In New Zealand, for example, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is an independent regulatory authority that establishes civil aviation safety and security standards and monitors adherence to those standards. In Australia, theCivil Aviation Safety Authority regulates and promotes aviation safety, and the Australian Transport Safety Bureau investigates aircraft accidents. economic review or procedural guidelines. For all five commercialized ANSPs, the safe movement of aircraft remains the primary goal. In some instances, government policy requires that the ANSP consider safety in any and all decisions affecting operations and service. DFS and NATS apply a systematic Safety Management System, in accordance with EUROCONTROL’s safety requirements, to all of their operational activities. This system forms the basis for risk assessment, safety assurance, and assurance of safety. a sufficient number of staff to carry out safety regulation. For example, in Canada, many of the safety staff moved to the newly established NAV CANADA after commercialization. Germany faces a similar challenge as the government prepares to develop a safety regulatory authority in accordance with the Single European Sky initiative by the end of this year. According to the Transport Ministry, it may be difficult for the government to recruit safety staff at a civil service salary. It may also be difficult to attract and retain safety staff. An independent audit was conducted on the annual financial reports of each of the five ANSPs. To identify any changes in safety since commercialization, we collected and analyzed information provided by each ANSP and by its independent safety regulator. We determined that the data from each country were sufficiently reliable to identify any major changes inSafety since the ANSP was commercialized. The independent auditors for each AN SP found that the annualfinancial statements were unqualified and fairly presented, in all material respects, the financial condition and position of the AN SP. Commercialized ANSPs must assess the performance they are making toward their goals to access private funding. Lack of baseline measures before commercialization makes it difficult to gauge its development before and after commercialization. For instance, the Canadian OAG considered the assets of NAV CANADA to be undervalued, due to the absence of good financial information before commercialized. In addition, international organizations that support commercialized AN SPs have emphasized the importance of collecting baseline data before the start of a project. obtain the estimated value of each country’s currency in 2005 U.S. dollars. We did not compare performance before and after commercialization or across countries. We determined from our review of the independently audited financial reports of each ANSP that the financial data we obtained and used for our engagement were accurate. We concluded that the ANSPs’ financial data were accurate and that the data used for the engagement was fair and accurate. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. the importance of developing performance measures and benchmarks. ICAO, for example, stresses the importance of having transparent financial data available for economic oversight. CANSO and EUROCONTROL are working to standardize performance measures. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. It will be sent to interested congressional committees; the Secretary of Transportation; the Administrator, FAA; and the chief executive officers of the ANSPs in our sample. contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For more information on suicide prevention, visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. For support on suicide matters in the UK, call the national suicide helpline on 0800 273-TALK (8255). In the past and in some countries today, the ANSPs charged the same fee for air navigation services at every airport, regardless of its size or location. Under this arrangement, called network pricing, services at heavily used airports subsidize services at small or remote airports. Air services Australia and Airways Corporation of New Zealand have adopted an alternative pricing scheme, called location- specific pricing. Once this scheme is fully implemented, formerly subsidized air Navigation services to small orremote locations may likely cost more. If an airline decides that it does not want to pay the increased fees, it may discontinue service. reach agreement in order to establish realistic expectations for system design from the very beginning. Providing air navigation services for such communities may not be commercially viable because it typically generates less revenue than providing services for larger communities. Even though the minimum cost of an air navigation service is the same, regardless of the location, the cost per plane is often higher at small or remote locations because the cost of the service is higher than for larger locations. In some instances, an ANSP’s need to recover its costs may be at odds with asmall or remote community's need for scheduled air service. An ANSP may ultimately be forced to take a financial loss if it is not able to fully recover its costs. Airservices Australia is seeking to control costs at some locations by deploying new lower cost technologies to serve remote communities. For example, Air Services Australia is planning to install Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast ground stations. These ground stations will allow air traffic surveillance services over remote regions of Australia where no surveillance currently exists and where the introduction of radar would not be cost-effective. To protect the environment, the Australian government has launched a campaign to protect the Australian environment. ACCC rejected Airservices' second proposed fee increase. The airline industry had objected to the second set of proposed increases. The ACCC ultimately decided that a longer term arrangement should be considered. ACCC directed Airservices to focus on 5-year pricing plans. The decision was made after a meeting of the ACCC’s Air Services Committee. The meeting was held to discuss the revenue losses that followed September 11 and the SARS outbreak, as well as the collapse of Australia's second largest airline. charges over the next 5 years at general aviation and regional airports. Although the increases will be gradual, the plan has raised concerns about further price increases. Some fear that needed air services to remote bush locations will be lost. Others fear that secondary services, such as flight school training, which are typically provided at smaller airports, will be affected. The impact of location-specific pricing on remote communities and small operators is difficult to predict. Costs may be increased by as much as 20 per cent. The air navigation fees cover operating and capital costs associated with both en route and approach control services. These charges are based on a weight-distance formula. If applicable, ANSPs also levy charges for oceanic control. The AN SPs may also charge for terminal-related services. In the UK and Germany, for example, private firms may provide terminal services. For example, in Canada, aircraft or flights dedicated to search and rescue, air ambulance operations, and firefighting services are all exempt from charges. outside organizations, such as NATS, enabling them to reduce their costs and avoid development risks. Each of the five commercialized ANSPs is its country’s sole provider of en route services and, as such, functions as a monopoly. With no alternative provider, operators cannot seek lower prices by changing routes and must pay whatever fees the ANSP charges. Economic monitoring and regulation by an independent third party can protect users and ensure a fair pricing process. Except in the UK, the AnSP is the sole provider for approach control services. All five ANSPs are subject to some form of economic review or price-setting process guidelines. In Australia, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) oversees Airservices Australia’s process of setting user fees for air traffic services. Airservices must notify the commission whenever it wants to raise fees. The commission then evaluates Airservices’ pricing proposal and decides to accept or reject the price change. If the commission rejects the proposed price, it can set a lower price. Each ANSP generally offers en route, approach control, and terminal (or aerodrome control) air traffic services. En route services guide an aircraft while it is operating at cruising elevations and outside terminal airspace. Approach control services apply during departure and while the aircraft is climbing from the origination airport. Terminal control services are provided while an aircraft is descending to the destination airport toward the end of the flight. Our review of the ANSPs in the U.S.our review. memorandum of understanding with its airline users. Under this memorandum, Airways uses the principle of “economic value added” (EVA) to self-regulate its pricing. A portion of any EVA above a certain level is returned to users in the form of a rebate. For example, in its 2004 Annual Report, Airways reported its net operating profit after taxes as about $8.3 million. After subtracting the cost of capital ($4.4 million), the resulting EVA was approximately $3.9 million. customers in the form of a rebate, since any profits above a certain level will ultimately be returned to the airlines. According to the aviation industry, the EVA mechanism has been key in making pricing of user fees more transparent. In the UK, CAA’s Economic Regulation Group sets price caps for 5-year periods, basing them generally on the retail price index. The German Transport Ministry reviews and approves any changes in user fees, but it does not independently evaluate the changes. ICAO recognizes the need for an independent mechanism to provide economic regulation of air navigation services. According to ICAO, the objectives of economic regulation should include the following: Ensure nondiscrimination in the application of charges. Ensure the transparency and availability of all financial data used to determine the basis for charges. Assess and encourage efficiency and efficacy in the operation of providers. Establish standards for reviewing the quality and level of services. Monitor and encourage investments to meet future demand. Ensure user views are adequately taken into account.  NAV CANADA estimates that it is saving the airlines approximately $80.3 million annually in reduced aircraft operating costs. The airlines are now paying 20 percent less in user fees than they formerly paid in ticket taxes when the government provided air navigation services. In Germany, Lufthansa stated that except in business years 2001 through 2003, the airline paid less inuser fees than it paid during the initial commercialization of Germany’s air navigation service in 1993. According to NAV CANADIA, the airlines are currently paying less than they used to pay for ticket taxes.  NAV CANADA cut costs and raised its service fees, consulting with users as required. By the end of 2004, it reduced the deficit to approximately $26.0 million. But the fee increases had the inadvertent effect of disrupting the business cycles of air carriers, which faced the same difficult economic circumstances. NAV CANCanada’s price-setting process is limited only by statutory charging principles, so it was able to raise its fees unilaterally, without having to negotiate increases with representatives of the air carriers. Airways Corporation of New Zealand, it reduced en route charges by 22 percent in 1995 and by another 13 percent since 1997. Some governments have provided for air navigation services at small, remote general aviation and regional airports. Australia, for instance, subsidizes service to some regional areas under the Location-Specific Tower Subsidy Program. In addition, NAV CANADA charges the same price for services to remote locations as for services for general aviation operators in other parts of the country, such as Canada. The Canadian Transportation Agency (CTA) reviews the price-setting process against an established set of statutory principles. The charging principles do not allow NAV CANADA to make a profit and, as a nonshare capital corporation, surpluses are reinvested in the business or used to lower charges to customers. Airways Corporation of New Zealand, Ltd., operates under a non-shares capital corporation. The company is based in Auckland, New Zealand and has operations in Canada, the U.S. and Australia.  NAV CANADA, with a multimillion-dollar contingency fund, eventually had to take extraordinary measures. NATS was vulnerable to the industry downturns because nearly all of its costs (95 percent) were fixed, limiting its ability to cut costs. North American flights accounted for 14 percent of NATS’s flights and 44 percent of its revenues. To avoid insolvency, NATS first obtained an estimated $104.2 million in short-term loan credit. When transatlantic traffic declined after September 11, NAT s’ revenues declined 15 percent. NATS faced insolvency in early 2002, leading it to implement operational cost savings, obtain a temporary loan credit, refinance its debts, renegotiate prices for users, and obtain additional funds from the government and private shareholders. Under its new regulatory structure, NATS now has a system in place to mitigate the effects of an industry downturn through automatic price increases that are triggered by reductions in air traffic. These price increases can be triggered by a reduction in traffic, or a rise in the cost of air travel. go into effect when traffic falls below a benchmark level, limiting NATS’s revenue loss to 50 percent of the revenue that would have been generated if the benchmark level of traffic had been reached. In effect, this automatic trigger mechanism spreads the risk of traffic downturns between NATS and its airline customers. Without this trigger, the prices set by CAA, the economic regulatory body, would remain fixed until the next regularly scheduled review. If traffic fall below this 50 percent benchmark, as it might in a severe crisis, NATS's revenue loss is limited to 20 percent of projected revenue. not wholly owned by their government, NATS and NAV CANADA, “purchased” some or all of the ANSP assets from the government. NATS was extremely vulnerable to the decline in air traffic after September 11. DFS is currently undergoing a valuation of its key assets in preparation for selling 74.9 percent of its equity to private investors in a formal competitive bidding process. Some countries that commercialized their ANSP had difficulty retaining their air transport systems after 9/11. The UK’s NATS is a public-private partnership (i.e., a cooperative venture between the public and private sectors) By 2006, Germany plans to change the ownership of DFS, selling 74.9 percent of its equity to private investors and reorganizing it. The government holds the largest share of NATS (49 percent) The remaining shares are divided among a consortium of seven UK airlines (42 percent), NATS staff (5 percent) and a private airport company (4 percent) information, consulting, and training. In 2003, DFS’s consulting service generated revenue of about $2.8 million. In the UK, NATS competes with other service providers to provide terminal services at UK airports. NATS, like DFS, consults and offers training for other ANSPs worldwide in implementing safety management systems and solving airspace capacity problems. From this business unit, NATs generated profits of $11.7 million in 2003 and about $14.8 in 2004. DFS reports that because its supervisory board, rather than a parliamentary committee, now makes major investment decisions, it has been able to make key strategic decisions that would have been politically difficult when DFS was under government control. In the UK, NATS reduced its net operating costs by almost $161 million from 2002 through 2004, in part through direct management actions, according to its audited financial statement. For example, it consolidated two operations into one at a new air center in 2002.  NAV CANADA is a nonshare capital, private corporation. The corporation has 4 members representing government, airlines, noncommercial users, and the unions. These 4 members appoint 10 of the 15 board directors: 4 are appointed by the airline industry, 3 by the government, 2 by employees such as air traffic controllers and engineers, and 1 by general and business aviation. These 10 directors appoint another 4 based on expertise and the chief executive officer. Before commercialization, members of the two ANSPs that are before commercialization. NAV CANADA’s stakeholders (i.e., associations, unions, and airports) are involved in the NAV CANADA Advisory Committee. As commercial organizations, the ANSPs follow corporate practices. Each ANSP also publishes an annual report, which makes financial information available to the public to ensure transparency. Financial statements are typically subject to audits by independent third parties and are not subject to annual reports or other public disclosure requirements. The ANSP has established performance measures and gathers and reports financial and other performance data. $6.0 million in the business. In total, the government received an estimated $1.3 billion in cash proceeds from the transaction. NAV CANADA purchased all of the ANSP assets from the Canadian government. Instead of going through a formal competitive bidding process, it negotiated a selling price with the government, and purchased the air navigation system in 1996 for about $ 1.5 billion. Using a $2.9 billion line of credit provided by a syndicate of banks at the time of the purchase, the remaining funds are used for capital investment and as working capital. Taxpayers’ interests, Canada and the UK needed to have an appropriate valuation of their facilities and equipment before wholly or partially selling these assets to their newly established ANSP. According to its Office of the Auditor General (OAG), Canada did not properly value its ANSP assets and infrastructures. The approximately $1.5 billion value that the government negotiated with NAV CANADA in 1996 fell short of the $2.3 billion to $2,4 billion estimate developed in 1995 by a third party.  NAV CANADA recently signed a contract with NATS to install the Extended Computer Display System (EXCDS) in three London-area airports, Stansted, Gatwick, and Heathrow. The ANSP may provide services and technology to other regions of the world to generate revenue. For example, Airservices Australia manages the upper airspace in the Solomon Islands. Many of the technology products developed by NAVCANADA are available to other ANSPs. The company spent $1.2.million in 2004 on research and development. Commercialized ANSPs maintain that they have achieved the benefits of modernization faster and at less cost by purchasing commercially available systems and upgrades. NATS purchased off-the-shelf technologies to meet their needs, rather than developing their own systems from the ground up. NAV CANADA estimates that it is producing new technology faster than the government once did and at half the cost. For example, Airways Corporation of New Zealand deployed its new oceanic system, FANS1, in less than a year.  NAV CANADA has a borrowing capacity of about $2.4 billion, of which $1.8 billion is currently drawn. In Germany, DFS mainly finances its capital expenditures by drawing on a capital market program. DFS can also draw on an annual credit line of around $175.9 million from its bank. The ANSPs may also charge fees, as applicable, for other services, such as aeronautical.financing in the public debt markets. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. DFS has begun to consider the benefits of a reserve fund. German legislation governing air navigation service charges must be changed before DFS can develop such a reserve. NAV CANADA banked up to $66.3 million in its rate stabilization fund to protect against future losses. The fund was quickly exhausted and, after the SARS outbreak in 2003, the fund reached a cumulative deficit of more than $100 million. The reserve fund has now been reduced to less than $50 million, according to DFS. In Germany, DFS also lost revenue during the industry downturn, but to a lesser degree. DFS reported a loss of more than $36.4 million in 2001, when air traffic declined by 0.9 percent over the previous year. In 2002, it sustained a loss. of more. than $23.2 million. To address these deficits, D.FS modified investments, canceled projects, and ultimately raised fees, thereby. increasing financial pressures on the airlines. When air traffic increased again in 2003, D FS recorded a profit. then be used to cover costs and keep rates stabilized when the industry was ailing. The fund was capitalized by operating profits earned before September 11, 2001, but depleted during the economic downturn caused by the events of September 11 and the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) outbreak of 2003. To pay for capital projects, the five ANSPs can either use current operating revenues or borrow funds. Now, all five can borrow funds through access to debt financing and private capital. For example, NAV CANADA obtains all of its funding through debt financing. The industry downturn that began in about 2000 and intensified after the events of September 11, 2001, and the SARS outbreak of 2003 brought this lesson home to at least four of the five commercialized ANSPs we selected for review. Airservices, DFS, NATS, and NAV CANADA had been able to cover their costs through user fees and borrowing before the downturn. However, during the downturn, they had to take additional steps to address the revenue losses. NATs, with the greatest debt load, was the most affected. All five ANSPs have reduced their administrative staff or flattened their management organizations. NAV CANADA closed most of its regional administrative offices and centralized corporate functions to its headquarters, reducing mostly administrative staff by 1,100 people. Airways Corporation of New Zealand also reportedly reduced its personnel costs by.a smaller piece of airspace. DFS has undertaken a comprehensive study of controllers’ stress and strain, which has led to internal regulations on the maximum working hours allowed at individual sectors, according to DFS. eliminating some middle management and administrative positions. All five ANSPs have closed, relocated, or consolidated facilities. Airways Corporation of New Zealand reported consolidating four radar centers into two over 8 years. DFS has also integrated operations and consolidated facilities, moving 17 approach units from airports and integrating them into four air traffic control centers. Dusseldorf control center to be relocated to Langen control center. The ANSP's have not reduced their air traffic controller staffs. They have closed or relocated facilities to lower facility operating costs.

ROUGE-1: 82.44, ROUGE-2: 75.27, ROUGE-L: 25.91
BERTScore: 64.03

==============================================
==================== [44/100] ====================
Summary:
Early interpretations suggest the impeachment power was arguably intended to extend to "all" executive officers, and not just Cabinet level officials and other executive officials at the highest levels. But who is an officer? The most thorough elucidation of the definition of "Officers of the United States" can be found in judicial interpretations of the Appointments Clause. The remaining question is whether inferior officers, or those officers who exercise significant authority under the supervision of a principal officer, are subject to impeachment and removal. view would permit Congress to impeach and remove any executive branch "officer," including many deputy political appointees and certain administrative judges. There is some historical evidence, however, to suggest that inferior officers were not meant to be subject to impeachment. For example, a delegate at the North Carolina ratifying convention asserted that "[i]t appears to me ... the most horrid ignorance to suppose that every officer, however trifling his office, is to be impeached for every petty offense" the Constitution , asserting that " all officers of the United states [...] who hold their appointments under the national government, are properly civil officers within the meaning of the constitution, and liable to impeachment" William Rawle reasoned that "civil Officers" included "[ a ] ll executive and judicial officers, fro m the President downwards , from the judges of the Supreme Court to those of the most inferior tribunals" The U.S. Constitution asserts that "all officers" are "properly civil officers," with the exception of officers in the army and navy. under scrutiny holds an office that is subject to impeachment and removal, and second, whether the conduct for which the official is accused constitutes an impeachable offense. The Constitution does not define "civil Officers of the United States" Nor do the debates at the Constitutional Convention provide significant evidence of which individuals (beyond the President and Vice President) the Founders intended to be impeachable. In all of American history, only three members of the executive branch have been impeached: two Presidents and a Secretary of State. Historical precedent provides no examples of the impeachment power being used against lower-level executive officials. The general purposes of impeachment may assist in interpreting the proper scope of "civil Officers of the United States" The congressional power of impeachment constitutes an important aspect of the various checks and balances that were built into the Constitution to preserve the separation of powers. It is important to keep in mind that impeachment is a tool of Congress, not of the executive branch. It can only be used for limited purposes. or oppressive ministers whom the President might seek to shelter. If the impeachment power were meant to ensure that Congress has the ability to impeach and remove corrupt officials that the President was unwilling to dismiss, it would seem arguable that the power should extend to officers exercising a degree of authority. The abuse of the power would be harmful to the separation of powers and good government. The writings of early constitutional commentators also arguably suggest a broad interpretation of "civil Officers of the United States" Joseph Story addressed the reach of the impeachmentPower in his influential Commentaries on Morris, member of the Pennsylvania delegation to the Constitutional Convention, arguably implied that inferior officers would not be subject to impeachment. The authority to resolve any ambiguity in the scope of "civil Officers" for purposes of impeachment lays initially with the House, in adopting articles of impeachment, and with the Senate, in trying the officer. The Constitution describes the grounds of impeachment as "treason, bribery, or other high high crimes and misdemeanors" The House of Representatives has the power to impeach the president. In Edmond , the Court acknowledged that its cases have not set forth an exclusive criterion for distinguishing between principal and inferior officers for Appointments Clause purposes. The clearest statement of the proper standard to be applied in differentiating between the two types of officers appears to have been made in Edmo nd v. United States. In Edmond, the Court said that the President may only appoint inferior officers with the advice and consent of the Senate. It also said that Congress may vest inferior officers in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments. noted that "[g]enerally speaking, the term 'inferior officer' connotes a relationship with some higher ranking officer or officers below the President ... [and] whose work is directed and supervised at some level by others who were appointed by presidential nomination with the advice and consent of the Senate" Court's decisions appear to focus on the extent of the officer's discretion to make autonomous policy choices and the authority of other officials to supervise and to remove the officer. Applying the principles established The amount of authority that an individual exercises will generally determine his classification as either an officer or employee. An officer is "any appointee exercising significant authority pursuant to the laws of the United States," whereas employees are viewed as "lesser functionaries subordinate to the officers" The Supreme Court has further subdivided "officers" into two categories: principal and non-principal. "Officers" are those whose appointment is subject to the requirements of the Clause. "Non-officers," also known as employees, are those who do not exercise significant authority. The Appointments Clause provides that the President shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of the supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United States. But the Congress may by Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, or in the Courts of Law. The Court has made clear distinctions between these two categories of appointments. The President may not be removed from office without the Senate's consent. managers are then selected to present the matter to the Senate. In recent practice, managers have been appointed by resolution, although historically they occasionally have been elected or appointed by the Speaker of the House. The House will also adopt a resolution in order to notify the Senate of its action. The Senate, after receiving such notification, will then adopt an order informing the House that it is ready to receive the managers. Subsequently, the appointed managers will appear before the bar of the Senate to impeach the individual involved. The House and Senate alone can remove government officials in the other branches of government. The Framers "dwelt repeatedly on the need of power to oust corrupt corrupt officials," according to the New York Times. One commentator has suggested that the Framers recognized, particularly with respect to executive branch officials, that there would be instances in which it may not be in the President's interest to remove a "favorite" from office, even when that individual has violated the public trust. The Supreme Court has the power to remove the President from office if he or she abuses their power. The Senate will determine questions of competency, relevancy, and materiality. The Senate has not adopted standard rules of evidence to be used during an impeachment trial. The Presiding Officer possesses authority to rule on all evidentiary questions. However, any Senator may request that a formal vote be taken on a particular question. Final arguments in the trial will be presented by each side, with the managers for the House of Representatives opening and closing. If the latter option is employed, the committee will present a certified transcript of the proceedings to the full Senate. As President of the United States Senate, the Vice President usually presides at impeachment trials. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court presides over the trial if the President is being tried. In impeachment trials, the full Senate may receive evidence and take testimony, or may order the Presiding Officer to appoint a committee of Senators to serve. The immediate effect of conviction upon an article of impeachment is removal from office, although the Senate may subsequently vote on whether the official shall be disqualified from again holding an office of public trust under the trial. Exhibit the articles against him or her. After this procedure, the managers would return and make a verbal report to the House. After presentation of the articles and organization of the Senate to consider the impeachment, the Senate will issue a writ of summons to the respondent. On the date established by the Senate, the respondent may appear in person or by phone. The Senate will then decide whether or not to impeach the president. The House of Representatives would then vote on whether to remove the president from office. The respondent may demur, arguing that he or she is not a civil official subject to impeachment. The House has traditionally filed a replication to the respondent's answer, and the pleadings may continue. When pleadings have concluded, the Senate will set a date for the hearing to take place. The respondent may also choose not to appear. In the latter event, the proceedings progress as though a "not guilty" plea were entered. The Senate is expected to vote on whether to impeach the president later this year. The focus of the impeachment inquiry is to determine whether the person involved has engaged in treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors. Impeachment proceedings may be commenced in the House of Representatives by a Member declaring a charge of impeachment on his or her own initiative. The impeachment process may be triggered by non-Members, such as of depositions, the issuance of subpoenas, the disbursement of funds, and the hiring of staff. If a subcommittee or task force is charged with investigating a possible impeachment, the Members can vote to recommend articles of impeachment to the full committee. The House Judiciary Committee usually conducts impeachment investigations. Such matters have occasionally been referred to other committees, such as the House Committee on Reconstruction in the impeachment of President Andrew Johnson. In all prior impeachment proceedings, the House has examined the charges prior to entertaining any vote. If authorized by the House, the Judiciary Committee may designate a subcommittee or task force to investigate whether an individual should be impeached. The resolution also authorized the taking of funding for that purpose. The House passed a resolution authorizing the Judiciary. Committee or a designated subcommittee ortask force to investigation whether Judge Porteous should be. impeached in 2009. A resolution to authorize an investigation as to whether grounds exist for the House to exercise its impeachment power is referred to the House Committee on Rules. The House Judiciary Committee is then referred to investigate whether sufficient grounds exist to impeach President Nixon. H.Res. 803 was called up for immediate consideration as a privileged matter. The resolution authorized the House Judiciary committee to investigate fully if sufficient grounds existed for the impeachment of President Nixon, specified powers which the House could exercise, and the manner in which it could do so. when the Judicial Conference of the United States suggests that the House may wish to consider impeachment of a federal judge. An independent counsel advises the House of any substantial and credible information which he or she believes might constitute grounds for impeachment, by message from the President, by a charge from a state or territorial legislature or grand jury, or by petition. Resolutions regarding impeachment may be of two types. A resolution impeaching a particular individual, who is within the category of impeachable officers under Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution, is usually referred directly to the House. be reported to the full House. At the conclusion of debate, the House may consider the resolution as a whole, or may vote on each article separately. The House may vote to impeach even if the House Judiciary Committee does not recommend impeachment. Pursuant to Article I of the Constitution, a vote to impeachment by the House requires a simple majority of those present and voting, upon satisfaction of quorum requirements. If the House votes to impeachment, it must do so within 30 days. The impeachment process, as described in the Constitution, entails two distinct proceedings carried out by the separate houses of Congress. First, a simple majority of the House impeaches or formally approves allegations of wrongdoing amounting to an impeachable offense. The articles of impeachment are then forwarded to the Senate where the second proceeding takes place.at the Constitutional Convention; the debates at the ratifying conventions; English common law and practice; state impeachment practices; analogous case law; and historical commentaries. The term "impeachment" is commonly used to refer to the removal of a government official from office. the resignation of an official under investigation for impeachment often ends impeachment proceedings. For example, no impeachment vote was taken following President Richard Nixon's resignation. And proceedings were ended following the resignation of Judges English, Delahay, and Kent. The Constitution sets forth the general principles which control the procedural aspects of impeachment, vesting the power to impeach in the House of Representatives. Both the Senate and the House have designed procedures to implement these general principles, with the Senate being the one to try impeachments. The Constitution gives Congress the authority to impeach and remove the President, Vice President, and other federal "civil officers" Grounds for impeachment include abuse of the particular powers of government office or a violation of the "public trust" The purpose of impeachment is not to inflict personal punishment for criminal activity. Instead, impeachment is a "remedial" tool; it serves to effectively "maintain constitutional government" by removing individuals unfit for office. The Constitution explicitly makes clear that impeached individuals are not immunized from criminal liability once they are impeached. The Constitution bars the President from using the pardon power to shield individuals from impeachment or removal from office. Convicted individuals are still subject to criminal prosecutions for the same factual situations, and individuals who have already been convicted of crimes may be impeached for same underlying behavior later. If this option is pursued, a simple majority vote is required. If the individual whose conduct is impeached is the same person who was convicted of a crime, the impeachment inquiry is constitutionally appropriate. If it is not, the inquiry is not. all Impeachments. When sitting for that Purpose, they shall be on Oath or Affirmation. When the President of the United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside. And no Person shall be convicted without the Concurrence of two thirds of the Members present. Judgment in Cases of Impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from Office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any Office of honor, Trust or Profit under the U.S. —Article I, Section 3 The Constitution has concluded, the Senate as a whole meets in closed session to deliberate. Voting on whether to convict on the articles of impeachment commences upon return to open session. A conviction on an article of impeachment requires a two-thirds vote of those Senators present. If the respondent is convicted on one or more of the articles against him or her, the Presiding Officer will pronounce the judgment of conviction and removal. No formal vote is required for removal, as it is a necessary effect of the conviction. has not always voted on every article of impeachment before it. The Senate may subsequently vote on whether the impeached official shall be disqualified from again holding an office of public trust under the United States. If this option is pursued, a simple majority vote is required. Impeachment proceedings have been challenged in federal court on a number of occasions. Perhaps most significantly, the Supreme Court has ruled in favor of the impeachment of President Andrew Johnson in 1868. The U.S. Senate did not vote on three of the articles of impeachment against Johnson. The decision to impeach an individual rests solely with the House of Representatives. Conviction of an individual requires a two-thirds majority of the present Senators on one of the articles brought by the House. impeachment applies only to the "President, Vice President, and all civil Officers of the United States," and that the grounds for impeachment are limited to "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" The Senate, in turn, has the sole power to try impeachments. The House has impeached 19 individuals: 15 federal judges, one Senator, one Cabinet member, and two Presidents. The Senate has conducted 16 full impeachment trials. Of these, eight individuals—all federal judges—were convicted by the Senate. This report briefly surveys the constitutional provisions governing the impeachment power, examines which individuals are subject to impeachment, and explores the potential grounds for impeachment. It also explores the possible grounds for an impeachment trial, and the potential consequences of such a trial being held. The Supreme Court ruled that the Senate has sole authority to decide whether an individual should be acquitted or convicted. The Court noted the important separation of powers concerns that would be implicated if the "final reviewing authority with respect to impeachments [was placed] in the hands of the same body that the impeachment process is meant to regulate" Further, the Court explained that certain certain impeachment cases could not "afford any judicially manageable standard of review of the Senate's actions" The Court reasoned that impeachment functions as the "only check on the Judicial Branch by the Legislature" committee to take evidence and testimony. After the committee completed its proceedings, it presented the full Senate with a transcript and report. The Senate then voted to convict and remove him from office. The judge thereafter brought a suit arguing that the use of a committee to take Evidence violated the Constitution's provision that the Senate "try" all impeachments. The Supreme Court noted that the Constitution grants "the sole Power" to try impeachment "in the Senate and nowhere else" and that the word "try," "lacks sufficient precision to" apply to this case. Judge G. Thomas Porteous brought a suit seeking to bar counsel for the Impeachment Task Force of the House Judiciary Committee from using sworn testimony the judge had provided pursuant to a grant of immunity. The impeachment proceedings were initiated after a judicial investigation of Judge Porteous for alleged corruption on the bench. The Nixon Court noted that here, in contrast, leaving the interpretation of the word "try" with the Senate did not violate any "separate provision" of the Constitution. In addition, several other aspects of the impeachment process have been challenged. to the Special Investigatory Committee under an order granting him immunity from that information being used against him in a criminal case. Judge Porteous argued that the use of his immunized testimony during an impeachment proceeding violated his Fifth Amendment right not to be compelled to serve as a witness against himself. The court rejected his challenge, reasoning that because theUse of such testimony for an impeachment proceedings fell within the legislative sphere, the Speech or Debate Clause prevented the court from ordering the committee staff members to refrain. English, Louderback, and Ritter all involved "misusing their power to appoint and set the fees of bankruptcy receivers for personal profit" Judge Alcee L. Hastings was impeached by the House on 16 articles, including involvement in a conspiracy to accept bribes in return for lenient sentences for defendants. Judge Hastings was convicted by the Senate on eight articles. In addition, Judge Walter L. Nixon Jr. was convicted in a criminal case on two counts of perjury to Judge Hastings. Judge Alcee L. Hastings sought to prevent the House Judiciary Committee from obtaining the records of a grand jury inquiry during the Committee's impeachment investigation. Judge Hastings' argument was grounded in the separation of powers: he claimed that permitting disclosure of grand jury records for an impeachment investigation risked improperly allowing the executive and judicial branches to participate in the impeachment process. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit ruled in favor of Judge Hastings, who was ultimately acquitted of a conspiracy to commit bribery. Judge Walter L. Nixon had been convicted in a criminal trial on two counts of making false statements before a grand jury and was sent to prison. He refused to resign and continued to receive his salary as a judge while in prison. House of Representatives adopted articles of impeachment against the judge and presented the Senate with the articles. Senate invoked Impeachment Rule XI, a Senate procedural rule which permits a judge to be removed from office if he is found guilty of a crime. In Nixon v. United States, the Supreme Court ruled that a challenge to the Senate's use of a trial committee to take evidence posed a nonjusticiable political question. The U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia initially threw out Judge Hastings' Senate impeachment conviction. The decision was vacated on appeal and remanded for reconsideration in light of Nixon v. United States. The district court then dismissed the suit because the Senate had tried his impeachment before a committee rather than the full Senate. The Eleventh Circuit rejected this "absolutist" concept of the separation of powers and held that "a merely generalized assertion of secrecy in grand jury materials must yield to a demonstrated, specific need for evidence in a pending impeachment investigation" individuals on false charges of contempt. The second type of behavior involves misuse of the office for personal gain. Secretary of War William W. Belknap was impeached in 1876 for allegedly receiving payments in return for appointing an individual to maintain a trading post in Indian Territory. In 1912, Judge Robert W. Archbald was impeaching and convicted for using the office to acquire business favors from both litigants in his court and potentiallitigants. And the impeachments of Judges in the office held at the time of the impeachment investigation have, on occasion, been investigated by the House. restricted the power of the President to remove members of the Cabinet without Senate approval. Considering the statute unconstitutional, President Johnson removed Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton. He was impeached shortly thereafter on nine articles relating to his actions. President Johnson was acquitted by a margin by the Supreme Court of the United States on November 14, 1864, after being found guilty by a vote of three to one. The case was the first to be decided by a court of law, rather than a jury, and was the last to be heard by the Senate. bondsmen whereby he received things of value in return for helping bondsman develop corrupt relationships with state court judges. Judge Porteous was convicted by the Senate on all the articles brought against him. Most impeachments have concerned behavior occurring while an individual is in a federal office. However, some have addressed, at least in part, conduct before individuals assumed their positions. For example, in 1912, a resolution impeaching Judge Robert W. Archbald and setting forth 13 articles of impeachment was reported out of the House Judiciary Committee and agreed to by the House. Judge Archbald was impeached by the House and tried by the Senate in the 62 nd Congress. He was convicted on four articles alleging misconduct in his then-current positions as a circuit judge and Commerce Court judge. The articles of impeachment brought against him alleged misconduct in those positions as well as in his previous position as U.S. District Court Judge of the Middle District of Pennsylvania. The article that alleged misconduct was the one that led to his impeachment. The charges against him were dropped the following year. a grand jury concerning his relationship with a man whose son was being prosecuted. The Senate convicted Judge Nixon on two of three articles. In 2010, Judge G. Thomas Porteous Jr. was impeached for participating in a corrupt financial relationship with attorneys in a case before him. He is the first individual to be impeached by the House and convicted by the Senate based in part upon conduct occurring before he began his tenure in federal office. He was convicted on Articles I and II each alleged misconduct beginning while he was a state court judge. as misconduct while he was a federal judge. Article IV alleged that Judge Porteous made false statements to the Senate and FBI in connection with his nomination and confirmation to the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana. On December 8, 2010, he was convicted on all four articles, removed from office, and disqualified from holding future federal offices. It does not appear that any President, Vice President, or other civil officer of the United States has been impeached by the House solely on the basis of conduct occurring before he began his tenure. the manifest injury of the people of the United States." A number of individuals have been impeached for official conduct for an improper purpose. The first type of behavior involves vindictive use of the office. For example, in 1826, Judge James Peck was impeachment for charging a lawyer with contempt, imprisoning him, and ordering his disbarment for criticizing one of the judge's decisions. In 1904, Judge Charles Swayne was impeached by the House and acquitted by the Senate. Among the articles of impeachment was the allegation that he had unlawfully imprisoned several people. Judge Harry Claiborne was impeached for providing false information on federal income tax forms. Report: perjury by the President was "just as devastating to our system of government" Report: Both JudgeClaiborne and Judge Nixon were impeached and convicted for perjury and false impeached. The report concluded that judges are only impeachable for behavior incompatible with the nature of the office they hold. and therefore only impeachable when committed by judges."It is "devastating" for the judiciary when judges are perceived as dishonest," the report said. support this notion. Many impeachments approved by the House of Representatives have included conduct that did not involve criminal activity. Less than a third have specifically invoked a criminal statute or used the term "crime" For example, in 1803, Judge John Pickering was impeached and convicted for, among other things, appearing on the bench "in a state of total intoxication" In 1912, Judge Robert W. Archbald was impeaching and convicted of abusing his position as a judge by inducing parties before him to enter financial transactions with him. Two judges were impeached for appearing on the bench in a state of intoxication. Judge Mark H. Delahay was impeached in 1873 for his "personal habits," including being intoxicated on and off the bench. The Senate voted to convict Judge Claiborne on the first, second, and fourth articles. Various other activities incompatible with.the integrity and impartiality of the administration of justice" amounted to a "misdemeanor," according to the Senate's impeachment bill of 1803. In 1862, Judge West H. Humphrey was impeached and convicted for neglecting his duties as a judge and joining the Confederacy. In 1926 Judge George English was impeaching for showing judicial favoritism which eroded the public's confidence in the court. And in 2009, Judge Samuel B. Kent was impeaches for allegedly sexually assaulting two court employees, obstructing the judicial investigation of this behavior, and making false and misleading statements to agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation about the activity. Judge Kent resigned before the Senate trial was completed. could review a congressional decision that the plaintiff was "unqualified" to take his seat. That determination had turned, the Court explained, "on whether the Constitution committed authority to the House to judge its Members' qualifications" The Court noted that while Article I, Section 5, does provide that Congress shall determine the qualifications of its Members, Article I,. Section 2, delineates the three requirements for House membership. Therefore, the Powell Court concluded, the House's claim that it possessed unreviewable authority was defeated by this separate provision. Judicial review of impeachments could create considerable political uncertainty, if, for example, an impeached President sued for judicial review. The Court was careful to distinguish the situation from Powell v. McC ormack , a case also involving congressional procedure where the Court declined to apply the political question doctrine. That case involved a challenge brought by a Member-elect of the House of Representatives, who had been excluded from his seat pursuant to a House Resolution. The precise issue in Powell was whether the judiciary was allowed to review such a decision. it presented a nonjusticiable political question. It was not just a political question, it was a moral one. It had to be decided by a vote of the people, not by a court of law. It is not a political issue, it is a moral issue. It has to be resolved by a ballot box. It's not a legal question, but a moral question. The answer is yes. It must be resolved. It can't be a legal issue, but it must be decided. The minority concluded that both were accused of committing "public misconduct" integral to their "official duties" The Judiciary Committee had rejected an article of impeachment against President Nixon alleging that he committed tax fraud. One of the articles of impeachment recommended by the House Judiciary Committee against President Clinton also alleged abuse of the powers of his office. That article alleged that the President refused to comply with certain congressional requests for information and provided false and misleading information in response to others. The committee report argued that such conduct "showed contempt for the legislative branch and impeded Congress's exercise of its Constitutional responsibility" of one vote in the Senate. In 1974, the House Judiciary Committee recommended articles of impeachment against President Richard Nixon. The articles alleged that the President, "using the powers of his high office," attempted to obstruct the investigation of the Watergate Hotel break-in, conceal and protect the perpetrators, and conceal the existence of other illegal activity. Second, that he used the power of the office of the Presidency to violate citizens' constitutional rights, "impair[]" lawful investigations, and "contravene[]" laws applicable to executive branch agencies. a judge would fail to qualify for a non-judicial officer. The impeachment and acquittal of President Clinton illustrates this difficulty. While two articles of impeachment were approved by the House, the Senate acquitted President Clinton on both charges. One reading of the minority's position is that certain behavior might be impeachable conduct for a federal judge, but not for the President. However, generating firm conclusions from this result is quite difficult as there may have been varying motivations for these votes. One possibility is that the Senate voted to acquit the President because of political reasons. that the acquittal occurred because some Senators, though agreeing that such conduct merited impeachment, thought the House Managers failed to prove their case. Another possibility is that neither ideological stance was considered, and voting was conducted solely according to political calculations. Congressional materials have cautioned that the grounds for impeachment "do not all fit neatly and logically into categories" because the remedy of impeachment is intended to "reach a broad variety of conduct by officers that is both serious and incompatible with the duties of the office" statements in matters distinct from their official duties. The report noted the President's perjurious conduct, though seemingly falling outside of his official duties as President, nonetheless constituted grounds for impeachment. The minority emphasized that the President was not impeachable for all potential crimes, no matter how minor. impeachment was reserved for "conduct that constitutes an egregious abuse or subversion of the powers of the executive office," the report said. In contrast, the minority views from the report opposing impeachment reasoned that "not all impeachable offenses are crimes and not all crimes are impeachmentachable offenses" congressional precedents reflect three broad types of conduct thought to constitute grounds for impeachment. The House has impeached several individuals for abusing or exceeding the powers of their office. For example, in 1868, amidst a struggle over Reconstruction policy, the House impeached President Andrew Johnson on allegations that he violated the Tenure of Office Act, which was passed in 1864. The current House is expected to vote on whether to impeach President Barack Obama in the coming weeks. The vote is likely to be close, but the House has a history of impeaching presidents. Some articles of impeachment brought against President Clinton were grounded on alleged behavior considered incompatible with the nature of the office of the Presidency. One article was for allegedly lying to a grand jury, and the second, for allegedly obstructing justice by concealing evidence in a federal civil rights action brought against him. The articles noted that by doing this, "William Jefferson Clinton has undermined the integrity of his office, has brought disrepute on the Presidency, has betrayed his trust as President, and has acted in a manner subversive of the rule of law and justice" Some have argued that only criminal acts are impeachable offenses under the U.S. Constitution. Julian Zelizer: The notion that onlycriminal conduct can constitute sufficient grounds for impeachment does not, however, comport with historical practice. In accordance with the understanding of "high" offenses in the English tradition, impeachable conduct could include behavior that violates an official's duty to the country, he says. Zelizer says the Constitution does not define "high Crimes and Misdemeanors," but it was adopted from parliamentary impeachments. offenses are "constitutional wrongs that subvert the structure of government, or undermine the integrity of office and even the Constitution itself" "[O]ther high crimes and misdemeanor[s]" are not limited to indictable offenses, but apply to "serious violations of the public trust" The term "Misdemeanor ... does not mean a minor criminal offense as the term is generally employed in the criminal law," but refers instead to the behavior of public officials. "[H]igh Crimes and Misdemeanors" are thus best characterized as "misconduct that damages the state and the operations of government institutions" judges "hold their Offices during good behaviour" One argument posits that these clauses should be read in conjunction. But the "modern view" of Congress appears to be that the phrase "good behavior" simply designates judicial tenure. The House's impeachment of judges was "consistent" with impeachment of "non-judicial officers," the report says. But one might argue that the range of impeachable conduct differs for judges and non-judges, the report adds. The Constitution does not delineate a standard for impeachment and removal for federal judges, it says. conduct that "br[ought] his court into disrepute, to the prejudice of said court and public confidence in the administration of justice" Some have suggested that the standard for impeaching a federal judge differs from an executive branch official. While Article II, Section 1, of the Constitution specifies the grounds for the impeachment of civil officers as "treason, bribery, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors," Article III, Section1, provides that federal judges can be impeached. ground for impeachment, the "good behavior" phrase simply makes clear that federal judges retain their office for life unless they are removed via a proper constitutional mechanism. The "treason, bribery, and high Crimes and Misdemeanors" clause thus serves as the sole standard for impeachable conduct for both executive branch officials and federal judges. A 1973 discussion of impeachment grounds reviewed the history of the phrase and concluded that the "Constitutional Convention ... quite clearly rejected" a "dual standard" for judges and civil officers. between judges and executive branch officials due to the differing nature of each office. For example, one might argue that a federal judge could be impeached for perjury or fraud because of the importance of trustworthiness and impartiality to the judiciary. The same behavior might not constitute impeachable conduct for an executive branch official. However, given the wide variety of factors at issue, it is uncertain if conduct meriting impeachment and conviction for a non-judicial officer has never been convicted by the Senate. The relative paucity of impeachments of non- judicial officers compared to judges. The committee concluded that, at least with regard to federal judges, impeachment was appropriate in several circumstances. The committee left unresolved whether non-criminal conduct outside of the judicial function could support an impeachment charge. The purposes underlying the impeachment were also left unresolved. The Committee concluded that the impeachment of a federal judge was appropriate if the conduct was connected with the judicial office or the exercise of judicial power. The purpose of the impeachment was to remove the judge from office for a period of time. The impeachment of the judge was not to remove him from office.

ROUGE-1: 82.31, ROUGE-2: 75.41, ROUGE-L: 26.50
BERTScore: 61.86

==============================================
==================== [45/100] ====================
Summary:
programmers, and support specialists], which generally possess higher educational requirements. Blinder also took an occupational approach and created an index of offshorability for hundreds of blue-collar, white-collar and service occupations. He considered the two categories, which included 22.2% of U.S. workers in 2004, too conservative an estimate of potentially offshorable jobs in light of technological and other advances expected to arise in the coming years. He added to the conservative estimate those occupations in category III he ranked as most susceptible to being offshored. Out of 515 service occupations, BLS estimated that 160 may be susceptible to transfer offshore. In 2007, there were some 30 million jobs in these offshorable service-providing occupations. Despite their vulnerability to being offshored, employment in these occupations grew slightly faster than overall service- Providing employment in the 2001-2007 period. The 33 service-Providing occupations found to be most susceptible to offshoring experienced below average employment and wage growth during the period, according to BLS. include whether the job requires face-to-face contact with others, is telecommutable or involves an IT-enabled work process. Computer and mathematical; architecture and engineering; legal; life, physical, and social sciences; business and financial operations; and office/administrative support. Jensen and Kletzer's most offshorable category accounted for 27.4% of all employment in services occupations in 2005. They also found that a service occupation's relative degree of offshorability was positively associated with its level of educational attainment. More offshorable occupations are not low-end jobs, whether measured by wages or by education. The correlation between skill and offshorability is almost zero. Blinder and Krueger used three alternative survey methods to try to determine how many of the jobs that workers held in 2008 were vulnerable to being moved overseas. All three methods found that about one in four U.S. jobs are potentially Offshorable. This is about the same as Blinder's moderate estimate based on an entirely different approach. 9.4% of total U.S. employment in 2000 was found to be in offshorable industries. Both manufacturing and professional services industries were estimated to have above-average percentages of vulnerability to offshoring. Over 12% of employment in the case of manufacturing, and almost 14% in theCase of professional services. They examined the task content of 457 service occupations to rank their relative vulnerability to being offshored. The measures of task content they used were used to rank the relative vulnerability of occupations. and a destination country having few language, institutional, and cultural barriers. The occupational groups identified as being vulnerable to offshoring include office support, auditors and tax preparers, computer programmers and software engineers. They are concentrated in such industries within the service sector as information, finance and insurance, and professional and business services. A study released by the Brookings Institution built upon the work of Bardhan and Kroll, Forrester Research, and others to develop projections of the share of jobs in 246 metropolitan areas that might be lost. Just 2.2% of the jobs in these 246 areas likely to be offshored between 2004 and 2015. Five metro areas might lose somewhat more jobs (between 3.1% and 4.3%) by 2015. Boulder, CO; Lowell, MA; San Francisco, CA; San Jose, CA. and Stamford, CT. Another 23 areas might have between 2.6% and 3.0% of their jobs offshoring. Those metropolitan areas estimated to be most vulnerable to services offsh outsourcing tend to be very populous. having 1 million or more inhabitants. They tend to be located in the Northeast (e.g., Bergen-Passaic, NJ; Boston, MA; and Hartford, CT) and West. They generally have high concentrations of IT jobs or IT-enabled back-office jobs such as data-entry keyers and telemarketers. Jensen and Kletzer developed a different geographically based approach to estimate the share of tradable and nontradable (nonoffshorable) jobs in manufacturing and manufacturing. the movement of work and that less than 1% of these workers had their jobs moved to another country. Forrester Research, Inc. was the source of perhaps the first and most commonly cited statistics on offshoring of service sector jobs. According to its forecast that appears to have been based on discussions with experts, a total of 3.4 million service-sector jobs might move abroad between 2003 and 2015. Half of the total (1.7 million) will be in the service sector. was projected to be relocated outside the United States within the first 7 years of the 12-year period, and half over the following 5 years. Although 3.4 million jobs may sound like a large number, Forrester's forecasted loss of some 300,000 jobs per year on average through 2015 represents a very small share of the jobs typically created and destroyed each year in the U.S. Researchers have mostly focused on determining which jobs are susceptible to being moved abroad and then moving them back. Factory workers have predominantly had less than 12 years of schooling or attained at most a high school diploma. Administrative support and professional workers much more often have taken some college courses or obtained at least a bachelor's degree. The change in the skill (educational) level of jobs being moved abroad has led some to wonder about the impact on the U.S.economy. Still others note that the movement of services jobs to other countries may have different implications for the labor market and public policy. English is the language of the computer industry worldwide. With English, IT services can be provided from many non-English-speaking, comparatively low-wage nations. In some cases, the number of persons with IT and accounting skills reportedly exceeded the immediate needs of their local economies. The number of programmers in China, Eastern Europe, India, and the Philippines is estimated to be in the hundreds of thousands. The domestic firms that utilized these programmers reportedly were pleased with the quality of their work. They were able to make the code fixes needed to avert problems with computer systems when the year 2000 arrived. Recent decades. Technological change and deunionization appear to have accounted for relatively more of the so-called polarization of wages that occurred during the 1980s and 1990s. No database exists that provides a comprehensive answer to the question of how many workers have lost their jobs to offshoring. The only data available on jobs lost to the out-of-country relocation of work come from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics' (BLS's) series on extended mass layoffs. Short- and long-run labor market implications of offshore outsourcing remain unclear. Some observers claimed that the business practice explained much of the "jobless recovery" from the 2001 recession. Some within the public policy community have again asserted that offshoring is contributing to the slow rebound of the labor market from the 2007-2009 recession. While acknowledging that trade and other forms of globalization can cause painful dislocations for those workers who must adjust to changes in the nation's employment structure, many economists agree that it can be beneficial. whether the offshoring of service, unlike production, activities will result in a dwindling supply of entry-level jobs. They also question whether the existing trade adjustment assistance programs can satisfactorily meet the needs of comparatively well-educated office workers. Congress historically has tried to promote U.S. job growth and assist workers who lose jobs through no fault of their own, whether job losses are caused by economic downturns (i.e., cyclical unemployment) or by shifts in the composition of jobs. The extension of offshoring from U.S. manufacturers to service providers has heightened public policy concerns about the extent of job loss and foregone employment opportunities. The overseas relocation of manufacturing work predates by decades the recent wave of services Offshoring. The report synthesizes the information (both empirical and anecdotal) released since the early 2000s on offshore outsourcing's impact on U.s. employment to help policymakers evaluate the adequacy of the nation's retraining and income support programs for workers displaced by greater global economic integration. More than 14 million jobs in 49 service occupations have attributes that could allow them to be sent overseas. No in-person customer servicing required; an IT-enabled work process that can be accomplished via telecommuting. A fairly wide gap between a job's pay in the United States compared to in a destination country; a comprehensive regularly collected data series does not exist on the number of U.S. workers who have lost their jobs to offshore outsourcing. This approach may overstate the. number of jobs that have been or will be lost to offshoring because it does not. consider other factors that may affect employers' decisions. Deloitte Consulting concluded that outsourcing will lose "holy grail" status. In the future, companies will not outsource because it is the latest management fad. Organizations will carefully define core, strategic, and "thought-leadership" functions and will keep those inhouse to retain knowledge, confidentiality, and control over key functions. Some organizations will decide to outsource only short-term. Some, therefore, are cautious about the future pace of moving abroad potentially vulnerable U.S. jobs. benefits the nation as a whole by enabling firms to sell a greater variety of higher quality products to U.S. consumers at lower prices. Some question whether this scenario applies to services offshoring, however. Milberg et al. suggest that companies engaged in Offshoring of service activities may be its chief beneficiaries. They use the profits gained from lower input costs to increase dividends to shareholders, raise stock prices through buybacks, and undertake more mergers and acquisitions rather than reinvesting and promoting growth in the United States. performed in the United States (i.e., structural unemployment) The notion that offshoring depresses job growth in the U.S. appears to underlie support among some policymakers for measures. Some members of the public policy community also support the adoption by other countries of trade and labor policies intended to level the playing field. Still others advocate for limited government intervention as the best means of promoting economic growth. This report does not attempt to sort through all the conflicting views on this issue. Low-wage nations (e.g., Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, China, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Jordan, Lithuania, Mexico, Slovenia, Russia, and Ukraine) Taken together, these developments have allowed U.S.-based companies to increasingly fragment tasks across borders in both manufacturing and information and business services. Relatedly, research suggests that the extension of task fragmentation to service activities accounts for the greater relative contribution of offshoring to increased wage dispersion (inequality) in the United States. Software companies are placing more of their clients' work in a variety of countries, including the "near-shore" markets of Canada and Mexico. Some individual U.S. employers reportedly believe that moving work to nearby Canada, which has fewer cultural differences with the United States than India or the Philippines, reduces their customers' potential antipathy to offshoring. And, despite the cost of labor rising in some Asian nations (e.g., India), there are many others whose low wages continue to draw U.N. jobs. The 2001 recession prompted U.S. employers to achieve further efficiencies by taking advantage of technological innovations. The persistence of these changes over time indicates that domestic outsourcing of formerly in-house functions is a permanent reorganization of how work is performed in the United States. The now widespread dissemination of technologies that enable relatively low cost, good quality, and high speed transmission of voice and data communications has allowed U.s. firms to extend offshoring beyond the jobs of workers that produce goods. Many organizations will also engage in large scale re-insourcing thereby further eroding the outsourcing market. Dell, for example, returned some help services to the United States due to customer dissatisfaction. Some have credited "reshoring" for part of the sector's employment rebound since the 2007-2009 recession's end. Other companies have begun returning call center operations and legal support work to the U.S., specifically to firms located in rural low-cost areas. The outsourcing market is expected to continue to grow. responding to heightened competition from Japanese and European multinational corporations, opened facilities abroad during the 1970s and 1980s. U.S. companies reacted to the back-to-back recessions of the early 1980s by focusing on their core missions and contracting out activities that specialized domestic enterprises could perform more efficiently. Firms also restructured their operations by outsourcing jobs to employees of temporary help agencies, professional and business services establishments (e.g., accounting firms), and independent contractors located located in the United States. provide services (e.g., writers of software code, processors of credit-card receipts, interpreters of CT scans of U.S. hospital patients) Jobs at risk of being offshored thus are both those held by information technology (IT) workers and IT-enabled workers. Events also transpired in other countries that enhanced their ability to export services to the United States and other developed countries. One such event was addressing the so-called Y2K crisis: U.K. firms, in response to a tight supply of computer programmers, turned to companies principally located in India. Despite 9/11, U.S. airline carriers have continued their outsourcing of maintenance jobs overseas. Concern periodically has arisen among U.s. outsourcers over unrest in some regions (e.g., disputes between India and Pakistan) The outsourcing of airline maintenance jobs has increased in places like Singapore, Brazil, the Dominican Republic, and the Philippines, says the report. The report concludes that offshoring in the United States has increased over the past 10 years, but not as much as it did in the early 2000s. Perry: About one-fifth of U.S. companies brought production back from overseas in 2011. He attributed what he regards as a nascent trend to "China's shrinking manufacturing wage and cost advantages" Caterpillar, National Cash Register, Wham-O, Otis Elevator, and Buck Knives are examples of those that have returned production and jobs to the United States, he says. He provides more than 10 companies as examples of Those that have Returned Production and Jobs to The United States.

ROUGE-1: 77.75, ROUGE-2: 71.95, ROUGE-L: 23.27
BERTScore: 56.38

==============================================
==================== [46/100] ====================
Summary:
This questionnaire can be filled out using MS-Word and returned via e-mail to USTSurvey@gao.gov. If you prefer, you may print copies of the questionnaire and complete them by hand. Please use your mouse to navigate by clicking on the field or check box you wish to answer. To select a check box or button, simply click on the center of the box. To change or deselect a checkbox response, simplyclick on the the response field. check box and the ‘X’ will disappear. To answer a question that requires that you write a comment, click on the answer box ____ and begin typing. The box will expand to accommodate your answer. We provide definitions for terms in this survey at or near the point at which the term appears. Please consider these definitions when responding to survey questions. Have there been any reviews of the recent review? [Enter quality of the data? UST management? 4 digit year.] Survey data presented in appendix II are not reliable for state level comparisons. 17 states generally reported having fairly recent data quality reviews, several internal controls on the data, and no significant data quality problems. 26 states and the District of Columbia generally report having some internal controls. 6 states reported having few, if any internal controls, according to our assessment of the reliability of their survey responses. We contacted state officials to clarify survey responses when necessary and used a centralized tracking document to record all changes. We included a series of data reliability questions in the survey to assess the accuracy of the information provided to us by the respondents. We collected information about the databases states used to provide survey data and the internal controls on those databases. We also requested supporting documentation if states noted their database(s) We also asked about whether the data provided were actual or estimates; and the assumptions, data, and calculations used to provided the actual or estimated data for selected questions. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. variability in the ways state officials described how they arrived at responses to certain questions. Some states provided explanations for their responses that were precise and grounded in reasonable mathematical or trend based assumptions, while others noted that their responses were educated guesses. Given the limitations in the information reported from some states, we determined that the survey data are not comparable by state, nor should they be reported using such terms as “actual” sums, budgets, or outlays. Consequently, the data are presented in the body of the survey. for data for a specific year referred to the federal fiscal year. If states were unable to provide data, we asked them to provide us with the starting date of their alternative reporting year. As a result, we present such data in the report as 2005 data. We also interviewed agency officials in a nonprobability sample of eight states to gather additional information regarding selected survey topics. Specifically, we talked with this group of officials in Florida, Iowa, New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Texas, and Utah. and/or significant data quality problems, and/or didn’t provide explanations for their calculations or reported that they were guesses. Overall, given the limitations in the information reported from some states, data reported by states and presented in this appendix should not be used to compare state programs. The GAO is an agency of the legislative branch that reviews federal programs on behalf of the U.S. Congress. To see the full report, go to: http://www.gao.gov/report/50-states. respond can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results. We included steps in both the data collection and data analysis stages to minimize such nonsampling errors. We asked respondents to return the survey by e-mail, fax, or mail by February 3, 2006. We accepted responses to the survey through mid-October 2006. For selected survey questions, where we were able to, we independently corroborated survey data by comparing these data with EPA data. We then followed up with states and EPA as needed about discrepancies. pretests to ensure variation in size of workload and status of the state financial assurance fund. As a result of our pretests, we made changes to some of the survey questions. We sent an announcement on November 18, 2005, of the upcoming survey to state contacts (including state officials). We then interviewed the officials to ensure that the (1) questions were clear and unambiguous; (2) terms used were precise; and (3) data needed to respond to the questions was available to the state officials. We edit-checked all surveys before they were keypunched. We verified the computer programs used to generate survey results. From the population of 51 state contacts who were asked to participate in our survey, we received 50 questionnaires for an overall response rate of 98 percent. We did not receive a questionnaire from South Dakota. We checked the data against hard copies of the surveys to ensure all changes and updates were recorded. When changes took place after a survey waskeypunched, the updates were made in the computer program used to generated survey results and recorded. are the penalties and the circumstances under which they would be imposed? 57. Are there any issues that have not been covered in this survey that you anticipate affecting the availability of public finding for cleanups in the next 5 years? 58. Arethere any additional comments you wish to make regarding the issues in this Survey or other matters related to USTs? Thank you for completing the survey! Please save this file now and send an e-mail with your saved questionnaire file and supporting documentation as an attachment to: USTSurvey@gao.gov. CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery. Visit CNN.com/Travel each week for a new gallery of snapshots from around the world. Visit iReport.com each week to see which photos have been featured in the latest Travel Snapshot gallery. The gallery will feature a new photo each week until the end of the year, with a selection of the best chosen to share with the world at large. For more information, visit CNN.org/Travel. Methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) is a gasoline additive designed to reduce emissions and raise octane. In some cases, MTBE was added to gasoline to fulfill requirements set in the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments to reduce certain types of emissions. Because MTBE dissolves easily in water and does not cling to soil very well, it migrates faster and farther through the ground than other gasoline components. This makes it more likely to contaminate public water systems and private drinking water wells. effects have not been conclusively established, but the federal government has determined it to be a potential human carcinogen. The effects of exposure to MTBE include headaches; eye, nose, and throat irritation; coughs; nausea; dizziness; and disorientation. Low levels of MTBE can make drinking water supplies undrinkable due to its offensive taste and odor. Because of uncertainties about MTBE’s health effects, EPA has not set a national standard for MTBE in drinking water. cooperative agreement with EPA. EPA will undertake a cleanup only when there is a major public health or environmental emergency. In these circumstances, EPA’s involvement is to be limited to stabilizing the immediate situation, with the expectation that further cleanup will be conducted by the state. States are responsible for overseeing cleanup work performed by the party responsible for the contamination and for performing the cleanup at sites where sites where it has been found to be contaminated. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. site as “cleanup initiated” when the release has been confirmed and a case number assigned. According to the EPA definition, however, cleanup initiated requires that the state or responsible party has evaluated the site and initiated physical activity. Cleanup initiated should also be reported in situations where the state has determined that no physical activity is necessary to protect human health and the environment. A Louisiana Underground Storage Tank Program official told us that a state official said a cleanup was underway at the time of the release. risk sites. As of February 2006, the state was only authorizing cleanup work that the fund could pay for within 90 days. Officials generally preapprove cleanup work only at the sites where contamination is most severe. The most urgent category includes releases deemed emergencies, all of which were being actively cleaned up as of August 2006. The remaining categories are ranked based on how soon the release is likely to affect human health and the environment, as well as its impact on the environment. The state categorizes releases into one of four categories. our report is included as appendix IV. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies to the EPA Administrator and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. a. Yes....... No ........ b. Yes......... No ........ c. Yes...... No ........ d. Yes..... No ........ 2. Which of the following types of information does each of the databases you listed above contain? (e.g. location) a. .......................................................... b. ........................... c. ................................................................... d.  ................................. 4. What are the known limitations of the current data ( e.g., data elements that are known to be incomplete, incorrect, or out-of-date)? This term does not include any farm or residential tank of 1,100 gallons or less capacity used for storing motor fuel for noncommercial purposes. The term also includes a septic tank, storm- water or wastewater collection system, flow-through process tank, or liquid trap or associated gathering lines directly related to oil or gas production and gathering operations. A tank situated in an underground area is defined as a tank situated 1.percent or more beneath the surface of the ground. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/energy/energy-storage-tanks/index.html. The EPA is surveying the 50 states as part of a study of how states finance the cleanup of leaking underground storage tank (LUST) sites. We will use the information gathered in this survey to provide the Congress with information about the magnitude of LUST cleanup costs across all 50 states. We are aware of similar survey efforts conducted in the past year by the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation and by EPA’s Office of Underground Storage Tanks. We have discussed our survey with these parties and eliminated overlap where feasible. The objectives of this review were to provide information on the cost in public funding from state and federal sources to clean up known releases from underground storage tanks. For the purposes of the review, we defined public funding as including any money controlled by the federal government. Key contributors to this report are listed in appendix V. of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. The full report can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/23/science/science-and-environment/features/top-10-reports-on-clean-up-from-underground-storage-tanks. do not know if responses for South Dakota would have differed materially from those of the states that completed the survey. From the responses we received, we gathered information about state databases used to track underground storage tank information. We provided states with the definition of public funding and provided data regarding active and closed tanks, confirmed releases, and cleanups initiated and completed. We also provided information about states’ sources of money for cleanup, including state financial assurance funds and federal money to clean up leaking underground storage tanks. We used a data collection instrument (DCI) to systematically and consistently record all available data reliability information. The DCI was then reviewed by an independent person who assessed the accuracy of DCI data entries and the reasonableness of the judgments on the reliability of states’ survey data. As expected, there was wide variability in the level of oversight of the databases states use to track underground storage tank information. There was similar that we used in this report from Treasury’s financial statements sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this review. survey to state officials responsible for underground storage tank programs or, where applicable, for state cleanup funds. The practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce nonsampling error. We sent the e-mail regarding the most appropriate contact to officials named on lists of state contacts from two other professional organizations that also conduct surveys about underground storage tanks. We report all states’ responses to selected questions only in appendix II, because of the known limitations in the reliability of state level comparisons. The survey data are sufficiently reliable as they are used in the body of the report. The survey was focused specifically on federally regulated underground storage tanks, as defined by EPA. A few states reported they were not able to provide us with data specific to such tanks for selected questions. Instead, they generally provided us with either data including a different universe of tanks or data prorated based on the number of federally regulated storage tanks in the state for these questions. Most survey questions that asked about funding for underground storage were answered in the affirmative by the states in which they were asked. discuss each topic of interest. We then calculated a score for each state based on the number of relevant topics they could discuss, as indicated by their survey responses. We interviewed all states that had scores at or above a threshold score that we determined, based on how many states we would need to discuss the relevant topics with to obtain sufficient information for the purposes of this report. We also conducted interviews with regional program officials from EPA’s Underground Storage Tank Program in six EPA regions to gather additional information. states without taking into account the number of such releases in each state. EPA expressed concern about placing an undue burden on states. 37 states and the District of Columbia reported data on number of tanks without viable owners that had known releases. Taking this information into account in distributing LUST Trust Fund money could encourage the remaining states to gather such information as well. In addition, developing national data on the extent to which releases remaining to be cleaned up are attributed to tanks without viability owners would be useful to both EPA and Congress. EPA develops information on states’ needs and performance from semiannual activity reports. According to officials in two states, the information they report in the reports is based on estimates rather than actual performance. EPA regional officials were not aware of reporting problems with the states in their regions that our survey disclosed. The data the state reports is generated by canvassing their regional staff, and the state has found errors in the data corrected data. The state has also reported that the data it reports on its tank numbers and cleanup activities is inaccurate. that the division had been reporting performance data on all tanks regulated by the state, including the aboveground storage tanks. Also undercounting the number of “active tanks’ by excluding tanks that were only temporarily out of service. To help ensure the accuracy of the states’ semiannual activities reports, EPA recommends that the regions review each state’s data submission for reasonableness based on the state's prior reports and the regional program manager's knowledge of the state�s program. Wyoming tracks contaminated sites rather than releases, official says. Arizona program official uncertain of EPA’s definition of cleanups initiated performance measure. Wyoming provides its best estimate of release data, official tells us. The state reports a total of about 1,000 cleanups since the start of the EPA program in 2006. The total number of cleanup initiated cleanups is about 2,000. The number of releases is around 1,500. The EPA reports call for data on releases rather than sites. review of its files disclosed that the program had been reporting duplicate entries and releases that did not meet EPA’s definition. An Oregon Underground Storage Tank Program Coordinator told us that, in the process of cleaning up its database information, program officials found many sites being reported that were duplicates or involved releases that didn't come from regulated tanks. A Maryland Department of the Environment official acknowledged that it has been reporting semiannual performance data incorrectly, and as a result, some of the state's performance activities have been double counted. a.... ........................... None b. .. ........................ ... None c. ............................ None d. ................................... None 5. Is there any additional information about the way your states’ data for UST management is collected, entered, stored, and quality reviewed that would help inform our interpretation of these data? 6. How many new releases from federally regulated USTs did your state confirm in each of the last five federal fiscal years? Is this numbers exact or estimated? 7. Is this data accurate or an estimate? EPA regional officials consider the components of the state formulas, along with additional factors, to determine the actual amount to be distributed to each of the states in their region. Additional factors that may be considered, according to EPA regional officials, include states’ actual need for money in light of such things as funding carryovers from prior years. For the most part, the EPA Regional officials whom we interviewed stated that deviations from the formula distributions, when they occur, are usually relatively minor. The total for the states within each region. In 2005, EPA began collecting information from states on various aspects of their financial assurance funds. According to some EPA officials, however, the data collected were of limited usefulness. One region’s program manager did not expect that the effort would provide any new information, except data to document what he already knew. An EPA headquarters official, who is closely involved with the effort, agreed that the agency's information collection, at most, helped confirm what regions already saw as problem. The goals of this effort included providing a better tool to monitor state financial assurance Funds’ soundness. EPA agreed with our recommendations and provided information on the agency’s plans and activities to address each of them. Regarding our recommendation that EPA ensure that states verify that tank owners and operators maintain adequate financial responsibility coverage, the agency indicated that it has issued draft guidelines that would require inspections of underground storage tanks to assess compliance with financial responsibility requirements. The agency indicated it would strengthen its oversight of the solvency of state assurance funds by improving a recently developed monitoring tool and by developing guidance for its guidance. The agency indicated that it would consider conducting such a study in conjunction with the states. EPA said it would work toward ensuring that state- reported data are consistent with existing EPA definitions and are limited to federally regulated underground storage tanks. Also, EPA stated that it will consider changes to improve the distribution of future LUST Trust Fund money. The agency said it will also work to better focus how EPA distributes program resources to states. For more on this story, visit CNN.com/Impact. the future public funding needs for EPA’s UST program. We recommend that the Administrator, EPA, take the following four actions: Ensure that states verify, on a regular basis, that tank owners and operators are maintaining adequate financial responsibility coverage, as required by RCRA. Assess, in coordination with the states, the relative effectiveness of public and private options forFinancial responsibility coverage to ensure that they provide timely funding for the cleanup of releases. Better oversight of the solvency of state assurance funds to ensure they continue to provide reliable financial responsibility Coverage for tank owners. Financial assurance funds may take on additional liability from tank installers and manufacturers. Some states may discover more releases in the coming years than in past years. The 2005 Act requires each state receiving federal funding to inspect all of their underground storage tanks on a 3-year cycle, beginning after the state inspects tanks that have not been inspected since December 1998. For those states, some state funds already provide such coverage to installers, but this additional liability could strain the resources of some states’ funds. approximately $190 million in fiscal year 2005. The 2005 Act also included several other provisions regarding inspections, operator training, and financial responsibility, among other things. Some of these provisions impose ongoing requirements on states. For example, the inspection provision requires each state receiving federal funding to inspect all of its regulated underground storage tanks at least once every 3 years, beginning after the state has inspected tanks that have not been inspected since December 1998. Effective February 2007, the 2005 Act directs EPA to require that each state receive federal funds either (1) require additional, or secondary, structures that would be required to be inspected, or (2) require inspections of existing structures.  states provided data with gaps or further clarifications needed in key areas, such as the number of release sites awaiting funding. EPA regional officials described this first effort as a collection of baseline information. The agency decided to collect data again in 2006 without changing its method. Results for 2006 were not available as of December 2006. The 2005 Act also included language providing that EPA may withdraw approval of a state fund for financial responsibility coverage without withdrawing approval of the overall state underground storage tank program. States provided information about the estimated total liabilities for underground storage tanks. that currently inspect sites less frequently, the additional inspections, while intended to prevent leaks in the long term, could lead to a spike in the number of releases discovered. For example, officials in Texas told us that underground storage tank facilities in their state are inspected about every 10 years, on average. Releases in this state that may not have otherwise been found for as long as 10 years may be discovered much sooner, leading to an increase in confirmed releases over the next few years. Finding these releases sooner may mean that the contamination would be less extensive. did not comply with applicable regulations or failed to report a release. New Hampshire officials indicated that, while the state has authority for administrative fines and civil penalties in cases involving multiple releases, such actions are not automatically imposed. None of the 20 states that provided comments in response to our survey question indicated that increased penalties were imposed simply based on the occurrence of a second release. Instead, fines and penalties may be assessed if a tank owner’s recalcitrance in achieving and maintaining compliance with operational regulations. The tax has been in effect continuously since 1987, except for a short period in 1990 and the period between December 31, 1995, and October 1, 1997. Since 1987, the fund balance has been growing at an average rate of about $129 million per year. By fiscal year-end 2005, the LUST Trust Fund had collected about $3.7 billion in revenue while appropriations totaled about $1.2 billion, leaving a fund balance of approximately $2.5 billion. States’ revenues from the Lust. 10 states reported they did not spend any of their LUST Trust Fund money on cleanup activities in fiscal year 2005. Regional officials told us that many states prefer to use their money to fund staff positions rather than cleanups. An EPA official in Region 4 took issue with states that do not use LUST trust fund money for cleanups, saying cleanups that could have been performed with the money are not being undertaken because the money is being used for salaries. The official said Region 4 encourages states to fund salaries with LUST funds. EPA has formed a workgroup to examine the issue of how to assess the soundness of state financial assurance funds. Annual appropriations from the LUST Trust Fund have averaged about $71 million in recent years. Typically, about 80 percent of the money is distributed to the states to support their cleanup programs. According to EPA, over the past 10 years, on average, states have used roughly one-third of their Lust Trust Fund money. The guidance had not been made final as of December 2006.  Appropriations from the LUST Trust Fund have been relatively stable since fiscal year 1998. In fiscal year 2005, the states used about two-thirds of their distributions to fund program administration and enforcement activities. EPA uses the balance of the annual appropriations to support cleanup activities on Indian lands and its own cleanup-related activities. The Trust Fund’s annual appropriations represent a relatively small part of many states’ cleanup program revenue in any given year. LUST Fund money used for cleanup work is generally intended to pay for cleaning up releases from tanks without a viable owner. year for a variety of activities. $200 million for cleanups of releases from leaking underground storage tanks. $100 million for activities including onsite inspections, groundwater protection, and enforcement. $55 million for delivery prohibition, operator training, and release prevention and compliance. An additional $50 million per year is authorized from the general fund to cover administrative expenses and other activities. Net revenue to the LUST Trust Fund from taxes on petroleum products totaled $1.2 billion in 2013. The Trust Fund was established in 1998. Federal money from EPA’s Brownfields program can be used to clean up sites contaminated by petroleum under certain circumstances. Only certain governmental organizations, nonprofit organizations, and nonprofit educational institutions are eligible for Brownfields cleanup grants. In fiscal year 2005, EPA provided eligible entities with about $22.3 million in Brownfields grants for cleaning up Sites contaminated with petroleum. No responsible party can be found for the LUST Trust Fund, which was established in the 1970s to help clean up contaminated sites. Department of the Treasury officials responsible for managing the LUST Trust Fund interviewed EPA headquarters and regional officials. We gathered documentation regarding appropriations of money from the fund to EPA, states’ expenditure of fund money, and the balance of the fund and its annual revenues. We selected these sources based on EPA officials’ indications that they were the most appropriate sources for the purposes of this report. We also discussed the reliability of Treasury’s Lust Trust Fund data with knowledgeable EPA and Treasury officials. contaminated soil and water; providing safe drinking water to residents at the site of a tank leak; providing for temporary or permanent relocation of residents; and providing reasonable and necessary administrative and planning expenses directly related to these activities. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (the 2005 Act), enacted in August 2005, expanded the permitted uses of the LUST Trust Fund. It authorizes states to use a portion of their LUST Fund money for inspections and other leak prevention purposes. The 2005 Act authorizes appropriations from the Lust Trust Fund through fiscal year 2011 of $555 million per year. for each of the following categories: (1) administrative activities, including LUST Trust Fund program management, general management and administrative support, program guidance and implementation, and training. (2) enforcement activities including all actions necessary to identify a leaking underground storage tank site’s potentially responsible party; issuance of letters, notices, and orders to the responsible parties; oversight of the cleanups; and activities associated with cost recovery actions. (3) cleanup activities consisting largely of emergency responses, site investigations, exposure assessments, and corrective actions. The 2005 Act also extended until 2011 the tax on petroleum products that capitalizes the federal LUST Trust Fund. EPA also aggregates elements of the states’ semiannual activity reports to measure program performance against the national goals it establishes. For fiscal year 2005, EPA’s goals for the underground storage tank program included (1) completing 14,500 cleanups, (2) completing 30 cleanups in Indian Country, and (3) decreasing newly reported confirmed releases to fewer than 10,000. The 1986 amendments to RCRA established the LUST Trust Fund to finance the cleanup of petroleum releases from underground storage tanks. Until recently, states could use these funds only for cleanup and related administrative and enforcement activities. Within this restriction, trust fund money could be used for the following general categories of activities: testing tanks for leaks when one is suspected; investigating a site to evaluate the source and extent of petroleum; assessing the number of individuals that may have been exposed to petroleum contaminants and the seriousness of exposure. a viable owner. 37 states and the District of Columbia reported numbers of releases that came from tanks without a viable owner in our survey. EPA Office of Underground Storage Tanks officials stated that EPA had not focus how EPA distributes program resources to states. We spoke with regional officials about these apparent discrepancies, as well as about the regions’ processes for distributing money from the LUST Trust Fund. We provided EPA with a draft of this report for its review and releases from leaking underground storage tanks. formula EPA headquarters uses to distribute LUST Trust Fund money to the regions. formula incorporates three components: minimum distribution of $300,000 per state; need-based amount; and performance-based bonus to states that meet or exceed national averages for cleanups initiated and completed. The distribution formula does not consider the number of releases from tanks without a viable owner in various states, nor does it consider the percentage of the population relying on groundwater for potable water. The formula also doesn't consider the numbers of underground storage tanks and releases in the state. annual letter with financial information supporting their ability to pay. Owners or operators that choose private insurance for financial responsibility coverage must pay annual premiums to maintain coverage. EPA does not provide states specific guidance on whether or how frequently states should engage in routine verification of financial responsibility Coverage. Most states reported to us that they attempted to checkFinancial responsibility coverage on a regular basis. Only about one-third of the states reported that they required annual proof that tank owners or operators were maintaining coverage. The remaining states generally report that they checked this coverage. As of September 30, 2005, 37 states had funds that met federal requirements for financial responsibility, according to EPA. An additional 6 states had such funds in the past but these funds no longer provided coverage for new releases. 7 states and the District of Columbia have never had financial assurance funds that were approved by EPA to provide financial responsibility coverage. The funds in each of the six states that stopped providing financial responsibility Coverage did so after a certain deadline. Tank owners and operators in these states now demonstrate financial responsibility covered by these funds. Twenty-three states reported cases of inadequate coverage in the past 5 years. States used somewhat different definitions of what constituted inadequate financial responsibility coverage. In general, states said they counted cases as having inadequate coverage when an owner or operator either (1) had not maintained coverage or (2) had maintained coverage but did not have proof of coverage at the time the state requested it. The federal government says it has no plans to require tank owners to prove they have adequate financial responsibility insurance in the next five years.  states that do not check financial responsibility coverage on an annual basis may not know if owners or operators are maintaining required coverage. Many states could not provide information on the extent of inadequate financial responsibility in their states for the past 5 years. If states do not verify coverage on a routine basis, it may be difficult for them to know whether owners or operator will have required coverage in the event of a release. If the required coverage is not in place when a release occurs, the release may not be detected. not know the number of times public funds had been used in these types of situations in the past. Checking financial responsibility coverage helps to ensure that owners or operators maintain adequate coverage as required by federal law. Some options that owners and operators can choose for coverage either require annual updates or are often renewed annually. Owners or operators that self-insure, or choose to demonstrate that they have sufficient assets to cover costs resulting from a release, must prepare an insurance application. For more information, visit the Federal Insurance Commission's website. and type of UST cleanups in your state? Sources of Funding for Cleanup Public funding: Includes any funding controlled and/or provided by state and federal agencies. Do not include funds spent by federal, state, and local governmental agencies to clean up releases from tanks they either own or operate. These funds would be considered to be provided types of state cleanup funds: (1) state financial assurance funds that cover the cleanup of contamination from federally regulated USTs, and (2) funds that are devoted solely to the cleanup from tanks without a viable owner. state money so that LUST Trust Fund money can be used for cleanups. EPA generally relies on states to ensure that tank owners and operators comply with federal financial responsibility regulations. EPA does not provide specific guidance to the states as to whether or how frequently they should verify financial responsibility coverage. States are not required to report data to EPA on the number of releases from tanks without a viable owner. EPA is ideally situated, through its existing relationship with state program officials throughout the country, to shed light on this issue. State financial assurance fund: Any state fund used to pay for cleanups of releases from federally regulated USTs. We recognize that in some cases a state’s fund may cover tanks without a viable responsible party as well as other types of tanks. We do not make a distinction between funds that EPA has approved as a financial responsibility mechanism and those that EPA hasn’t approved. In those cases where a state fund is dedicated solely to coverage of tankswithout a viableresponsible party, the survey provides a separate space to answer questions. covered by the state’s fund, the state expects that more than 95 percent of releases in its current backlog will be cleaned up using at least some public funding. State laws addressing when a specific owner or operator is considered to be responsible for a release can affect who pays for cleanups. For example, Michigan program officials previously told us that the state's causation standard exacerbates the funding problem for tanks without a viable owner. The state must prove that the present owner/ operator is responsible before it can be held responsible for. soon decided that funding staff positions was more cost effective than performing the cleanup and pursuing cost recovery, which can be an expensive and time-consuming process. By funding additional staff positions rather than cleanup activities, states were often able to identify the responsible parties and force them to do the cleanups, thereby avoiding the time and expense of pursuing cost-recovery actions. Because they have state money available for cleanup efforts, states can use the federal money for cleanup activities. A Region 6 official told us that some states view the cost recovery process as a deterrent to using the federal funds. EPA-defined site cleanup costs: “All costs associated with site response concerning prevention or mitigation of threats to public health, welfare, or the environment that may occur by a release (or suspected release) of petroleum from an underground storage tank.” These costs include emergency responses, site cleanup. Responsible party funding: Includes both direct expenditures by responsible parties (for example, a tank owner paying out-of-pocket for all or a portion of the costs of cleanup) and indirect expenditures. after June 1995 because it had insufficient funds to pay existing and future claims. Michigan state officials reported that several other funds provided cleanup money for underground storage tanks in 2005. Seven states and the District of Columbia have never had funds that provided financial responsibility coverage. In these states, tank owners and operators use other ways of demonstrating financial responsibility Coverage, primarily private insurance and self-insurance, according to our survey. The Clean Michigan Initiative Bond Fund can be used for many activities, such as waterfront improvements and cleanup of contaminated lake and river sediments. While they never had financial assurance funds, some states have provided cleanup funds to address releases from underground storage tanks. Four of these states reported paying for such cleanups from state sources in 2005. Delaware, for example, reported spending $1 million in 2005 from a reimbursement fund for 240 sites. Other states assist or have assisted owners and operators with cleanup by operating insurance-type mechanisms. In the state of Washington, for instance, the state’s reinsurance program helps owners and Operators obtain affordable pollution liability insurance by assuming part of the risk. States may have releases from tanks without a viable owner in their backlog. Maintaining adequate financial responsibility coverage ensures that money will be available to clean up releases from underground storage tanks. The longer contamination from these releases is left in place, the greater the potential becomes for the contamination to spread. The farther these contaminants are allowed to spread, the chance becomes that they will contaminate drinking water and other sensitive resources, potentially putting human health and the environment at risk. We asked states about that they require more urgent cleanup. Under the principle of “the polluter pays,” tank owners and operators are primarily responsible for the costs of cleaning up contamination from their leaking tanks. RCRA requires these owners to obtain some form of financial responsibility coverage to demonstrate that they have access to resources to cover cleanup costs. To avoid funding shortages, many states developed financial assurance funds, at least in part to ensure that releases are cleaned up in a timely manner. In the event of a release, tank owners should seek financial assurance coverage. The approach that different states use regarding who pays for the cleanup of leaking underground storage tanks can affect the percentage of releases in a state that are cleaned up using at least some public funding. One such approach is whether a state has chosen to set up a financial assurance fund that provides financial responsibility coverage for tank owners. Nearly all states reported to us in our survey that they use public funding to clean up releases from tanks without a viable owner. Four states reported that they may wait until the property on which the leaking tank owners are covered by these funds usually pay a relatively small deductible. EPA estimates that releases cost about $125,000 to clean up. Most state financial assurance funds charge a deductible of $25,000 or less. Twelve states described the circumstances under which penalties could be imposed on tank owners for multiple, or repeated, releases. Officials in several states indicated that penalties were not usually imposed simply if multiple releases occurred. Rather, most states imposed penalties on the basis of evidence that the tank owner was responsible for the release, the survey found. The survey was based on responses from tank owners in 12 states. cleaned up using public funds is likely to decline in the future. Some states that do not use their financial assurance funds to provide financial responsibility coverage for newly identified releases, such as Florida and Arizona, expect particularly sizable declines. These states expect that owners or operators will use private sources of financial responsibility. coverage to pay for the cleanup of most releases identified in primarily through private insurance, according to state officials. Florida. Although the state’s financial assurance fund stopped providing financial responsibility Coverage for new releases in 1998, it is having difficulty paying for all of its cleanups. The state fund is only able to actively conduct cleanup work at about one-third of the remaining sites. years, while only 7 states and the District of Columbia reported no cases. The number of cases involving inadequate financial responsibility coverage may indicate that at least some public funds will be used to clean up a release that otherwise would have been paid for by a responsible party. For example, according to Florida officials, the state has cleaned up about 350 sites annually in past years using public funding. Of these sites, approximately three to four sites per year involved responsible parties that would have paid for the release. did not maintain adequate financial responsibility coverage. In our survey, Florida estimated an average cost of $380,000 in public funds to fully address each release requiring public funds. Florida may have spent more than $1 million per year on such sites in the past. Officials in three additional states—New Jersey, Texas, and Utah—also told us that public funds could be used in cases involving inadequate financial responsibility Coverage. They did not say if they would use such funds, but they did say they could. as about $207 million. Pennsylvania, Florida, Texas, New Jersey, and California account for more than half of the total balance. State taxes on gasoline and other fuels accounted for about $1.3 billion (92 percent) of this income to state funds. States reported that financial assurance funds also received revenues totaling about $42 million (3 percent) from fees paid by tank owners and operators. Only four states’ financial assurance. funds collected tank fees but not gasoline taxes in 2005. projections on recent trends, although officials in a few states specifically noted that they expected to identify fewer releases in the future. Most states use financial assurance funds to pay for cleaning up releases from underground storage tanks, with most of the revenues coming from state gasoline taxes. Lack of timely cleanup is a concern because the longer pollution from releases is left in place, the greater the potential for it to spread, further placing human health and the environment at risk. EPA officials are responsible for determining whether a financial assurance fund is financially sound. State financial assurance funds generally pay for cleaning up releases from tanks. Some states may not have sufficient resources to ensure that these cleanups are performed in a timely manner. Officials in nine states reported in our survey that their funds limit the amount of cleanup work they finance based on funding availability. North Carolina. The revenues to the state’s financial assurance fund have not been sufficient in recent years to address all of the fund’‘s high-cost, high-risk’ releases. State financial assurance funds must be financially sound, according to EPA guidance. EPA can withdraw approval if a fund no longer provides coverage that ensures timely and adequate cleanup of releases. EPA would be concerned about the soundness of a state financial assurance fund if the funding levels or claim processing time caused undue delays in cleaning up releases. In Texas, for example, claims substantially exceeded revenues during the early years of the state’sFinancial assurance fund. By 1992, the fund had a backlog of unpaid funds. bills totaling about $170 million. This amount exceeded the fund’s annual income by approximately 300 percent. In order to catch up, the fund temporarily slowed down some cleanup work. Even though the fund stopped accepting new releases after December 22, 1998, state officials expect it to remain in place at least until 2008. EPA monitors the soundness of state financial assurance funds; this task is carried out by EPA regions, according to the agency's 1993 guidance on the subject. This guidance suggested several steps that regions could use to adequately monitor the funds. The 2005 Act included language providing that, if a state diverts resources from its financial assurance fund, EPA may not distribute a certain portion of LUST appropriations to that state for enforcement purposes. This provision affects only the 37 states whose financial assurance funds still provide financial responsibility coverage for new releases. Officials we interviewed in Pennsylvania and South Carolina regarding this issue were uncertain about the 2005 Act’s impact on future diversions. Two states even commented in their responses to our survey that they anticipated diversions in 2006. Of the 43 states that have had financial assurance funds, 16 reported in our survey that they had diverted a total of nearly $435 million from their funds between 2001 and 2005. Officials in most of these states reported that the diverted amounts went to the state’s general fund or to offset state budget shortfalls. Diversions may also limit some states’ ability to pay for cleanups under certain circumstances, the authors say. They say states may sometimes decide to withdraw or withhold money from state financial assurance Funds. diverted funds for specific programs, such as Brownfields grants and loans, a lead- based paint removal program. Officials we interviewed in two states where diversions occurred reported a negative impact on the state program’s ability to clean up sites. In Florida, for example, $20 million was diverted in 2002. As a result, financial assurance fund managers had to adjust the threshold for cleanup, meaning that the cleanup of less urgent releases, which otherwise would have been addressed, was delayed. State financial assurance funds may also be affected by future natural disasters, such as hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005. As late as June 2006, the impact of the flooding caused by these hurricanes on Louisiana’s financial assurance fund was not yet fully known, according to a state official. If all underground storage tanks that could have been affected by the flooding turn out to have had releases, the workload of the state assurance fund would increase by 25 percent. Payouts from the state guarantee fund would also increase by approximately $4. states about topics such as their use of LUST Trust Fund money, restrictions within their state financial assurance fund on accepting claims. We selected this sample of states in order to discuss as many of our topics of interest as possible within a limited number of interviews. To select the states, we first reviewed all states’ responses to survey questions related to the relevant topics to determine which states would be able to participate in the survey. We then selected the states based on their responses to the survey questions. the state’s unobligated balance of federal LUST Trust Funds, if any? Is this an exact number or an estimate? State’S unobliged balance ofFederal LUST trust funds. How do responsible parties who have active federally regulated USTs in your state demonstrate financial responsibility? Please list the number of tanks covered by the various available financial responsibility mechanisms below. Is there any additional information about the LUST Fund amounts listed above that would help inform our interpretation of your responses to these questions? each loss and insulating the primary insurer from losses greater than a certain amount. In the case of a $1,000,000 policy, for example, Washington’s reinsurance program is responsible for settlements over $75,000. At federal fiscal year-end 2005, state financial assurance funds in 39 states held unexpended balances of approximately $1.3 billion. Four states did not have or did not report a fund balance. As shown in figure 8, individual states’ fund balances ranged as high as $2 billion. Many states have maximum limits on the overall balance of their funds. If a state’s maximum limit is reached, its fund ceases collecting revenues from one or more of its revenue sources until the fund balance drops below a minimum threshold. For example, Idaho has not collected certain fees for its fund since 1998 when the balance of its fund exceeded $30 million. The fund will again begin collecting revenue from these fees once its balance falls below the minimum threshold, an official says. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/state/financial-assurance-funds/index.html. Q27: Is your state fund limiting the number of claims it accepts based on the amount of funds it has available to pay for those claims? Q27: What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? Q28: What was the status of your state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner as of September 30, 2005? Q29: What is your state's financial assurance fund's priorities for paying claims to conserve funds? Q30: What are the priorities you set for your fund? claims against the state financial assurance fund after a certain date? Date after which claims will no longer be accepted No decision made to stop accepting claims......... 35. How capable is your state’s financial assurance. fund of meeting future demands upon it? . Able to meet all......................................................................... Able to meeting most .................................................................... Able to met some ................................................................... Not able. 36. As of September 30, 2005, had your state decided to stop collecting revenues for the state. financial assurance Fund after acertain date? fund over the next 5 years, compared with the annual revenues accrued to the fund in the past year? Large increase................ Moderate increase......... Stay about the same...... Moderate decrease........ Large decrease............... a. What was the amount of the outstanding claims (claims received by the state program for which funds have not yet been obligated) on your state’s financial assurance fund as of September 30, 2005? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Outstanding claims ......................... $ 33. If applicable, for what purposes did your state divert UST financial assurance funds? How much was deposited into your state’s financial assurance fund in the past year? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Amount deposited........................... a. Is amount of funds it has available to pay for those claims? Yes ....................... No......................... b. Is your state fund setting priorities for paying claims to conserve funds? No ....................... Yes...................... d. What are the eligibility dates for releases? [Fill in either or both dates as applicable.] [Enter mm/dd/yy.] e. Are there other restrictions on accepting and paying claims? provide this amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05).] Is this an exact number or an estimate? Total outlays................................... a. On what date does the year for which you are reporting start? b. Enforcement costs .................... c. Site cleanup costs ..................... d. Total costs ................................ e. According to EPA, states may sometimes not spend a given year’s entire LUST Trust Fund award in the year the funds are provided. Over the past 5 years, how many cases has your state encountered in which tank owners did not have adequate financial responsibility? Is this an exact number or an estimate? If applicable, for what purposes did your state divert funds from the fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner? As of September 30, 2005, had your state decided to stop accepting new years or longer...................................................................................... State does not check financial responsibility..................................................... ........................................................................... 55. Does your state ever impose penalties on responsible parties for multiple releases from federally regulated USTs? Yes ....................... No......................... Go to next question. How frequently, if at all, does your state check whether a tank owner’s financial responsibility is current? At least annually ................................................................................................ Every 1 to 2 years .............................................................................................. Every 3 years. As events warrant (e.g. upon tank installation or upgrade, upon a release).. d. State does not check financial responsibility ................................................ ....................................................................... 54. Of the 54 states surveyed, 54 said they check tank owners’ financial responsibility on a regular basis. Financial test of self-insurance: c. Corporate guarantee: d. Insurance coverage: e. Surety bond: f. Letter of credit: g. Trust fund set up by owner or operator: h. Bond rating test: i. Financial test (local government only): j. Guarantee from another local government or the state: k. A dedicated fund: l. The number of tanks covered by the various financial responsibility mechanisms: 52. Is there any additional information about how you calculated the number of Tanks covered? What was the amount of the outstanding claims (claims received by the state program for which funds have not yet been obligated) on your state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner as of September 30, 2005? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Obligated ...................................... 42. During the past 5 years, what amount of funding, if any, did your state divert for purposes other than those related to claims against the state fund? 43. As of September30, 2005, had your state decided to stop collecting revenues. This amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05)? Yes......................... No .......................... b. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year 29. How much of the amount deposited into your state’s financial assurance fund in the past year was from each of the following sources? A. Flat rate fees assessed on tanks. b. Fees/taxes assessed on a per-unit basis on fuel(s) c. Interest ....................................... d. Cost recovery. or an estimate? a. Public funding spent to clean up tanks WITH a viable owner ....... b. Publicfunding spent toClean up tanks without a viable owners........................................... c. Is this the total amount ($0) spent (in actual outlays) in the past year for the public funding portion of cleanups at federally regulated UST sites? Yes .................... No...................... d. Why is this amount different? e. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year g. How did you calculate the amount of public funding? assessed on a per-unit basis on fuel(s)................................ c. Interest ............................................ d. Cost recovery .................................. ...... ...... ...... 40. What do you anticipate will happen to revenues to your state's fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner over the next 5 years, compared with the annual revenues accrued to the fund in the past year? Large increase................ Moderate increase......... Stay about the same...... Moderate decrease........ Large decrease............... a. What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? EPA and states have made progress in cleaning up releases from underground storage tanks. Of the almost 450,000 releases confirmed as of fiscal year-end 2005, cleanups had been initiated for about 93 percent and completed for about 74 percent. About $4.0 million of these grants were awarded for direct cleanup work, $13.3 million for site assessments, and $5.0million for revolving loan fund programs. Table 1 shows key tank- related data elements reported by EPA as of September 30, 2005. The Congress also took action through the 2005 Act to reduce the use of MTBE in gasoline. States reported that completing the cleanup of approximately 54,000 known releases from leaking underground storage tanks would likely require substantial amounts of public funds from state and federal resources. The public cost of cleaning up releases from tanks without a viable owner, as well as the number of releases in states’ cleanup backlogs that lack a viable owners, is not fully known, according to the states. The Clean Air Act Amendments were passed in 1990. Cleaning up known releases from leaking underground storage tanks would cost an estimated $12 billion in public funds from state and federal sources. States were unable to estimate the cost of cleaning up more than another 8,000 releases whose cleanup will require at at least some public funds. Tank owners or operators will pay the entire costs to clean up another 34 percent of these releases, according to state officials. States reported that they did not know whether any public funds would be used toClean up most of the remaining 13 percent of releases. About 11 percent of the approximately 117,000 releases that have not yet been fully cleaned up came from such tanks. The full extent of releases from tanks without a viable owner is unknown. 11 states reported that they did not know how many of the releases in their backlogs were from tanks with no owner. 17 states reported there were approximately 4,000 Releases from tanks for which they had not yet determined whether a viable owners was in place. The actual number could be much higher for two reasons. least some public funds. Nearly half of these releases will require $100,000 or more to fully clean up, with about 5 percent requiring $500,000. Just over half of the approximately 117,000 releases that states reported in our survey had not yet been fully cleaned up will be cleaned up using that they expect to spend public funds to clean up a total of about 16,700. Using these estimates, we determined that the total cost toClean up releases projected to be identified in the next five years in these states could be around $2.5 billion. EPA estimates that a release costs about $125,000 on average to clean up. Proving responsibility becomes difficult in cases where releases have occurred in the past. If responsibility cannot be established, the state must then fund any cleanup of the site. EPA has stated that releases that have contaminated groundwater are generally more complicated and more expensive toClean up than releases that haven't. The cost can vary based on several factors, including the extent of contamination, the cleanup method selected and the presence of MTBE or groundwater contamination. In 2005, these states confirmed a combined 8,000 releases, compared with their projections of an average of about 7,400 releases per year for the next 5 years. In general, state officials told us that they based their projections on releases they had identified in the past. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services says it has no immediate plans to change the way it releases drugs and other drugs. The agency says it will continue to work with state and local governments to identify and prevent drug and alcohol abuse. an exact number or an estimate? How did you calculate the number of new releases from USTs your state confirmed in each of the last five years? How many new releases do you estimate that your state will confirm over the next five years. How many releases from federally regulated USTs do you expect your state to confirm in the next 5 years? An estimate of how many releases your state is likely to confirm over that period of time. An estimated number of releases that you think your state could confirm in that time period. 9/30/05)? Yes .................... No...................... h. On what date does the year for which you are reporting start? 18. Is there any additional information about the amounts of public funding listed above that would help inform our interpretation of your responses to these questions? 19. What additional sources of public funds for LUST cleanups, if any, do you believe have a high probability of becoming available in the next 5 years? 20. What were the primary factors you considered in making an assessment of the probability that any of the current sources of. public funding for Lust cleanups will no longer be available in. the next five years? investigations, exposure assessments, the planning and design of corrective action, and the conduct, management and oversight of long-term remedial corrective actions. How did you estimate the number of releases for which EPA-defined site cleanup costs will be paid for exclusively by responsible parties? How many releases in the current cleanup backlog that will require at least some amount of public funding after September 30, 2005, excluding funds already spent on these cleanups? And how many would you estimate will require public funding amounts in the following ranges? a. $0 - $99,999 ............................................... b. $100,000 - $200,000 ...................................... next five years? b. Estimated number of new releases over the next five years that will require at least some amount of public funding to clean up? c. How many of these new releases do you estimate will require some public funding? 9. EPA computes your state’s “cleanup backlog” by subtracting the cumulative number of cleanups completed from the total number of releases completed over the past five years. For more information, go to the EPA website or go to www.epa.gov/cleanup. What do you estimate is the average cost in public funds to fully address each release that involves MtBE? How did you estimate the number of releases that fall into each category of funding? 15. Based on your experience with cleanups of leaking federally regulated USTs that require some amount of public funding, what do you estimates the cost to address each of these releases? 16. What do you think the cost would be in the event of another MtBE release in the near future? 17. What would the cost in the future be if MtBE were to be replaced with a new system? What do you estimate is the average cost in public funds to fully address each release that impacts groundwater at levels requiring cleanup? How did you estimate these average costs in public funding? 16. In the past year, what was the total amount spent (in actual outlays) to pay for the public funding portion of cleanups at federally regulated UST sites? [If possible, if possible, we would like to hear from you about how much you spent on cleanups in the last year] of confirmed releases. Based on the numbers you provided above, your state’s cleanup backlog, as of September 30, 2005 is: 0. Is this number correct? Yes .................... No...................... a. What is the correct number? Please refer to this number when answering questions about your state's cleanup backlog in completing the remainder of this survey. 10. Considering the number of releases in your state.”, how many involve MtBE at levels requiring cleanup? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Number of releases with MtBE. as of September 30, 2005, the responsible party was unknown, unwilling, or unable to perform the needed cleanup (for example, “orphaned” or abandoned tanks). How many releases in your state’s cleanup backlog, identified above, come from tanks without a viable owner? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Number of releases ......................... a. How did you calculate the number of releases in. your state's cleanup backlog that come from Tanks without a viability owner? able to perform the cleanup? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Number of releases .......................... a. How did you calculate the number of releases in your state’s cleanup backlog for which the state has not yet determined whether a responsible party is known, willing, and able to perform cleanup? 23. In the past year, how much public funding from all sources was spent (in actual outlays) on cleaning up releases from USTs, both WITH and WITHOUT a viable owner? If possible, provide these amounts for the latest federal fiscal year, 10/1/04. spent to clean up releases from USTs with and without a viable owner. How much do you estimate it will cost to complete the remainder of the cleanups for all of these releases? None ................. Go to Q25. a. How did you estimate the cost to. complete the rest of theCleanups for the backlog of releases from. USTs without a. viable owner? Go toQ25.b. For the purposes of the following questions, please consider two questions.

ROUGE-1: 74.71, ROUGE-2: 69.33, ROUGE-L: 21.30
BERTScore: 49.94

==============================================
==================== [47/100] ====================
Summary:
The study concluded that without additional water management actions, a wide range of future imbalances in supply and demand are plausible. The completed Basin Studies also identified, with varying degrees of specificity, possible adaptation strategies to address the projected effects of climate change on water resources. The study noted that the purpose of identifying these strategies was not to select a single, best strategy, but rather to recognize that there are various ways to address projected water imbalancedances in the basin. Each approach has positive and negative implications that should be considered in future planning efforts. U.S. Global Change Research Program: Changes in the climate in the United States and its coastal waters have altered—and will continue to alter—the water cycle. Warming temperatures, changes in precipitation patterns, rising sea levels, and more frequent and intense storms affect water resources in a number of ways. Increased flooding in some areas and drought in others, and inundation and erosion in coastal areas. With aging water management infrastructure with limited funding for maintenance and construction. Precisely how and to when and how much water is available. navigation, and recreation; protecting life, health, and property in the face of risks posed by freshwater resources; and protecting coastal and ocean resources as rising sea levels and changes in storm frequency, intensity, and duration impact coastal infrastructure. Adaptation is defined by the National Research Council as adjustments in natural or human systems to a new or changing environment. It exploits beneficial opportunities or moderates negative effects, according to the council's definition of Adaptation. The National Institute of Standards and Technology has published a report on Adaptation to Climate Change. The report was published by the Institute of Science and Technology. Climate change has the potential to affect many aspects of the environment and society in which water resource management plays an active role. A 2011 federal interagency review of the potential impacts of climate change on water resources identified four interrelated areas of concern for water resource managers. Assuring an adequate water supply for multiple needs, such as drinking water, agriculture, energy production, industrial uses, is one of the areas of greatest concern to water managers. The U.S. Geological Survey says climate change is expected to continue and increase in intensity in some areas of the nation. need to be regularly monitored for effectiveness and plans need to incorporate new information about risks, lessons learned, and modified priorities. A 2009 study collaboratively produced by the Corps, NOAA, Reclamation, and USGS concluded that the options for responding to the effects of climate change will vary by location. evaluating options will likely require a partnership between federal, state, and local interests to attain consensus among water managers and users. In 2009, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers released a report on the state of the nation's water resources. training courses for federal and nonfederal resource management professionals. In 2012, the agencies implemented an online course on incorporating climate change into water resource planning. In 2013, the first two pilot residence courses were offered. The courses address climate impacts on surface hydrology and on water demand for irrigated crops. The online course was designed to provide students with waterresource planning knowledge, while the residence courses offer opportunities for gaining hands-on experience in applying that knowledge, according to the program’s website. The Corps, Reclamation, and others are collaborating in a number of efforts to incorporate climate science into water management tools. Reclamation is coleading two of Interior’s Landscape Conservation Cooperatives in the Colorado River Basin area. Interior is working to identify resources that are particularly vulnerable to climate change and implement coordinated adaptation responses for half of the nation by September 30, 2013. The Landscape conservation Cooperatives will provide products and services, such as climate change computer models and vulnerability assessments, to help resource managers put them into action on the ground. organizational culture, which are necessary elements for a collaborative working relationship. The Corps and Reclamation have made collaboration a key element of their adaptation policies and plans. The draft performance metrics for climate adaptation in the Corps’ 2013 Army Campaign Plan includes a target for the number of products developed in collaboration with other water resource agencies for adaptation planning and action. Under Interior’s 2013 Climate Change Adaptation Policy, Reclamation is to integrate climate change adaptation strategies into its policies and practices by, among other actions. According to the website, these courses are collectively designed to provide a professional development and training series that will help managers assess climate change impacts across the spectrum of natural resources. The Corps and Reclamation have collaborated with each other and other agencies in a manner that is generally consistent with practices that we have previously identified as important to helping enhance and sustain collaboration among federal agencies. In 2005, we reported that collaboration—broadly defined as any joint activity that is intended to produce more public value than could be produced when organizations act. on its climate change adaptation pilots. Each study addresses a central question designed to help the Corps, officials say. For example, because the reliability of a planned flood reduction project could depend on how climate change affects future flooding, the Corps launched a pilot study. Based on the expert panel’s findings, the pilot team is integrating climate data into the Corps’ flood model to project future river conditions, they say. Corps officials told us that the information developed by the corps’ climate change climate change pilots is being incorporated into guidance. This pilot study’s results supports the Corps’ effort to design an approximately $1.8 billion flood risk reduction project on the Red River of the North. According to Corps officials, the pilot study successfully adapted existing tools and data to project future flooding. Corps officials told us that climate data indicated a trend of flooding consistent with climate change projections. In accordance with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Flood Risk Reduction Program, the study was conducted on a pilot basis. The pilot study was designed to test existing guidance and contribute to the development of new guidance. The Corps is conducting 15 pilot studies nationwide to test different methods and frameworks for adapting to climate change. Reclamation is conducting Basin Studies to develop strategies to mitigate climate change impacts on water supplies. Both agencies have also begun integrating what they have learned into their Corps and Reclamation policies and program guidance. The Corps plans to initiate 1 additional pilot in 2013, according to the Corps’ September 2012 report. The agency’s goal is to create a policy and guidance framework that will support the implementation of practical, nationally consistent, legally justifiable, and cost-effective adaptation strategies. of climate change on the Corps’ business areas would likely be negative, positive, or a mix of both. The analysis found, for example, that increasing air temperatures may have an effect on glaciers that could negatively impact Corps business areas such as navigation, flood and coastal storm damage reduction, ecosystem restoration, and emergency management. As part of the high-level analysis, the Corps also identified a number of adaptation priorities. To address its priority of developing more refined policies, the Army Corps of Engineers has created a climate change action plan. specifically, policymakers are increasingly viewing adaptation as a risk-management strategy to protect vulnerable sectors and communities. Climate change adaptation planning frameworks generally consist of four key elements that are reviewed and revised as needed as new information emerges. These four elements are the following: Establish a mandate to address climate change with clearly articulated adaptation goals, objectives, and measures of success toward meeting goals. Assess and understand the risks, vulnerabilities, and opportunities posed by climate change by determining (1) what aspects of the climate are changing and over what periods. The Corps has constructed and continues to operate, maintain, and rehabilitate a large inventory and wide variety of water management infrastructure. Reclamation’s climate adaptation efforts fall within the larger effort by Interior to implement Executive Order 13514. In 2013, Interior adopted a policy directing the agency to integrate climate change adaptation strategies into its operations, policies, programs, and planning. See appendix I for more information on the Corps’ and Reclamation's organization and infrastructure. and water supply, while reducing impacts of flood damages and other natural disasters. hoc responses, but other federal programs as well. As stated in a 2010 National Research Council report, increasing the nation’s ability to respond to a changing climate can be viewed as an insurance policy against climate change risks. Since 2009, as directed by executive order or required by law, the Corps and Reclamation have taken steps to assess water resource and infrastructure vulnerabilities. Officials from both agencies told us that as they develop the necessary guidance, they plan to implement specific adaptation strategies and share policies and program guidance. For over 230 years, the Corps has led the development and stewardship of much of the nation’s public water resources. The Corps’ Civil Works Program plans and manages water for transportation, recreation, energy, wildlife habitat, aquatic ecosystems, for climate change information and tools to support long-term planning for time scales of 5 years and more. The second document, published in 2013, described the data and tools needed to support short- term planning of less than 5 years. For both documents, the corps and Reclamation asked their water resource managers to identify the information and Tools most relevant to their programs. in the Interagency Climate Change Adaptation Task Force (Task Force), which was already developing a strategy for adaptation to climate change. In October 2010, the Task Force delivered a progress report to the President through the Council on Environmental Quality containing overarching policy goals to advance climate adaptation. The Task Force recommended the development of a national action plan to strengthen climate change adaptation for freshwater resources. Based on the work of the Task force, the Council of Environmental Quality was formed in October 2010. The Council ofEnvironmental Quality was established in November 2010. To address projected imbalances in supply and demand, the studies are to identify adaptation strategies. As of September 2013, 3 Basin Studies have been completed, and an additional 14 studies have been funded and are under way. Reclamation officials told us that they next intend to initiate feasibility studies for adaptation strategies identified in completed Basin Studies. See appendix II for additional information on the locations and results of Reclamation’s Basin Studies, as well as the results of the Basin Studies that have been conducted. agencies, including NOAA, USGS, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture, to develop the plan. Reclamation policy officials stated that the Basin Study Program activities, including the WWCRAs and Basin Studies, are also contributing to the planning effort. A state water manager told us that a prior river basin planning effort had largely been unsuccessful due to the lack of involvement or opposition by environmental and tribal interests. These collaborative efforts can help ensure that the long-term water resource monitoring networks critical for detecting and quantifying climate change are established. adaptation pilots is also contributing to subsequent Corps studies. Climate change and modeling data for a pilot study of sediment impacts to Cochiti Dam and Lake in New Mexico is contributing to ongoing studies in the Corps’ Albuquerque District. Reclamation is partnering with nonfederal entities to conduct focused assessments, known as Basin Studies, to identify specific water resources. One is the Santa Clara Pueblo Watershed Assessment, which is studying observed climate trends and projected climate changes to address likely future changes to watershed hydrology. environmental and tribal interests, and several stakeholders commended Reclamation for working to ensure that the views of a wide range of stakeholders were considered in the Basin Studies. In addition to the individual named above, Elizabeth Erdmann, Assistant Director; Brad Dobbins; Richard Johnson; Mick Ray; Jeanette Soares; Lorelei St. James; and Sarah E. Veale made key contributions to this report. Nirmal Chaudhary, John Delicath, Cindy Gilbert, and Armetha Liles provided additional technical assistance. Reclamation reported to Congress in 2011 its assessments of the potential effects of climate change on water supplies in the major river basins in the West. Reclamation is now conducting WWCRAs that focus on future water demand. The combined assessments will be included in Reclamation’s next SECURE Water Act report that is due in 2016. These assessments will also be updated based on the latest climate science as water uses and conditions change, and they will be including in future reports that are due to Congress every 5 years. Reclamation intends to identify basin-wide water supply vulnerabilities, project climate change’s impacts on the performance of water infrastructure, and develop adaptation strategies. As of September 2013, 3 Basin Studies have been completed, and an additional 14 studies have been funded and are under way in western states. The studies will analyze how well existing water and power infrastructure are meeting current demands and then forecast their performance in light of projected water resources vulnerabilities. The SECURE Water Act requires Reclamation to consider and develop strategies to mitigate climate change impacts on water supplies. Congress passed the SECURE Water Act, requiring Reclamation to establish a climate change adaptation program. To assess the effect of climate change, Reclamation must analyze the extent to which changes in water supply will impact several areas. Reclamation’s ability to deliver water to its customers, hydroelectric power generation, fish and wildlife habitat, and recreation are among the areas that will be affected by climate change. The law also requires the agency to assess specific risks to the water supply and develop strategies to address them. Congress and the Executive Office of the President have directed federal agencies to address the potential impacts of climate change. Reclamation has carried out its mission to manage, develop, and protect water and related resources in 17 western states. The agency has led or provided assistance in constructing most of the large dams and water diversion structures in the West for the purpose of developing water supplies for irrigation. In 2009, Reclamation directed its Office of Research and Development to take the lead in implementing the Responses to Climate Change Program. Corps’ infrastructure at acceptable levels of performance and efficiency. Most of Reclamation’s water infrastructure facilities are more than 50 years old. Despite the ongoing challenges of operating and maintaining aging infrastructure under budgetary constraints, it is important that the Corps and Reclamation address the challenge of managing climate change risk in order to limit the fiscal exposure of the federal government. As noted in our 2013 high-risk update, climate change is a significant threat to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. supply of each of its major river basins, including risks related to, among other things, changes in snow cover and the timing and quantity of runoff. To develop strategies to address impacts, the law requires Reclamation, in consultation with nonfederal stakeholders such as appropriate state water resource agencies, to consider and develop appropriate strategies to mitigate the impacts of water supply changes. Also in 2009, the President signed Executive Order 13514, Federal Leadership in Environmental, Energy, and Economic Performance. nongovernmental stakeholders. Both agencies have already initiated cost-sharing and resource-leveraging measures. The agencies plan to continue such collaborative approaches going forward. In 2009, the Corps and Reclamation—with its CCAWWG partners NOAA and USGS—published a study, In 2009,. The Corps is leveraging resources for adaptation pilot studies with state, local, and nongovernmentally entities. Reclamation is splitting the cost of Basin Studies with state and local partners. For example, as required under the SECURE Water Act, Reclamation officials told us they intend to share the Cost of the feasibility studies for adaptation strategies equally with nonfederal partners. hours of energy per year. In 2011, Reclamation, estimated that the replacement value of its assets was approximately $90 billion. About two-thirds of the assets in Reclamation’s inventory are “transferred works’ The Corps is conducting pilot studies nationwide to support the development of adaptation guidance and guidance. The Corps was founded in 1864 and is based in San Francisco. It is now based in Los Angeles and has offices in San Diego, San Francisco, and Los Angeles. No structural or operational adaptation strategies have been implemented in response to the agency’s vulnerability assessments. Corps and Reclamation officials told us that because they are early in the adaptation process, the extent to which limited budgets and existing infrastructure maintenance backlogs will affect the implementation of adaptation strategies remains to be determined. The implementation ofadaptation strategies by both agencies will likely rely on collaborative sharing of costs and resources with federal, state, local, and and state agencies. The agency's efforts to update guidance will be informed by the adaptation strategy feasibility studies as they are completed. poses a significant financial risk to the federal government, including, but not limited to its role as the owner or operator of extensive infrastructure vulnerable to climate impacts. State and local authorities are responsible for planning and implementing many types of infrastructure projects. While implementing adaptive strategies to protect infrastructure may be costly, there is a growing recognition that the cost of inaction could be greater and more difficult to manage given expected budget pressures, which will constrain not just future projects but also present and future spending on infrastructure. Formal agreement to provide funding to USGS to operate stream gauges. This data is also available for use by all federal and state agencies, as well as others interested in water information. Reclamation policy officials told us, in response to a SECURE Water Act requirement to consult with federal and applicable state agencies to develop a monitoring plan for acquiring and maintaining water resources information. Agency staff are currently identifying information needs and plans to work collaboratively with data collecting, Reclamation officials tell us. same time the data collected and compiled by the water management agencies for a specific purpose can be used by the science agencies for alternative objectives. Outside of CCAWWG, as mentioned elsewhere in this report, the agencies have also followed key collaborative practices, such as the Corps leveraging resources to fund maintenance of the USGS’s stream- flow monitoring networks. Reclamation establishing joint strategies with state agencies and others to conduct Basin Studies. We provided a draft of this product for review and comment to the Departments of Defense and the Interior. need for observational data to support climate adaptation is increasing. In recent decades, maintenance of long-term monitoring networks has declined. USGS alone has deactivated or discontinued almost 1,700 surface-water stream gauges. Corps Civil Works officials told us that stream gauge data is extremely important to the Corps’ ongoing operations. To ensure the needed data is collected, the Corps has a to ensure that the neededData is collected. The data is used to produce the climate change information upon which the Corps bases its adaptation planning. The Corps-hosted Federal Support Toolbox is now publicly available online. According to Corps Civil Works officials, the website is a “one stop shop” for technical resources to support water programs and facilities. The Corps and NOAA are coleading actions to implement the Task Force recommendation to develop a federal Internet portal to provide current, relevant, and high-quality information on water resources and climate change data applications and tools for assessing the vulnerability of water programs to climate change. The portal is expected to be completed by the end of the year. The Corps and Reclamation are collaborating as coleaders in developing and implementing a training program as recommended by the Task Force’s National Action Plan: Priorities for Managing Freshwater Resources in a Changing Environment. The Toolbox is an evolving and comprehensive water resources data portal with direct links to valuable databases, innovative programs and initiatives, and state-of-the-art models and tools. These agencies—joined by NOAA, USGS, and the Environmental Protection Agency—are collaborating with the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research and the Western Water Assessment. The Corps is engaged in collaborative efforts with external partners to integrate climate science into planning tools for water resource managers. For example, the Corps partnered with NOAA’s National Ocean Service to create an online sea level change calculator. The Corps Civil Works officials also told us that collaboration with the Federal Emergency Management Agency contributed to the development of a post-Superstorm Sandy sea level rise tool to be used in coastal projects. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is based in San Diego. In 2009, the CCAWWG partners jointly produced a preliminary assessment of how climate could impact federal water resources management. Large portions of the Corps’ water resources infrastructure were built over 50 years ago and are experiencing various stages of decay and disrepair. The report also found that federal funding over the past 20 years has consistently been inadequate to maintain the (referred to in this report as the C CAWWG study) This study identified several challenges that climate change poses for water resource managers. CCAWWG has clearly defined common objectives, including the development of working level relationships between federal water management and federal science agencies. The CCAWWG agencies also have mutually reinforcing strategies. For example, the operating needs of the Corps and Reclamation drive the direction of science inquiries by the science agencies, resulting in improved operations. USGS and NOAA will jointly prepare the companion documents, incorporating perspectives from other federal and nonfederal representatives of the scientific community. According to the 2009 CCA WWG study, at the same time as the for collaboration among agencies. Program is implemented through nine business areas that represent the diversity of the nation’s water resource management needs. These include Navigation, Flood and Coastal Storm Damage Reduction, Hydropower, Recreation, Emergency Management, Water Supply and Executive Direction and Management. The program also provides leadership, strategic planning and executive direction and management for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Army National Guard. For more information on the program, visit www.ArmyNavy.com. For information on how to get involved, visit ArmyNavyProgram.org or call 1-800-273-8255. The Corps has a large inventory and wide variety of water management infrastructure. As of September 2012, its inventory includes 702 reservoirs and 75 hydropower facilities. In the area of navigation, the Corps’ inventory includes 12,000 miles of commercial inland waterways, 193 lock sites with 239 chambers, and 926 harbors. For flood measurement.performance measurement, visit the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ website at: http://www.usace.org/flood. reduction, the Corps inventory includes 14,501 miles of levee systems. In 2012, the National Research Council reported that the Corps’ infrastructure had an estimated value of approximately $164 billion. The Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) is, according to agency records, the nation's largest wholesale water supplier. The Bureau provides water to over 31 million people and irrigation water to one out of five western farmers on 10 million acres of farm land. which produce 60 percent of the nation’s vegetables and one-quarter of its fresh fruit and nut crops. Reclamation is also the second largest producer of hydropower in the United States. According to agency records as of 2011, Reclamation’'s asset inventory includes 476 dams and dikes, creating 337 reservoirs with a total storage capacity of 245 million acre-feet of water. These plants provide an average of more than 40 megawatt of power. To carry out its mission and operations, the agency is organized into five regions. vulnerability assessments, the Corps is currently undertaking coastal project vulnerability assessments. The Corps is developing and testing a methodology for nationwide, watershed-level vulnerability assessments of its inland missions, operations, programs, and projects. The agency officials expect to complete the first phase of screening assessments in 2013, with more refined assessments to come in future years. Ultimately, the corps plans to combine the coastal and inland assessments into a unified methodology. The nationwide vulnerability assessments will, according to Corps officials, help them make initial screening-level determinations of where adaptation strategies are needed or not needed. The 15 pilots are led by 13 different Corps districts and address project planning, engineering, operations, and maintenance for 6 different Corps business areas. Some of the pilots are being conducted collaboratively with federal, state, and university partners. Taken together, Corps officials expect the pilot projects to provide a body of knowledge and tested methods that will serve as the foundation for its guidance and future adaptation. For more information, visit the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' website or go to www.usace.org. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) is composed of four program areas including Civil Works, Military Construction, Real Estate, and Research and Development. To carry out its Civil Works missions nationwide, the program is organized into eight geographic divisions composed of 38 districts. Division and district geographic boundaries are generally aligned with watershed boundaries. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III.may be found on the last page of this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. alone—can be enhanced and sustained by engaging in eight key practices. These include defining and articulating a common outcome, establishing mutually reinforcing or joint strategies, and identifying and addressing needs by leveraging resources. Running throughout these practices are a number of factors, such as leadership, trust, and performance management systems, according to the authors of the book, "Collaboration: The Art of Collaboration in the 21st Century" The authors say these practices can be applied to a variety of fields, including business, education, health care, and government. were incorporated, as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time we will send copies to the Secretaries of Defense and the Interior; the appropriate congressional committees; and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841.

ROUGE-1: 72.80, ROUGE-2: 66.35, ROUGE-L: 29.27
BERTScore: 75.17

==============================================
==================== [48/100] ====================
Summary:
GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents is through the Internet. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full-text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can also go to www.people.com/gao for more information. GAO posts this list, known as “Today’s Reports,” on its Web site daily. The list contains links to the full-text document files. To have GAO E-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to our home page and complete the easy-to-use electronic order form found under “To Order GAO Products” Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/Fraudnet.htm, E-mails: fraudnet@gao, or 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system) We are sending copies of this report to the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) and interested congressional committees. The General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the American. Please contact me at (202) 512-9505 if you have any questions. Major contributors to this report were David Childress, Mary Jo Lewnard, and Edda Emmanuelli-Perez. fee schedules that are consistent with the updated fee schedules unless a determination is made that a different fee schedule is justified; and undertake a notification, training, and follow-up effort. In written comments on a draft of this report, DOD concurred with the recommendations and commented on actions that have been or are to be taken. Because archive officials were unaware of the FMR fee schedule, we continue to believe that the more substantive actions that we recommended are warranted. It added that DOD audit organizations will be requested to include user fee schedule compliance as a part of their standard reviews, where applicable. request total $15 or less. Documents shall be provided without charge or at reduced charge when a DOD component determines that a waiver or reduction of fees is in the public interest. DOD last revised its User Charge Statute fee schedule for copying, certifying, and searching records in March 1986. At that time, DOD revised its user fees instruction and added a schedule of fees and rates for services related to copying, certification, and search records. The instruction stated that this schedule was to be. used for such services throughout DOD. The same fees were included in the DOD FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 4, Appendix 2, issued in March 1997. Although the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 and OMB Circular A-25 require a biennial review of charges for services, DOD Comptroller officials were not aware of any reviews having been done. Fees being developed by the Army Military History Institute indicate that the fees mandated in Appendix 2 might be significantly understated. For example, the Institute’s early proposal,  archives do not impose a minimum charge for providing information. This could result in requesters receiving copies of documents free or for less than a dollar as opposed to the $3.50 minimum specified in the DOD’s User Charge fee schedule. The Marine Corps fees, which are based on FOIA, resulted in any requester receiving up to 2 hours of search time and 100 pages without a charge. Archives officials told us that, in many cases, fees are not charged when the request is from military personnel, veterans, or government employees. Military archive officials reported collecting about $81,000 during fiscal year 2000. Air Force reported the most collections (about $46,000) and the Marine Corps reporting the least ( about $2,000). However, these amounts are probably much less than amounts that should be collected if updated fee schedules are established and effectively implemented. Fees charged by the archives are generally less than those in DOD fee schedules even though the fees in the DOD schedules are outdated and could be understated by a factor of three or four. accruing to the public at large, a reasonable charge shall be made to each identifiable recipient. The policy provides that a charge will be imposed to recover the full cost to the federal government of rendering a service or the fair market value of such service, whichever is higher. Appendix 1 of Chapter 4 lists benefits for which no charge is to be made such as services requested by members of the U.S. Armed Forces in their capacity as service members. Appendix 2, “Schedule of Fees and Rates for Copying, Certifying, and Searching Records Rendered to the Public,” is mandated. Fees for search, review, and duplication of documents are to be based on direct costs. The first 2 hours of search time and the first 100 pages of duplication shall be provided without charge unless requesters are seeking documents for commercial use. Fees will be waived or reduced when the information is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of DOD, and fees shall be automatically waived when assessable fees total $15 or less. FOIA requests are specifically excluded under Section 1085. The Directorate for Freedom of Information and Security Review is responsible for the FOIA regulation. Fee schedule for general information has not been updated since 1986. FOIA fee schedule for technical information was last issued in 1998. DOD reported that about $670,000 was recovered through assessed fees in fiscal year 2000, less than 2 percent of the reported $36.5 million in costs associated with providing information under FOIA. If FOIA fees are understated by a significant amount, as appears possible, increases in increases in FOIA fees could be significant. The collections reported by the four primary military archives are not indicative of potential Comptroller collections. Collections from updated FOIA fee schedules could be significant, authors say. DOD has not revised its fee schedules under the User Charge Statute and FOIA since 1986, they say. The primary military archives are not using the mandated fee schedules, they write. The fees being charged to public requesters vary significantly across these archives, the authors say, and they need to be consistent across the DOD system. They recommend that the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) and the Director, Freedom of Information and Security Review review and update fee schedules. All of the four primary archives charge fees for providing historical information to requesters. None of the fees were in accordance with the mandated DOD user fee schedule specified in Appendix 2 of DOD FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 4. If a request is not identified as a FOIA request, the fees should be determined under the User Charge Statute. Neither of these statutes authorizes the military archives to retain fees collected in providing general Receipts. These arrangements, by reducing budgetary pressures, have lessened the benefits that an archive could achieve from implementing Section 1085. Section 1085 does not apply to the DOD offices, organizations, museums, and archives other than the four designated archives. The User Charge Statute and FOIA will continue to be the basic authority for these activities to charge fees for providing information. DOD’s policy, as stated in Chapter 4, is that when a service is provided that conveys special benefits to recipients, above and beyond those provided by DOD, the fee should be charged for that service. The user charge Statute is implemented by Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-25, and DOD Financial Management Regulation (FMR), Volume 11A, Chapter 4. Section 1085 does not specify a fee structure or the fees that are to be charged. Prior to the authority granted under Section 1085, DOD, including the military archives, was authorized to charge fees for responding to requests for information. The Section also states that fees are not to be charges for information that is requested (1) to carry out a duty as a member of the armed forces or employee of the United States or (2) under FOIA, which has a separate fee structure. Fees collected under both the User Charge Statute and FOIA for general information must be deposited in the Treasury as Miscellaneous Receipts. The Army Military History Institute identified the ability to use collected fees to improve service to the public as the primary reason it developed the legislative proposals that led to Section 1085. Increasing numbers of public requests at a time when budgetary resources were decreasing resulted in the increase in the authority to retain collected fees for the purpose of defraying costs, the institute says. in Appendix 2 establishes a minimum fee of $3.50 for any chargeable case and additional fees for searching and providing copies of various records, photographs, forms, etc. For photography, the Appendix’s schedule of prices per print is based on the size, type, and quantity ordered. In this case, the fee under Appendix 2 appears to be about one-third of the Institute's proposal. Comptroller officials noted that Appendix 2 provided for a minimum clerical search and processing charge of $8.30. to 33. As a result, backlogs and waiting times increased. Congress enacted Section 1085 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2001. The Act authorizes the charging and retaining of fees by one designated primary archive in each of the four military departments. The four designated archives are the Air Force Historical Research Agency at Maxwell AFB, Alabama; Army Military History Institute at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania; Marine Corps Historical Center at Washington Navy Yard, D.C.; and Naval Historical Center in Washington. Section 1085 permits each of the four archives to develop its own fee schedule. Officials at the Air Force Historical Research Agency had tasked key stakeholders with determining a fee structure. However, they have not established a target date for implementing the Section.Section by October 2001. The Naval Historical Center and the Marine Corps Historical Center have not decided whether to implement a fee system based on Section 1085 provisions. They have taken no specific actions toward implementation and have received no implementation guidance from the Air force. The specified charge for clerical search and processing is $13.25 per hour with a minimum charge of $8.30. Existing fees vary significantly among the archives. The Institute’s proposal for five copies of an 8- x 10-inch photograph shows a total fee of $105 (pull fee per item of $5 and $20 for each copy). The total fee under Appendix 2. is $105. The proposal includes a $25 hourly research charge. If a search charge is appropriate, the Institute”s proposal includes an $18.25 hourly charge. In the mid-1990s, the Army Military History Institute began developing proposed legislation for charging and retaining fees to defray costs of providing historical information to the public. The Institute, whose mission is to preserve the Army’s history, was experiencing a significant increase in requests from the public while resources available to respond were decreasing. For example, the annual number of requests increased from about 13,000 in 1987 to 20,600 in 1995 and to 35,800 in 2000. During the same period, the number of staff members decreased from over 40 to over 30.  Archives are developing arrangements to minimize the cost impact of public requests on the archives’ budgets. For example, the Army Military History Institute arranged for a contract, through a nonappropriated fund account, to reproduce requested photographs with fees collected for the photographs reimbursing the fund. The Naval Historical Center refers those requesting its photographs to the Naval Historical Foundation, a nonprofit foundation, which reproduces the photographs and charges the customer. Without such arrangements, the costs of reproducing photographs and responding to requesters would come from the archive’s budget.

ROUGE-1: 71.98, ROUGE-2: 67.89, ROUGE-L: 24.51
BERTScore: 53.75

==============================================
==================== [49/100] ====================
Summary:
IIRIRA added a provision enabling refugees or asylees to request asylum on the basis of persecution resulting from resistance to coercive population control policies. Asylum claims with the INS dropped in the years following the passage of IIRIRA. The Real ID Act of 2005 ( P.L. 109-13 ) further revised asylum law. Foremost, it established expressed standards of proof for proof for asylum claims.known as expedited removal), adding time limits on filing claims, and limiting judicial review in certain circumstances. conditions). If the asylum officer approves the application and the alien passes the identification and background checks, then the foreign national is granted asylum status. There has been a 79% decrease in affirmative asylum cases filed since the enactment of IIRIRA in 1996. The number of asylum cases approved more than doubled from 13,532 in FY1996 to 31,202 in FY2002, and then fell to the lowest point over the 14-year period—9,614—in FY2009. is already present, or at a port of entry while seeking admission. This process differs from a potential refugee who begins a separate process wholly outside of the United States. Depending on whether or not the applicant is currently in removal proceedings, two avenues exist to seek asylum. The affirmative and defensive applications follow different procedural paths but draw on the same legal standards. In both processes, the burden of proof is on the asylum seeker to establish that he or she meets the refugee definition specified in the INA. Asylum applications of aliens who are not granted asylum by asylum officers are referred to EOIR immigration judges for formal proceedings. In some respects, these applicants/aliens are allowed a "second bite at the apple" Asylum applicants in the affirmative process are not subject to the mandatory detention requirements while their applications are being adjudicated, though there is broader authority under the INA to detain aliens for other grounds. Defensive applications for asylum are raised when a foreign national is in removal proceedings and asserts. The USCIS schedules a non-adversarial interview with a member of the Asylum Officer Corps. There are eight asylum offices located throughout the country. The asylum officers either grant asylum to successful applicants or refer to the immigration judges those applicants who fail to meet the definition. They make their determinations regarding the affirmative applications based upon the application form, the information received during the interview, and other information related to the specific case (e.g., information about country). The asylum officer makes their determination based on the form and information received from the interview. claim for asylum as a defense to his/her removal. If the alien fails to raise the issue at the beginning of the process, the claim for asylum may be raised only after a successful motion to reopen is filed with the court. The immigration judge's ultimate decision regarding both the applicant's/alien's removal and asylum application is appealable to the BIA. Defensive asylum claims made during EOIR proceedings started at a lower level in FY1996 (84,293) than affirmative USCIS claims (116,877) FY2009. EOIR approved 5,131 in FY1996 and 10,186 in FY2009. DHS' Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officer must summarily exclude a foreign national arriving without proper documentation, unless the alien expresses a fear of persecution if repatriated. Absent a stated fear, the CBP officer is allowed to exclude aliens without proper. documentation from the United States without placing them in removal proceedings. This procedure is known as expedited removal. According to DHS immigration policy and Asylum seekers are often detained with criminal aliens, a practice that many consider inappropriate and unwarranted. Detention is psychologically damaging, some argue, to an already fragile population. Proponents for current law warn that releasing asylum seekers in expedited removal undermines the purpose of the law. They argue that mandatory detention of asylum seekers is an essential tool in maintaining immigration control and homeland security.. Any loosening of these policies, they allege, would divert the CBP and ICE officers from their homeland security duties to track. asylum seekers were three times as likely to obtain asylum if they had legal representation, to emphasize the need for legal counsel. Supporters of current law maintain that the one-year rule prevents abuses of the asylum system. They point out that foreign nationals have the option of seeking asylum defensively during removal proceedings. Others have observed that many asylum seekers who fail to file within one year of arrival subsequently receive withholding of removal or relief under the United Nations Convention Against Torture. They assert such people would have qualified for asylum but for the one year deadline. Research has revealed disparities in asylum decisions. Many are calling for greater congressional oversight of the immigration courts. Some are pushing for an increase in funding for immigration judges and law clerks. Others, however, contend that the problems related to disparities in Asylum decisions lie with the U.S. government. Without making the United States more vulnerable to unauthorized migrants, criminals, or terrorists, it would not be as vulnerable as it would otherwise be, they say. It would be more secure and less vulnerable to criminals and terrorists. to consider cases in pairs or panels of three asylum offers. Despite concern over the disparate decisions, there is an argument that greater congressional oversight might politicize the process. Legislative intervention to promote more consistent decisions presumably might undermine the independence of the asylum adjudicators and immigration judges. Because none of the studies that documented the disparities had access to the case facts and evidence, the rationale for decisions remains unknown and thus may indeed be justified. Immigration removal proceedings are civil in nature and, thus, do not entail the right to legal counsel that criminal proceedings do. less in the funding shortages and more in the quality of immigration judges. Some are recommending higher recruitment standards for immigration judges and more training, particularly training in the culture of asylum seekers' homelands. Some further recommend a requirement of written opinions in asylum cases. Still others maintain that the USCIS asylum officers also display disparate outcomes among similarly situated asylum cases, and that enhanced training and research support should be available. Establishing mechanisms to foster communication among asylum offices is offered as an option to improve consistency. Asylum seekers' access to counsel has arisen in recent years. Many maintain that few can adequately represent themselves. Charity and pro bono legal projects cannot afford to serve all asylum seekers, many say. Some offer that providing legal counsel is an option for addressing the disparities in outcome, they say. Many cite the GAO study, which found that many can't afford to represent themselves and need legal counsel to get a fair hearing. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. The Refugee Protection Act of 2011 would make significant revisions to asylum policy. The bill would eliminate the time limits on seeking asylum in cases of changed circumstances. It would also proscribe conditions under which an asylum seeker who was a victim of terrorist coercion would not be excluded. The Senate Committee on the Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy and House Committee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement Ranking Member Zoe Lofgren introduced the companion bills on June 15, 2011. The companion bills are S. 1202 / H.R. 2185. a country where there are "substantial grounds" for believing that he or she would be in danger of being tortured. An applicant for non-removal under Article 3 has the burden of proving that it is more likely than not that he would be tortured if removed to the proposed country. If a diplomatic assurance (deemed sufficiently reliable by the Attorney General or Secretary of State) that the alien will not be tortured is obtained from the government of the country to which the alien would be repatriated, the alien's claim for repatriation can be considered. by the U.S. Border Patrol or the ICE agents when they are apprehended. When aliens formally request asylum, they are sent to the nearest USCIS-authorized fingerprint site. They have all 10 fingers scanned and are subject to a full background check by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Distinct from asylum law and policy, aliens claiming relief from removal due to torture may be treated separately under regulations implementing the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (hereafter, Torture Convention) In 2003, the Attorney General ruled that illegal mass migration by sea threatened national security because it diverts the U.S. Coast Guard and other resources from their homeland security duties. The case involved a Haitian who had had expedited removal proceedings and detained (subject to humanitarian parole) The Attorney General expanded on this rationale in his April 17, 2003, ruling that instructs EOIR immigration judges to consider "national security interests implicated by the encouragement of further unlawful mass migrations ..." in making bond determinations. come ashore in Biscayne Bay, FL, on October 29, 2002, and had been released on bond by an immigration judge. The BIA had upheld his release, but the Attorney General vacated the BIA decision. All foreign nationals seeking asylum are subject to multiple background checks in the terrorist, immigration, and law enforcement databases. Those who enter the country legally on nonimmigrant visas are screened by the consular officers at the Department of State when they apply for a visa, and all foreign nationals are inspected by CBP officers at ports of entry. misrepresentation are placed in expedited removal. If they express a fear of persecution, they receive a "credible fear" hearing with a USCIS asylum officer. If found credible, they are referred to an EOIR immigration judge for a hearing. The Attorney General and Secretary of Homeland Security can exercise discretion in the granting of asylum. Foreign nationals who participated in the persecution of other people are excluded from receiving asylum. The law states other conditions for mandatory denials of asylum claims, including when the alien has been convicted of a serious crime. if returned home, they will be persecuted based upon one of five characteristics: race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. Foreign nationals arriving or present in the U.S. may apply for asylum with the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) in the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) after arrival into the country. They may seek asylum before a Department of Justice Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR) immigration judge during removal proceedings. procedures, CBP inspectors, as well as other DHS immigration officers, are required to ask each individual who may be subject to expedited removal the following series of "protection questions" to identify anyone who is afraid of return. Why did you leave your home country or country of last residence? Do you have any fear or concern about being returned to your homecountry or being removed from the United States? Would you be harmed if you were returned toyour home country? DoYou have any questions or is there anything else you would like to ask? religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. The intent of the persecutor is subjective and may stem from mixed or multiple motives. The courts have ruled that the persecution may have more than one motive, and so long as one motive is one of the statutorily enumerated grounds, the requirements have been satisfied. A 1997 Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) decision concluded "an applicant for asylum need not show conclusively why persecution occurred in the past or is likely to occur in the future" asylum seekers, including that the applicant's race, religion, nationality, social group, or political opinion was or will be one of the central motives for his or her persecution. Because "fear" is a subjective state of mind, assessing the merits of an asylum case rests in large part on the credibility of the claim and the likelihood that persecution would occur if the alien is returned home. A third dimension that overlays these concepts is the matter of "mixed motives" for persecuting the alien. The credible fear concept also functions as a pre-screening standard that is broader and easier to meet. The standards for "well-founded fear" have evolved over the years and been guided by judicial decisions, including a notable U.S. Supreme Court case. The regulations specify that an asylum seeker has a well-foundedFear of Persecution if (A) The applicant has a fear of persecution in his or her country of nationality or, if stateless, in his/her country of origin. The regulations state that the asylum officer or immigration judge shall not require the alien to provide evidence that there is a reasonable possibility he or she would be individually singled out for persecution. In the group identity instance, if the asylum seeker. establishes that there was a pattern or practice in his or her home country of persecution of. a group of persons similarly situated to the applicant on account of race, identity may form the basis of the asylum claim. The asylum seeker is unable or unwilling to return to, or avail himself or herself of the protection of, that country because of such fear. last habitual residence, on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. There is a reasonable possibility of suffering such persecution if he or she were to return to that country. He or she is unable or unwilling to return because of such fear. The regulations also state that an asylum seeker "does not have a well-founded fear of persecution if the applicant could avoid persecution by relocating to another part of the applicant's country.... " In evaluating whether to grant asylum, a judge must consider a number of factors. unique fluctuations over time. Country conditions lie at the core of the principle that the U.S. will not return a foreign national to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. As discussed more fully above, individualized persecution or persecution resulting from group persecution is more likely to cause asylum seekers to seek refuge in the United States. This data analysis suggests that conditions in the major source countries—whether economic, environmental, political, religious or social—were likely the driving force behind asylum seekers. denial rates of Salvadoran asylum seekers were the highest, spanning 90% to 98%. Some argue that given the religious, ethnic, and political violence in various countries around the world, it has become more difficult to differentiate the persecuted from the persecutors. Some express concern that U.S. sympathies for the asylum seekers caught up in the current political uprisings in the Middle East, northern Europe, and South America are being misconstrued by the media and the public. Some cite the seemingly inexplicable disparities in asylum approvals rates. attracts asylum seekers who have weak or bogus claims. Some have warned of "the ongoing separation of asylum from any grounding in the national interest" Others have maintained that migration "push" factors, such as rapid population growth, poverty, and political instability in the sending countries of asylum seekers, are factors over which the U.S. has little control. "The asylum system has become the hole in the fence for millions of dubious claimants—and a major immigration magnet in itself," one critic has concluded. Some have long been concerned that terrorists would seek asylum in the United States. Critics point to asylum seekers from countries of "special concern" as potential national security risks. Supporters of current law say it sends a clear signal of deterrence to aliens who consider using asylum claims as a mechanism to enter illegally. Some argue further that because asylum is a discretionary form of asylum, it should not be treated as a law enforcement tool.down wayward asylum seekers. The U.S. is home to hundreds of thousands of pending asylum cases. Some argue that the U.S. should re-calibrate asylum policy to provide more protections for asylum seekers. Others argue that security risks resulted more from the limits of intelligence data on terrorists in the past rather than the expansiveness of asylum policy. Some further assert that asylees from other countries should not be treated the same as asylum seekers from the United States. The debate over asylum policy should be debated for years to come, says David Rothkopf of the Migration Policy Institute. Africa, and South Asia could inadvertently facilitate the entry of terrorists. Others maintain that current law does not offer adequate protections for people fleeing human rights violations or gender-based abuses. Some assert that asylum has become an alternative pathway for immigration rather than humanitarian protection provided in extraordinary cases. At the crux of the issue is the extent to which an asylum policy forged during the Cold War is adapting to the competing priorities and turbulence of the 21 st century. Some of these issues are highlighted below. immigration policy, asylum issues are less about the number of foreign nationals involved and more about the qualities of the policies and the efficacy of the procedures. Asylum is an adjudication of a person based upon facts, evidence, beliefs, and circumstances that might be clear at some times yet nebulous at other times. The policy tensions of asylum often pit the promotion of our humanitarian values against the prevention of fraudulent abuses. The protection of the persecuted against the security of our borders; and the obligations of our moral responsibilities internationally against the commitments of our social priorities domestically. Some argue that the law should be amended to provide an exception for people who have been forced by terrorists to provide support. Opponents of limiting the judicial review of asylum cases contend that it would erode two traditional values of U.S. polity. The law states that an alien who commits an act that is of "special concern" may be eligible for asylum. The right to due process and freedom from repression and persecution are protected by the Constitution. It is illegal to deny asylum to someone who has committed an act of violence against the United States. balance of these competing concerns may be shaken by a crisis in a neighboring nation or by larger world events. The U.S. Congress plays the key role in considering when and whether revision or re-calibration of asylum law and policies is warranted, says John Avlon, a professor of law at the University of California, Los Angeles. He says Congress should consider whether a change in asylum law or policies is in the best interests of the country as a whole, rather than just the asylum seekers. as a terrorist; provide alternatives to detention of asylum seekers; modify certain elements necessary for the asylum seeker to meet the conditions for the granting of asylum; and, allow aliens interdicted at sea the opportunity to have an asylum interview. The United States has long held to the principle that it will not return a foreign national to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened. This principle is embodied in several provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), most notably in provisions defining refugees and asylees. In 1974, the former Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) issued its first asylum regulations. The Refugee Act of 1980 codified the U.N. Refugee Protocols definition of a refugee in the INA and included provisions for asylum in INA 208. The law defined asylees as aliens in the United States or at a U.S. or Canadian consulate or embassy. The INA does not provide for the right to stay or stay for a period of time. It does provide for a right to apply for asylum if a person is considered a refugee. danger to the community; the alien has been firmly resettled in another country; or there are reasonable grounds for regarding the alien as a danger to national security. The INA, moreover, has specific grounds for exclusion of all aliens that include criminal and terrorist grounds. This report opens with an overview of current policy, discussing the threshold of what constitutes asylum and the procedures for obtaining it. The second portion of the report identifies the top sending countries and includes a time series analysis of six selected source countries for asylum seekers. In 1968, the U.S. became party to the 1967 United Nations Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees. Nonrefoulement means that an alien will not be returned to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened. The U.N. Refugee Protocol does not require that a signatory accept refugees, but it does ensure that signatory accepts them.approvals by country of origin. The report rounds out with a discussion of selected legislative policy issues, including immigration reform. he "knows, or reasonably should know, affords material support" to a terrorist organization is inadmissible. It makes no exception for instances where the alien has been coerced into providing support. Over the past decade, the United States has admitted or adjusted about 1 million foreign nationals to legal permanent resident (LPR) status each year. Overall, asylee adjustments comprised only 4% (411,972) of the 10.3 million LPRs admitted oradjusted from FY2000 through FY2009. A study of 290 asylum officers who decided at least 100 affirmative cases from the PRC from FY1999 through FY2005 found that the approval rate of PRC claimants spanned from zero to over 90%. In one regional asylum office, the grant rates for affirmative applications from thePRC varied fromzero to 68%. Sixty percent of the officers in that regional office deviated from their office's average PRC asylum approval rates by more than 50%. Nationwide, immigration judges granted asylum to 47% percent of defensive cases ofPRC claimants from January 1, 2000, through August. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) analyzed the disparity in asylum decisions as well and found that "significant variation existed" GAO performed multivariate statistical analyses on asylum cases from 19 immigration courts. The average national grant rate for Colombian asylum seekers is 36%. Figure 14 presents the data for the asylee producing countries in the high-volume immigration courts from which these conclusions are drawn.national average.... Colombian asylum seeker also faced major disparities. Those who appeared before the Orlando Immigration Court had a 63% grant rate. Those heard by the Atlanta Immigration Court faced a grant rate of 19%. GAO found that the grant rate for affirmative cases was lower than 10% for asylum seekers from El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Mexico. In terms of defensive cases, about 50% of asylum seeker from Iran and Ethiopia were granted asylum and almost 60% of such cases from Somalia. However, this outcome occurred for 13% or less of the defensive asylum cases from Honduras, Indonesia, and El Salvador. GAO also offered the following important caveat: Because data were not available on the facts, evidence, and with Nepal) to be among the top 10 in FY2009. Several top sending countries were also among the decade's top 20 approved affirmative and defensive asylum cases. Colombia, Haiti, Guatemala, and, of course, the PRC. For year-by-year data on the top 20 source countries for approved asylum cases, see the Appendix . Research studies of the approval rates of cases filed by asylum seekers consistently reveal disparities by USCIS regional asylum offices and EOIR immigration courts. reporting on the arbitrary and inconsistent administration of the federal system that grants political asylum. In 2006, researchers at Syracuse University's Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse found "a surprising lack of consistency" among similarly situated asylum cases considered by EOIR. The Stanford Law Review published "Refugee Roulette: Disparities in Asylum Adjudication" in 2007. The example of asylum seekers from the PRC offers striking differences in the percentage of cases approved across regions and jurisdictions. The size of the disparities in asylum grant rates creates a perception of unfairness in the asylum adjudication process within the immigration court system. Researchers at Syracuse University's TRAC have been conducting analyses of the immigration courts for several years and were among the earliest to identify wide variations in asylum outcomes that were dependent on the immigration judge. The denial rates of Iraq asylum seekers were the lowest, spanning from zero to 4%, and their variation was also the lowest at 4%. In contrast, the asylum seeker's country of origin, the PRC, had denial rates ranging from 4% to 74%. half denied less—was 65% . There were, however, eight judges who denied asylum to nine out of ten of the applicants who came before them. In the New York immigration court, for example, one judge denied only 6% in one case. TRAC's latest study of the FY2008-FY2010 period found that judge-to-judge disparities in asylum decisions have moderated since their earlier studies, but it concluded that the disparities remained substantial. The latest study was conducted by the Center for Immigration Studies. The immigration court in Atlanta approved 7% of defensive PRC cases; however, the court in Orlando, FL, approved 76% of defense cases. The disparity continued if the applicant lost at the Board of Immigration Appeals and petitioned for review in the U.S. Court of Appeals. From FY2003 to FY2005, the Fourth Circuit did not remand a single case from the PRC (i.e., the court never decided in favor of the applicant), while the Ninth Circuit never remanded a case. that handled almost 90% of the cases from October 1994 through April 2007. GAO identified nine factors that affected these outcomes: (1) filed affirmatively (originally with DHS at his/her own initiative) or defensively (with DOJ, if in removal proceedings); (2) applicant's nationality; (3) time period of the asylum decision; (4) representation; (5) applied within 1 year of entry to the United States; (6) claimed dependents on the application; (7) had ever been detained (defensive cases only) "Credible fear" typically comes up when an alien arrives without proper documentation and is put into expedited removal proceedings. Those deemed to have a credible fear proceed to a defensive asylum hearing with EOIR. PRC asylum cases peaked in FY2002 for both affirmative and defensive claims—10,522 and 11,499. Affirmative claims rose by 268.4% from 2,377 to 10,522 in FY2009. The ebbs and flows of asylum seekers over the 13-year period, however, exhibit different patterns depending on the asylum gateway. fear" claims that USCIS has considered has steadily increased from 4,712 in FY2005 to 5,454 in FY2009. Consistent time series data on "credible fear" claims are not available before FY2005. On November 13, 2002, the former INS published a notice clarifying that certain aliens arriving by sea who are not admitted or paroled into the United States are to be placed on a waiting list. On that day, the U.S. placed more than 1,000 aliens on the list. Defensive asylum claims are down by 53.2% for Salvadorans, despite peaking at 9,955 in FY2007. The number of "credible fear" claims during expedited removal has risen sharply from 73 in FY2005 to 945 in FY2009. Many Haitians who flee Haiti are interdicted by the U.S. Coast Guard and do not appear among those who claim asylum in the United States. Affirmative claims hit 4,938 in FY2001 and surpassed the number of defensive claims that year. Asylum seekers from Mexico reached a 13-year high point in the late 1990s. Affirmative asylum claims from El Salvador have steadily declined by 90.4%. The "credible fear" claims have dipped by 54.6%, from 185 in FY2005 to 84 in FY2009. The overall trends of Colombian asylum seekers from FY1997 through FY2009 are up by 48.2% and 53.6% respectively, according to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. a port of entry who meet the definition of a refugee. As Figure 1 illustrates, asylum claims spiked immediately after passage of the Refugee Act in 1980. In the 1980s, political violence and civil wars in Central America prompted mass migration of asylum seekers from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua. Asylum cases filed with the INS surpassed 100,000 for the first time in 1988. The Tiananmen Square massacre of Chinese soldiers in 1989 prompted a surge in asylum claims in 1989. In 1990, over 120,000 Cubans and about 25,000 Haitians set sail for Florida, known as the Mariel Boatlift. Protesters in 1989 symbolized events that triggered asylum seekers from China. The December 1991 military coup d'etat deposing Haiti's first democratically elected president, Jean Bertrand Aristide, led thousands of Haitians to flee by boat to the United States in FY1992. The following year, 285 Chinese came ashore in New York on the "Golden Venture" and a total of 683 Chinese come ashore in three different ocean-going vessels along the coast of California in the summer of 1993. asylum claims, with 4,209 new cases. Five of the top 10 source countries of asylum seekers were Western Hemisphere nations in FY2009. The PRC remained the leading source country throughout the 2000s. Middle Eastern and South Asian nations do appear in the top 20 source countries over the past decade for approved affirmative and defensive asylum cases.. Iran, Iraq, Indonesia, and Pakistan were top 20 sources countries for those who received asylum from FY2000 through FY2009, as were Indonesia, India, and Burma. The U.S. Coast Guard interdiction of Haitians has undoubtedly suppressed the number of asylum seekers from that nation. Although the continent of Africa was not home to many of the asylum seekers discussed above, the African nations of Cameroon and Eritrea, as well as Ethiopia, appear in the top 10 source countries for asylum cases approved by USCIS and EOIR in FY2009 ( Figure 13). The emergence of the African countries in theTop 10 source nations for approved asylum cases is revealed in Table 1. of a group of persons similarly situated to the applicant on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion; then the fear of persecution is deemed reasonable. The PRC led in the number of asylum cases approved by USCIS and EOIR in FY2009 ( Figure 13 ). abuse of human rights in the PRC has been a principal area of concern in the United States for many years. Presumably, PRC asylum seekers are also benefiting from the provision enabling aliens to claim asylum on the basis of persecution resulting from resistance to coercive population control policies. By the end of FY1995, there were 457,670 asylum cases in the backlog, as the INS asylum corps was unable to keep pace. Almost half of those cases, however, resulted from the 1990 settlement of the American Baptist Church (ABC) case. The Illegal Immigrant Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA, P.L. 104-208 ) of 1996 made substantial changes to the asylum process, most notably by establishing summary exclusion provisions (now known as summary exclusion clauses) protection will not be considered further and the alien may be removed. For many years, most foreign nationals who sought asylum in the United States were from the Western Hemisphere. In FY1999, the People's Republic of China (PRC) moved to the top of the source countries for affirmative asylum applications. The U.S. now has more asylum cases filed from China than from any other country in the world, according to the U.N. refugee agency's most recent report on the number of asylum cases.

ROUGE-1: 76.13, ROUGE-2: 70.12, ROUGE-L: 24.08
BERTScore: 60.02

==============================================
==================== [50/100] ====================
Summary:
Some insurers, such as those with a small number of enrollees, are permitted certain adjustments to their MLRs. These adjustments are referred to as credibility adjustments, and they are added to, and thus Credibility adjustments are provided to increase, the insurer’s MLR. All insurers will calculate their MLR for their experience in 2013 and subsequent years based on data from a 3-year period. Insurers with aSmaller Enrollees calculated MLRs for 2012 based on their 2011 and 2012 experience combined. One insurer, who paid rebates in 2011, noted that it would not have owed rebates had the MLR formula been based on 3 years of insurers’ experience. Another insurer told us that it will likely owe rebates for 2013 because MLR data it reported in 2011 and 2012 will be averaged into 2013. The insurer added that over time, however, it believes the 3-yearMLR formula should be beneficial for the insurer by reducing its rebates over the next 3 years. The individual market includes policies sold by insurers directly to individuals. Insurers report their MLR data to CMS by entering information on a standardized form that includes multiple data fields that make up the MLR and rebate formulas. Medical claims include claims paid and incurred for clinical services and supplies provided to enrollees by physicians and other clinical providers. Expenses for quality improvement (QI) activities. These include expenses for activities for activities that improve the quality of care provided to patients. In 2016, they must define small employers as having from 1 to 100 employees. requirements have generally influenced their spending on QI activities since 2011. Other influencing factors, such as customer and employer demand for QI programs, competition among insurers, and the goal of improving enrollees’ health outcomes, could lower the use and costs of health care services. Five of the eight insurers we interviewed also commented that the 2013 PPACA MLR calculation, which is based on a 3-year period including 2013 and the prior 2 years, will likely reduce some of the effects in the MLR formula. The remaining amount of premiums that an insurer does not spend on the components of medical claims, QI activities, taxes and fees, and non- claims costs, will be referred to as the insurer’s “premium surplus” Premium surplus includes profit and other reserved capital. The PPACA MLR is generally calculated by dividing (a) the sum of an insurer's medical claims and expenses for QI Activities (the formula numerator) by (b) the insurer's premiums, after excluding from them the amount of federal and state taxes. changes during this time that would have affected their MLRs. If the formula had been different, insurers might have made different business decisions in those years. Two of the eight insurers we interviewed stated that they exited certain insurance companies. All eight insurers told us that the PPACA MLR requirements have not affected where they do business and have had no effect, or a very limited effect, on their spending on QI activities since 2011. This time period is broader than the period for which we analyzed MLR data. MLR requirements were one factor among a variety of factors that influenced their decisions regarding premium rates. Two of these insurers told us that the MLR requirements have generally moderated their premium increases. One insurer that has increased its premium rates in the individual market since 2011 stated that without the PPACA MLR requirement in place the insurer would have likely increased rates further. Another insurer explained that if it does not meet the PP ACA MLR standards in its planning, it will adjust its premium rate increases to avoid the associated expense. markets since the PPACA MLR requirements began, but they did not attribute those decisions to the MLR. One insurer who operated in all 50 states told us that it left the individual market in three states in 2014. The insurer further explained that a low number of enrollees in each market contributed to its decisions to no longer operate in the three states. None of the insurers we interviewed reported that the PP ACA MLR was a factor in their decision to leave the market in those states. cited for making premium changes included: trends in medical claims, competition with other insurers, the PPACA requirements that insurers offer their plans on a guaranteed-issue basis as well as provide essential health benefits in their plans. One insurer that has increased premiums in the individual market since 2011 stated that its increased premiums were due in part to the increased costs that the insurer told us was associated with it. Three of the eight insurers reported that thePPACA was the reason for their increased premiums. For providing coverage on a Guaranteed Issue basis, as mandated under PPACA. operated, but group market insurers were more likely to meet or exceed the standards than individual insurers. In 2011, about 76 percent of insurers met or exceeded market insurers. The median PPACA MLRs in 2011 and in 2012 among all insurers were about 88 percent, and the median for the large group market was higher than that of the small group and individual markets. However, these 2 years of data may not reflect the reality in the individual and large group markets, the authors say. They note that the percent of all insurers meeting or exceeding the standards increased by about 3 percentage points. of the plan’s premium or as a flat fee, for example, determined by the number of enrollees in the plan. In 2011 and 2012, the percentage of net premiums that insurers spent on their enrollees’ medical claims varied across insurance markets. In 2012 insurers in the large group market spent about 89 percent of their net premiums on medical claims compared to the 85 percent that they spent in 2011. Most insurers met or exceeded the PPACA MLR standards established for the markets and state in which they operate. Under the PPACA MLR requirements, private insurers must report annually to CMS. Insurers must pay rebates when their MLRs do not meet or exceed the minimum applicable MLR standards. When an insurer’s MLR is lower than the applicable PPACAMLR standard, the insurer must pay a rebate. The rebate amount is based on the PP ACA MLR rebate formula, as shown in figure 2. It is generally 80 percent for the individual and small group markets and 85 percent forThe large group market, with some exceptions. Private insurers first reported this information in 2012, based on their 2011 experience. Large and small group employers are defined by the number of their employees. Prior to PPACA, a small employer was defined in federal law as having a maximum of 50 employees. From the time PPACA was passed in 2010 until 2016, PPACA gives states the option of continuing to define a small group employer as having 50 or fewer employees, but starting in 2016, that definition will be changed to 50 or less. Insurers’ spending on non-claims costs as a percent of their net premiums varied by insurance market. Insurers in the small group market spent a higher share on agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions than insurers in the individual and large group markets. The three categories that made up the largest share of insurers’ Spending on Non-Claims costs were agents' and brokers' Fees and commissions, other general expenses, and other claims adjustment expenses. For example, in 2012 small group insurers spent about 42 percent of. their total on claims adjustments. about 16 percent of their net premiums on non-claims costs compared to the 7 percent that large group insurers spent. An insurer’s premium surplus includes profit and other reserved capital but does not account for any PPACA MLR rebates the insurer may have to pay to enrollees. Insurers’ spending on QI expenses did not vary across markets as insurers in each market spent about 1 percent of net premiums in 2011 and in 2012. There was also variation across the insurance markets. non-claims costs on agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions compared to the 23 percent that large group insurers spent. Insurers paid about $1.1 billion in total rebates to enrollees and policyholders who paid premiums in 2011, the first year that insurers were subject to the PPACA MLR requirements. In comparison, insurers in the individual and large group markets spent a higher share of non- claims costs on other general expenses, such as salaries, rent, and travel. by providing rebates to group policyholders, for example, employers. Group policyholders are responsible for allocating the amount of rebate that is proportionate to the total amount of premium paid by enrollees. Agents and brokers sell plans for insurers and perform a variety of functions on behalf of individuals and employers. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, in 2012 there were approximately 337,000 jobs held by insurance sales agents. They include agents and brokers working independently as well as those who are working independently. employed by an insurer. Agents and brokers provide assistance to individuals and employers in choosing and enrolling in plans. They may assess an individual’s insurance needs and describe the characteristics of different plans that best meet those needs. They can also provide assistance after an individual or employee has enrolled in a plan, for example, by helping enrollees communicate with health plans in trying to resolve disputed medical claims. Insurers who use agents and brokers to sell their plans typically pay them based on a percentage. applicable, as a condition of receiving coverage from the insurer. These also include any fees or other contributions associated with the health plan. Federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees. Federal income taxes on investment income and capital gains are excluded. Non-claims costs. These include all other insurer expenses beyond medical claims, expenses for QI activities, and federal and state tax and license fees. CMS defines non- claims costs for the following categories: (1) agents’ and brokers’ fees and (2) other expenses. commissions; (2) cost containment expenses, which reduce the number of health services provided or the costs of such services, but are not related to an activity to improve health care quality; (3) claims adjustment expenses, such as office maintenance and supplies costs. (4) salaries and benefits that insurers pay to their employees who sell their plans; (5) other taxes that may not be excluded from premium revenue; (6) other general and administrative expenses,such as salaries and advertising. that are designed to increase the likelihood of desired health outcomes in ways that can be objectively measured. Activities must be primarily designed to improve health outcomes, prevent hospital readmissions, improve patient safety, reduce medical errors, and lower infection and mortality rates. Insurers are also allowed to include expenses for health information technology required to accomplish these activities as well as a percentage of their expenses for converting disease classification codes. These include the sum of all funds paid by an enrollee and employer, if they are insured. rebates in 2012. These amounts would each have decreased by about 75 percent had agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions been excluded from the MLR and rebate calculations. Of the $1.1 billion in total rebates that insurers paid in 2011, insurers in the large group market paid 37 percent of this total, or $405 million in rebates. In 2012, of the $520 million in totalRebate that insurers Paid in 2012, insurers In the small group market Paid the largest amount in Rebates (about $207 million) is calculated and this difference is multiplied by the insurer’s premiums, after federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees are removed. There are different ways in which rebates can be paid out by insurers that depend, in part, on whether rebates are associated with individual or group market plans. In general, insurers can choose to provide rebates in the form of a lump-sum payment or as a premium credit for the following MLR year. Insurers in the individual market must providing rebates to their enrollees while insurers in the small and large group markets may meet this obligation. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. This appendix presents information on insurers’ median PPACA medical loss ratios by state and insurance market for 2011 (see table 6) and for 2012 (see tables 7 and 8) This appendix shows the total amount of rebates that insurers paid to enrollees and policyholders who paid premiums, by state for all markets combined for 2011 and 2012. In addition to the contact named above, Gerardine Brennan, Assistant Director; George Bogart; Romonda McKinney Bumpus; Pamela Dooley; Julianne Flowers; and Laurie Pachter made contributions to the report. the likelihood of owing rebates. We provided a draft of this product to HHS for comment. HHS responded that it had no general or technical comments. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Health and Human Services and other interested parties. In addition, the report is available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7114. key contributions to this report. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. For support in the UK, call the national suicide prevention line on 0845 90 90 100 or visit the Samaritan's Samaritans.

ROUGE-1: 75.54, ROUGE-2: 69.77, ROUGE-L: 30.51
BERTScore: 68.06

==============================================
==================== [51/100] ====================
Summary:
than 400 training courses offered by the Office of Human Resources Management in 2005. Since 2004, OIOS has subscribed to IIA’s online training service that offers more than 100 courses applicable to auditors. The Office does not formally require staff training, nor does it systematically track training to provide reasonable assurance that all staff are maintaining and acquiring professional skills. OI OS policy manuals list no minimum training requirement, although they gather some information on their use of training funds for their annual training report. to the UN Office of Human Resources Management, they do not maintain an office wide database to systematically track all training taken by their staff. In our April 2006 report on OIOS, we also recommended that the Secretary of State and the Permanent Representative of the United States to the UN work with member states to support OI OS’s efforts to more closely adhere to international auditing standards. In commenting on the official draft of that report, OIos and State agreed with our overall conclusions and recommendations. OIOS’s authority spans all UN activities under the Secretary-General. OIOS derives its funding from (1) regular budget resources, which are funds from assessed contributions from member states. UN personnel records show that OIos staff took a total of more than $1 million in fees and expenses in 2004 and 2005. The UN does not formally require or systematically track staff training to provide reasonable assurance that all staff are maintaining and acquiring professional skills, the report says. not have adequate resources, they do not have a mechanism in place to determine appropriate staffing levels to help justify budget requests, except for peacekeeping oversight services. For peacekeeping audit services, OIOS does have a metric—endorsed by the General Assembly—that provides one professional auditor for every $100 million in the annual peacekeeping budget. For the CMP, OiOS reported that it has been difficult to support staff increases in oversight areas that lack a comparable metric, according to officials. OIOS has no authority to enforce payment for services rendered, officials say. There is no appeal process, no supporting administrative structure, and no adverse impact on an agency that does not pay or pays only a portion of the bill. In our April 2006 report concerning OIOS, we recommended that the Secretary of State and the Permanent Representative of the United States to the UN work with member states to support budgetary independence for OIos. In commenting on the official draft of that report, OI OS said it agreed with our findings and recommendation. GAO found that current UN financial regulations and rules are very restrictive, severely limiting OIOS’s ability to respond to changing circumstances. GAO: State fully agreed with our findings that UN member states need to ensure that OiOS has budgetary independence. State: State does not believe that multiple funding sources have impeded OI OS’S budgetary flexibility. OIos formally adopted the GAO‘s recommendations. Oios stated that observations made in our report were consistent with OI SOS’’�s internal assessments and external peer reviews. dependent on UN funds and programs and other UN entities for resources, access, and reimbursement for the services it provides. OIOS negotiates the terms of work and payment for services with the manager of the program it intends to examine, and heads of these entities have the right to deny funding for oversight work. By denying OIos funding, UN entities could avoid OI OS audits or investigations, says the report. The report was published by the International Institute of Social and Economic Research. and high-risk areas could potentially be excluded from timely examination. For example, allowing the heads of programs the right to deny funding to internal audit activities prevented OIOS from examining high- risk areas in the UN Oil for Food program, where billions of dollars were subsequently found to have been misused. In some cases, fund and program managers have disputed fees charged by OiOS for investigative services rendered. 40 percent of the $2 million billed by OIos after it completed its work is currently in dispute, and since 2001, less than half of the entities have paid. its multiple funding sources, OIOS locations worldwide, or its operating divisions to address changing priorities. In addition, the movement of staff positions or funds between regular and extrabudgetary resources is not allowed. For example, one section in the Internal Audit Division may have exhausted its regular budget travel funds, while another section may have travel funds available that are financed by extrab budgetary peacekeeping resources. It would breach UN financial regulations and rules if it moved resources between the two budgets. Since 1996, an increasing share of OIOSís total budget is comprised of extrabudgetary resources. The majority of OiOS’s staff (about 69 percent) is funded with extrabbudgetary resources, which increased due to audits and investigations of peacekeeping operations, including issues related to sexual exploitation and abuse. OIos is based in Washington, D.C., and has offices in New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington, DC. The organization is funded by a combination of its regular budget and its extrab budget, which has increased in nominal terms. states that cover normal, recurrent activities such as the core functions of the UN Secretariat and (2) extrabudgetary resources. OIOS audited some aspects of the Oil for Food program and identified hundreds of weaknesses and irregularities. But it lacked the resources and independence needed to audit the entire program, the authors say. The report was published by the International Institute for Social and Economic Research (IISER) on November 14. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The UN is vulnerable to fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement due to weaknesses in existing oversight practices. The General Assembly mandate creating OIOS calls for it to be operationally independent. UN funding arrangements severely limit OIos’s ability to respond to changing circumstances and reallocate its resources among the Institute for Internal Auditors’ (IIA) international standards for the professional practice of internal auditing in 2002. Effective oversight demands reasonable budgetary independence, sufficient resources, and adherence to professional auditing standards. OIOS has adopted a risk management framework to link the office’s annual work plans to risk-based priorities, but it has not fully implemented this framework. As of April 2006, out of 25 entities that comprise major elements of its “oversight universe,” only three risk assessments had been completed. As a result, OIOS officials cannot currently provide reasonable assurance that the entities they choose to examine are those that pose the highest risk, says the report.to the UN work with member states to support OIos’S efforts to more closely adhere to international auditing standards. in their annual work plan during the planning phase so that, by 2008, at least 50 percent of their work is based on a systematic risk assessment. Although OIOS’s annual reports contain references to risks facing the UN organization, the reports do not provide an overall assessment of the status of these risks or the consequence to the organization if the risks are not addressed. For instance, in February 2005, the Independent Inquiry Committee reported that many of the Oil for Food program's deficiencies were not described in the annual reports submitted to the UN. OIOS does not have an annual report to assess risks and controls. The General Assembly would have to determine the appropriate vehicle for such a new reporting requirement. The official agreed that OIOS should communicate to senior management on areas where the office has not been able to examine significant risk and control issues. The office has stated that the office does have the ability to assess risk and controls, but that such an assessment does not belong in the annual report in its current form, which focuses largely on the activities of the office. UN needs to establish an independent bid protest process for suspected wrongdoing. The number of contracts reviewed by the committee has increased by almost 60 percent since 2003. The committee’s chairman and members told us that the committee does not have the resources to keep up with its expanding workload. They said that the UN needs to set up an independent third-party evaluation as well as arbitration, due process, and formal resolution for all reports. It also needs to create an independent body to investigate allegations of wrongdoing. The committee is charged with evaluating proposed contracts worth more than $200,000. Concerns regarding the committee’s structure and workload have led UN auditors to conclude that the committee cannot properly review contract proposals. It may thus recommend contracts for approval that are inappropriate and have not met the committee's requirements, the report said. The committee is responsible for advising the Department of Management as to whether the contracts are in accordance with UN Financial Regulations and Rules and other UN policies. The report was published on Wednesday. The UN has not established an independent process to consider vendor protests. Such a process would provide reasonable assurance that vendors are treated fairly when bidding. It would also help alert senior UN management to situations involving questions about UN compliance. The General Assembly endorsed the principle of independent bid protests in 1994 when it recommended for adoption by member states a model procurement law drafted by the UN Commission on International Trade Law. The UN’s lack of an independent bid protest process limits the transparency of its procurement process by not providing a means for a vendor to protest. We have identified problems affecting the UN’s bid protest process, headquarters contract review committee, vender rosters, procurement workforce, ethics guidance for procurement personnel, and procurement manual. In our April 2006 report on UN procurement, we recommended that the Secretary of State and the Permanent Representative of the United States to the UN work with member states to encourage the UN over the past 2 years. A Procurement Service official who helped revise the manual in 2004 stated that the procurement service has been unable to allocate resources needed to update the manual since that time. The UN Procurement Service directs its vendors to file protests to the chief and then to his or her immediate supervisor. If handled through an independent process, vendor complaints could alert senior UN officials and UN auditors to the failure of UN procurement staff to comply with stated procedures. The U.N. hired a consultant to evaluate the internal controls of its procurement operations. One of the consultant’s conclusions was that the internal control of the procurement operations was inadequate. The consultant also found that the UN had not followed its own procurement procedures properly. procurement spending has more than tripled to keep pace with a rapidly growing peacekeeping program. The UN Department of Management, through its 70-person UN Procurement Service, is ultimately responsible for developing UN procurement policies. Because the UN is a multilateral institution, our oversight authority does not directly extend to the UN, but instead extends through the United States’ membership in the organization. In recognition of this factor, we conduct UN-related work only in response to specific requests from committees with jurisdiction over UN matters. steps to improve UN procurement. The Department of State stated that it welcomed our report and endorsed its recommendations. The UN did not provide us with written comments. To assess internal controls in the UN procurement process, we used an internal control framework that is widely accepted in the international audit community. We assessed the UN’s control environment for procurement, as well as its control activities, risk assessment process, procurement information processes, and monitoring systems. In doing so, we reviewed documents and information prepared by the UN Board of Auditors. If implemented, the CMP will be a large and unique endeavor for the UN. Effective internal oversight and management of the procurement process will be necessary for the successful completion of the project. Recent UN scandals, particularly in the Oil for Food program, demonstrate oversight launched as a result of the World Summit in the fall of 2005. The degree to which the UN and OIOS embrace international auditing standards and practices will demonstrate their commitment to addressing the monumental management and oversight tasks that lie ahead. could impact implementation of the CMP. Long-standing weaknesses in the UN’s procurement office have left UN procurement funds highly vulnerable to fraud, waste, and abuse. Many of these weaknesses have been identified and documented by outside experts and the UN's own auditors for more than a decade. Sustained leadership at the UN will be needed to correct these weaknesses. This concludes my testimony. I would be pleased to take your questions. Should you have any questions about this testimony, please contact me at (202) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov. to provide full and effective oversight of this large, costly, and complex UN effort. As the program was implemented, the Oil for Food program was further weakened by inadequate attention to internal controls. In addition to oversight, an effective procurement process is one of the keys to success for any large scale construction project. For more than a decade, experts have called on the UN to correct serious weaknesses in its procurement process. The UN procurement process has been under increasing stress in recent years as a result. The UN does not consistently implement its process for helping to ensure that it is conducting business with qualified vendors. As a result, the UN may be vulnerable to favoring certain vendors or dealing with unqualified vendors. In 1994, a high-level group of international procurement experts concluded that the UN’s vendor roster was outdated, inaccurate, and inconsistent across all locations. The UN has not demonstrated a commitment to improving its professional procurement staff through training, OIOS said in a recent report. UN has not established a career path for professional advancement for procurement staff. UN has not updated its procurement manual since January 2004 to reflect current UN procurement policy. In June 2005, a UN consultant recommended that the UN develop separate guidelines in the manual for the planning and execution of construction projects. These guidelines could be useful in planning and executing CMP procurement. The UN has been considering the development of specific ethics guidance for procurement officers for almost a decade, in response to General Assembly directives dating back to 1998. The UN has relied disproportionately on the actions of its staff to safeguard its resources. Recent studies indicate that Procurement Service staff lack knowledge of UN procurement policies. Most procurement staff lack professional certifications attesting to their procurement education, training, and experience. The UN has not established requirements for procurement staff to obtain continuous training, resulting in inconsistent levels of training across the procurement workforce. Furthermore, UN staff have not been trained in a career development path, and other key human capital practices critical to attracting, developing and retaining a qualified professional workforce. main breaker for electrical power to the top floors of the Secretariat building failed, causing it to fuse to the electrical panel. This failure could have resulted in a major fire. As host country, the United States financed construction of the original complex by providing the UN with a no-interest loan. The rest of the complex was built between 1960 and 1982 and funded through the UN’s regular budget or private donations. In December 2002, the General Assembly endorsed the CMP to renovate the UN headquarters complex. May 2003, we reported that the resulting renovation planning was reasonable, but that additional management controls and oversight were needed. In April 2006, the UN appropriated $23.5 million to finance the renovation’s preconstruction phase and committed $77 million to construction of temporary conference space and supplementary office space rental. The General Assembly has not yet decided whether to approve implementation of the CMP. In a February 2003 resolution, the General Assembly stressed the importance of oversight in implementing the C MP. The UN headquarters buildings in New York City are in need of renovation. Over the last 50 years there have been no major renovations or upgrades to the buildings or their systems. In September 2005, the headquarters complex was shut down and the staff sent home because a fire broke out in one of the buildings. The UN headquarters complex lacks fire sprinklers, has a deteriorating window structure, and is vulnerable to catastrophic electrical failures. The buildings do not meet current safety, fire and building codes and does not meet UN technology or security requirements. Other major contributors to this testimony were Phyllis Anderson and Maria Edelstein, Assistant Directors; Joy Labez, Pierre Toureille, Valérie L. Nowak, Jeffrey Baldwin-Bott, Michaela Brown, Joseph Carney, Debbie J. Chung, Kristy Kennedy, Clarette Kim, J.J. Marzullo, and Barbara Shields. This is a work of the U.S. government and not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO.

ROUGE-1: 74.41, ROUGE-2: 68.65, ROUGE-L: 33.66
BERTScore: 62.19

==============================================
==================== [52/100] ====================
Summary:
The 13 ERS airfields are located mostly in Europe and throughout the Pacific. Each is planned to be within an area 3,500 nautical miles from the U.S. and from the war zones. DOD selected the 13 bases according to their proximity to the anticipated war zones, the host nation’s willingness to allow the use of its bases, and other factors such as climate. The ERS also provides the capabilities needed to handle ongoing peacetime operations and requirements associated with smaller-scale contingency operations. Mobilization of U.S. forces for such conflicts requires a global system of integrated land, sea, and air resources. The fleet of civilian and military passenger and cargo aircraft and the En Route System (ERS) airfields provide the critical air component. ERS airfields are normally staffed for the peacetime flow of aircraft. Additional personnel and equipment would be brought in to handle the increased flow of Aircraft in the event of contingency operations or full-scale war.. According to DOD’s January 2001 estimate, the 13 ERS. airfields would not currently have enough capacity to move the required amounts of personnel and. strategic operations. Conflicts can and do occur. In the late 1980s, the European Command had planned to return U.S. facilities at two ERS airfields to the host nations. Transportation Command officials believed the airfields were needed for mobilizations to the Middle East. The airfield facilities were ultimately retained. Overall management of a particular E RS airfield is shared between the command with responsibility for that geographical area and the military service that operates the airfield on a daily basis. The ERS airfields are in Europe, but their purpose is to act as a conduit for aircraft headed to war zones in the Middle East. While the unified commands have some management responsibilities for the airfields, they have no funding programs for base operations and construction. The military services and the Defense Logistics Agency generally provide U.S. funding for these purposes. For example, the Air Force provides funds for the operation of its E RS airfield in Fairford, England. If the base command is in charge of the airfield, it may act as an advocate for it. Operation of the ERS airfields is shared between the host nation, which owns the airfield, and a number of DOD organizations. Host nation responsibilities vary and are documented in the Status of Forces Agreement for each country. U.S. organizations with responsibility for the airfields include the Air Force, who provides day-to-day operations for all but two of the air fields. According to officials, while space is sometimes shared, it is not shared with the host country and is usually owned by the host. The Air Force operates 11 ERS airfields; the Navy operates the airfield in Rota, Spain; and the Marines operate the air field in Iwakuni, Japan. The airfields are located on bases owned by the host country, under agreements for support negotiated by the State Department. Each military service must operate theAirfield in accordance with its primary service mission. However, each service must also manage the Airfield in according with the policies set forth by the geographical command. These commands are responsible for supporting and achieving U.S. interests in their particular ERS-related areas. The Transportation Command has functional responsibility for managing the entire Defense Transportation System. However, it is not in charge of the ERS airfields and can provide only limited funding for repair and improvement projects. The needs of the geographical commands (such as the European, Central, and Pacific commands) take precedence over those of the functional commands. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization may also use the bases to assist in carrying out its war-fighting responsibilities. Both commands may act as advocates for the resource needs of ERS. region and for planning and maintaining war-fighting capabilities in the event of an outbreak of hostilities. They include component commands drawn from each of the military services to manage the support associated with each. These commands may act as an advocate for ERS needs consistent with their contribution to the commands’ mission of maintaining war fighting capabilities. In Europe, both the European Navy and U.S. Air Forces Europe provide support for their naval and air bases in the region. In the Pacific, the Navy’s Pacific Fleet, Marine Forces Pacific, and Pacific Air Forces provide similar support. Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials play some combination of three basic roles: owner/manager, funder, and/or advocate in support of various ERS needs. The Transportation Command has functional responsibility for managing the entire Defense Transportation System, with the airlift portion handled by its air component. The Air Mobility command uses the ERS airfields to help provide aerial refueling and airlift through its fleet of air tankers and cargo. It plans and coordinates movements through the overall transportation system. A formal, written strategic plan that lays out missions and goals, guiding principles and priorities, performance measures, and monitoring mechanisms is also needed. This plan would help ensure that ERS operations are governed by a coherent worldwide vision and not by limited regional or service notions and perspectives. Without the vision and order provided by a formal strategic plan, decisionmakers do not have the information they need to ensure ERS resources and operations are focused on the right goals and outcomes. Without a system for ongoing monitoring of key aspects of ERS Operations, decisionmaking does not take place. ERS needs a better management structure, report says. Some elements of ERS operations are individually managed by various organizations and processes. Report: “robust” management in one or even several areas does not constitute a coherent and coordinated overall management structure. Our recommendation is intended to assign responsibility for overarching issues, such as development of an overall strategic plan, the authors say. The report recommends that ERS develop an overarching strategic plan for the future of the ERS organization and for all of its operations. ERS. Management of the ERS is fragmented among at least four unified commands and six subcommands, three services, host nations, and other organizations. No organization is responsible for formally coordinating and overseeing overall ERS operations. The growth in importance of the En Route System has not been matched by a commensurate improvement in its performance. The European and Pacific Commands established separate steering committees to provide a forum for coordination and resolution of ERS issues in each region. The Transportation Command co-chairs both steering committees. Establishing the European and Pacific steering committees was an important first step in organizing regional operations. While the war-fighting responsibilities and authorities of the geographical commands must be respected, one overarching organization with responsibility for strategic operations during peacetime is needed. Without such structure ERS operations are prone to a higher risk of inefficiency in the form of confusing and overlapping lines of authority and accountability for key decisions, the authors say. They also warn of a lack of coordination and duplication of effort among responsible organizations, and wasteful competition forinformation and management structures. Contributors are the Defense Logistics Agency and the Air Force Operation and Maintenance and Military Construction programs. It is unclear whether all the construction projects will be completed as planned. According to Transportation Command officials, funding for the projects covered by U.S. programs has been formally requested through the DOD budget process. About 19 percent of funding was associated with projects that had either begun or completed work, compared to about 10 percent of host nation and allied funding. The ERS only recently has the ERS begun to receive high priority for funding. DOD infrastructure is grossly under funded, with facilities currently funded for replacement every 250 years. Projects planned in later years are more vulnerable to funding changes since they have not yet been spent. Officials also note that host nation involvement in funding can create some uncertainty in construction timetables. For example, DOD had to reassign fiscal year 2002 funding for construction projects at one ERS airfield in Europe to other DOD projects because of the host nation's involvement in the project. (See p. 18 for a discussion of DOD problems in infrastructure management.) U.S. Air Forces Europe would validate the project and request funding through the various programs available. The Defense Logistics Agency has responsibility for funding fuels projects across all services. In deciding whether to include a project in funding requests, the services and the Defense Logistic Agency assign their own priorities to the project. For more information, go to www.airfors Europe.org. In the U.S., call the National Air Force Foundation on 1-800-273-8255. DOD plans call for about 55 percent of the $2 billion in ERS construction funding to come from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and host nations. Japan has provided some $21 billion for projects under this program, which started in 1979 to ease the financial burden of stationing U.S. forces in Japan. The remaining 45 percent ($878 million) is expected toCome from a variety of U.s. programs (see table 1). The largest ERS project is the Air Force’s F/A-18 Super Hornet. Most (58 percent) of the costs are associated with bases in the Pacific region. Host nations and U.S. allies are expected to fund about 55 percent of the total. It is unclear whether all the projects will be completed as planned, as the projects must compete with each other and with other DOD projects for funding and face other uncertainties. Since the end of the.review in July 2000, the Pentagon has spent more than $1.2 trillion on military operations in the Middle East and Africa. of a 2- to 3-year delay in host government approval of funding requirements. According to officials, the host government was concerned about sovereignty issues involved in its membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Formal approval has now been received for these projects, and funding has been shifted by about 1 year. Most of the projects have not yet started construction. As of October 2000, about 4 percent ($75.0 million) of total funding had been spent on completed projects with another 10 percent ($194.6 million) spent on projects in progress. The Airlift Flow Model only knows what cargo is available for pickup at the moment. An optimization model would be aware of all cargo available throughout the mission being modeled. In a situation where 10 tons of cargo are ready to be loaded right now and 40 more tons several hours in the future, the Airl lift Flow Model would schedule an aircraft to pick up the 10-ton cargo immediately since it is focused on current conditions. An optimized model would likely wait a few hours until an aircraft was loaded with all 50 tons before sending it off. A DOD-sponsored study predicted that by redistributing the existing ramp space and fuel, DOD could boost cargo deliveries by an estimated 12 to 13 percent. A second DOD- sponsored study used an optimization model to analyze the impact of proposed construction projects designed to increase the fuel handling capacity at ERS bases. The study concluded that the increase in throughput capacity provided by the projects would be small. However, a better distribution of ERS resources could significantly increase the flow of cargo compared with the flow predicted by the Airlift Flow Model. shortfall, the model DOD uses to simulate ERS operations could overestimate the size of the shortfall. Air Mobility Command officials acknowledge that the Airlift Flow Model, although designed to simulate or describe complex systems, does not necessarily identify the best or optimal solution to mobilization requirements. The model repeatedly simulates cargo movements until it reaches a solution to the identified mission, but the solution may or may not be the optimal one. There are other types of models, called optimization models, that officials say are designed to seek thebest or optimal solutions. labor intensive, making the models relatively inflexible and slow, and that it is difficult to introduce variables into analyses. Officials from the Office of the Secretary of Defense stated, however, that because optimization models show promise, DOD is continuing to sponsor projects to further develop their use. We were unable to quantify the overall impact of the Airlift Flow Model on the U.S. Air Force's ability to mobilize troops in the event of an emergency. The Air Mobility Command believes that by repeated analyses over time using their model, they were able to identify the best solutions for mobilization missions. DOD officials believe that optimization models have promise, but also believe that they have drawbacks. They did not use them to analyze the ERS in the Mobility Requirements Study 2005. optimization models can come to unrealistic conclusions because they cannot simulate random events. They may use information (such as longer-range plans for an entire mobilization) that may not be available to commanders early in the mobilization. Using existing resources more effectively may be the best way to increase fuel deliveries. Officials further state that loading data into optimized models can be very difficult. real time, readily available information needed to quickly identify and correct problems. DOD also needs to develop an overall cost-benefit study of its construction plans for the ERS. DOD’s annual requests for funds contain no evidence that projects are prioritized by importance, the authors say. DOD disagreed with our recommendation to include information on ERS limitations in its annual performance plan and report, they say. The authors say DOD needs to ensure that the guiding principles and rationales at play in allocating scarce funding dollars are not lost in the budget process. Despite concerns about aging and deteriorating facilities and equipment, the ERS has no centralized oversight system to provide data on deterioration and failure rates. DOD believes the guidance it provides through the planning and budgeting process is sufficient to optimize the list of construction projects to be funded. We disagree. We understand that developing a formal cost-benefit analysis of the overall ERS infrastructure is difficult. However, our experience has shown that it is possible to do a formal study of the entire ERS and its infrastructure. the European and Pacific Steering committees and the Inspector General. We obtained lists of construction projects at each ERS airfield and analyzed them from a number of different perspectives. To determine whether the ERS has the information and organizational structure needed to ensure that its operations are carried out efficiently and effectively, we analyzed data and reports on a variety of basic management issues. We identified all organizations with information gaps and discussed information gaps with DOD officials. We also discussed the total costs by base, by region, and systemwide. gaps in DOD’s overall strategic planning processes that have led to difficulties in assessing performance in a variety of areas. As a result, we have classified DOD strategic planning as a major management challenge. DOD has reduced force structure since the end of the Cold War, but has not achieved similar reductions in infrastructure costs. DOD acknowledges that it has not been spending enough money to offset the growing backlog of facilities maintenance and repair. We also classified DOD management of support infrastructure as aMajor Management Challenge. Mobility Requirements Study 2005 is identified as the ERS “Infrastructure Analysis,” not as a strategic plan. It is simply an analysis of current shortfalls in capacity and whether planned construction projects will remedy those shortfalls by 2005. The analysis does not include many of the elements needed for sound strategic plans, which need to lay out missions and goals, necessary resources, assigned responsibilities for accomplishing goals, priorities and strategies to be followed, and performance measures for gauging progress toward identified goals. In addition, the analysis doesn't identify the expected cost to remedy the capacity. shortfalls, or the organizational or procedural responsibilities for achieving ERS goals. The analysis does not identify priorities between regions, bases, or projects to help identify strategies to be followed in case of funding or other problems. It simply assumes that projects will be completed on schedule without any measures of actual progress. In fact, during our review Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials could not tell us how many projects were under way. The U.S. Air Force is the world's largest air force. DOD officials say the process was focused on satisfying mission war-fighting requirements while attempting to minimize costs where possible. An overall cost-benefit analysis was not done, they said, because the ERS evolved over many years in response to changing military and political conditions. Officials stated that they attempted to make cost-effective decisions by, for example, using different combinations of bases. The planned $2 billion in projects represent the best solutions for correcting the shortfall, officials said. It is not known if any of the planned projects will be completed. performance report gives an incomplete and misleading view of strategic mobility capabilities. DOD also disagreed with our description of the growth in estimated costs for improving the ERS. DOD stated that the different cost estimates we were provided are not directly comparable because they were produced several years apart and were premised on different sets of bases and analytical methodologies. Our report clearly lays out these differences. DOD further claimed that we were using the comparison to point to “unexplained” cost growth. Whether DOD was aware of the reasons behind the increased estimate was not the primary point we made. long-term plans and strategies, guiding policies, and operating priorities for the ERS. DOD does not include information on ERS shortfalls in its reports on the performance of the overall strategic mobility system. DOD needs to ensure that ERS problems and issues receive a visibility consistent with their critical strategic importance. Efforts to reduce shortages of DOD cargo aircraft will have to be stepped up, the authors say. The study would also serve as a useful review of ERS construction plans and projects in light of the ongoing review of the National Military Strategy. cost-benefit study, and monitoring system—to one organization to help provide a clear, coordinated, and comprehensive management structure for all ERS operations. DOD said it would nevertheless try to improve the integration, presentation, and documentation of the plan to help with its integration and documentation. DOD partially agreed with our recommendation to develop an overall ERS strategic plan and monitoring System. It stated that the recent Mobility Requirements Study 2005 already includes a strategic plan for the ERS. It should be noted that during our review this recommendation received strong support from officials at organizations currently involved in ERS Operations. outside organizations understand its provisions. We disagree that the January 2001 Mobility Requirements Study 2005 contains a strategic plan for the ERS. There seems to be some confusion in DOD over this issue. During the course of our review we asked repeatedly for copies of any strategic plan and DOD officials repeatedly told us that no formal strategic plan existed. In fact, during our formal closeout meeting in April 2001 officials told usthat a formal strategicPlan was being developed as a result of ourreview. The document cited by DOD in the 2001 January 2001 document is not the one cited in the 2005 document. DOD has no formal strategic plan for the ERS. Without such a plan, DOD does not have the information or management structure needed to ensure the success of the program. Sound strategic planning is crucial to achieving program success, the authors say. Over the years, they say, they have noted similar problems with the U.S. intelligence community's research into the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq and Afghanistan. The authors: ISIL's mission and goals should be clearly laid out in a strategic plan. Cold War, many U.S. military locations overseas have been closed and their personnel relocated to bases in the continental United States. Transportation Command officials state that with this drawdown in the 1990s, the ERS lost many of its facilities and much of its flexibility. Today, ERS has access to only 13 locations, compared with 45 in the early 1990s. As a result, the remaining bases have become much more important as the only airfield options available for en- route mobilization support. Air Mobility Command leaders realized how critical the airfields were. To publicize the problem and obtain higher priority, the Air Mobility Command proclaimed 1997 the “Year of the En Route System” However, even with the increased priority, officials told us that it still takes many years to move projects through the budget. The U.S. Air Force has more than 2,000 airfields across the world. The Air Force is home to more than 100,000 military personnel, including more than 1,000 Air Force families. example, choosing to repair or improve existing bases rather than building new ones. Because of the age of the facilities, many of the planned projects had already been identified and justified in the military construction budgeting process. Despite concerns about aging and deteriorating facilities, Transportation Command officials also told us that they could not provide data on deterioration and failure rates. The ERS has no centralized oversight system to provide readily available, up-to-date data on the condition and readiness of the airfields, officials said. were trying to make. DOD did not know how much it would cost to bring ERS capacity up to requirements because it does not monitor overall costs. Air Mobility Command officials had to make a special query to all the commands to find out what the current costs were and whether they had changed over previous estimates. We believe that the lack of a strategy or system for monitoring contributed to the delay in providing an updated estimate late in our review. Officials responded that obtaining such an update would be very labor intensive and time consuming. ERS capacity was about $1.2 billion for fiscal years 1997 through 2006. Shortly after that the estimate was changed to $2.0 billion. The increase reflects changes in the bases making up the ERS since the mid-1990s. Transportation Command officials told us that most ERS airfields were built during or immediately after World War II, and most were built in the 1940s and 1950s. The Air Mobility Command agreed to query all of the various commands involved to determine the current cost to eliminate the shortfall. The $2 billion will fund repairs and improvements to fuel systems, runways, ramp space, and other base elements. The largest construction cost category is associated with fuel system repair and improvement. According to Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials, the standard fuel systems at current ERS bases were designed and built during the early 1950s and had an estimated life span of 30 to 40 years. At some bases refueling must be carried out by trucks, rather than airplanes. Some components were built by host nations even earlier. by more modern pipeline and hydrant systems. At other bases, hydrants are antiquated or have deteriorating lines that slow and sometimes interrupt fueling operations altogether. Bases in the Pacific region total about $1.14 billion (58 percent) compared to about $825 million (42 percent) for the European bases. Officials emphasize that the proposed projects are intended largely to replace capability lost due to deterioration or base closures. In fact, only 25 of the 516 projects provide additional capacity. equipment to the war zones in the time required (the specific requirements and capacities are classified) DOD expects the shortfall to be largely eliminated by 2005. But the assumptions and modeling approach DOD uses in its calculations raise some uncertainty about the precise size of the shortfall. Some study assumptions tend to underestimate the shortfall, while the modeling approach used could overestimate it. The net effect of these factors on estimates of ERS capacity in 2005 is unclear.. DOD’s latest estimate of. ERS construction to eliminate the shortfall consists of 516 projects and costs about $2 billion. Some of the study’s assumptions tend to underestimate the size of the shortfall. Despite concerns about their old age and deteriorating condition, DOD assumes that ERS airfields would operate without breaking down. Capacity requirements for the ERS could be raised even higher if other ongoing missions (such as peacekeeping) were added. A similar strategy is being considered for the Pacific, but it has not yet been approved. The study at least partially offsets these assumptions by calculating the capacity of ERS bases in Europe. The Congress may wish to consider directing the Secretary of Defense to implement the recommendations. In written comments on a draft of this report, DOD generally disagreed with our conclusions and recommendations. DOD stated that our report asserted that the approach it used is “flawed” and overestimates the shortfalls. DOD believes that it has applied the best tools available and that it will continue to refine its capabilities, as new modeling tools become available. The Congress may want to report on DOD’s progress to ensure that these prudent improvements to ERS management are carried out. have misunderstood our point. Our report does not assert that the modeling approach was flawed or that it overstated the shortfall. We state that the assumptions and modeling approaches DOD used could underestimate or overestimate the size of the shortfall, but that we could not measure the precise effect of these factors on DOD’s estimate. We point out the uncertainties of both approaches—including DOD officials’ comments on the pros and cons of each—so that the reader can clearly understand the degree of precision in DOD's estimate. is important to fully consider all options in such analyses to ensure that, should an optimal solution be available, it is identified. DOD also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the Honorable Donald H. Rumsfeld, Secretary of Defense. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. Please contact me at (757) 552-8100 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report. limited impact if those aircraft do not have adequate airfields to land on. To improve the visibility of the ERS and reduce the risk of management problems and inefficiencies, we recommend that the Secretary of Defense: make one organization responsible for strategic management and coordination of overall ERS operations during peacetime. develop a formal strategic plan and monitoring system for the E RS. develop an overall cost-benefit study to document the rationales for plans to repair and improve the EARS, and include information on ERS limitations in DOD’s performance plan and report. the project in terms of its relative contribution to their own missions, as well as its contribution to the overall Department of Defense mission. To determine whether the ERS airfields have the capacity needed to meet the requirements of the National Military Strategy, we obtained briefings, reviewed documents, and interviewed officials at the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the RAND Corporation, and the Naval Postgraduate School. Much of our analysis was focused on the U.S. Transportation Command, the European Command and the Central Command. responsibility for or management duties at ERS airfields and reviewed the scope of their individual responsibilities with DOD officials. We conducted our review from July 2000 through April 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. In addition to those named above, Katherine Chenault, Lawrence E. Dixon, Richard G. Payne, Stefano Petrucci, and Gregory J. Symons, made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. DOD does not include data on ERS shortfalls in the report, despite the major effect such shortfalls have on airlift capacity. We concluded that reducing unneeded infrastructure could free up the funding needed to ensure that critical assets such as the ERS airfields are adequately funded. Omitting ERS information from the key annual report would be a mistake, the authors say. The ERS is an integral aspect of strategic mobility, they say. In fact, Air Mobility Command reports cite ERS infrastructure as the top limiting factor in deployment operations.  requirements could raise airlift capacity requirements by about 7 percent. The ability of the ERS to handle this extra requirement, however, is unclear. Officials were unsure when this issue would be tackled. We did not independently verify DOD’s estimate of system capacity. We reviewed the processes DOD used to identify deficiencies and corrective actions and discussed them with officials at the offices identified above, as well as at DOD”s Office of the Inspector General.i.com: Do you know a hero? Nominations are open for 2013 CNN Heroes. recent Mobility Requirements Study 2005, which estimated the mobility assets and supporting infrastructure needed to deploy for the two-war scenario. The study concluded that current capacity is significantly short of requirements but that improvements to the ERS would largely eliminate the shortfall by 2005. According to DOD officials, the effect of the shortfall would be that required military forces and equipment would arrive in the war zones later than planned, increasing the risk of operations not being executed as planned and of higher casualties. It is estimated the shortfall will be less than $1 billion.

ROUGE-1: 78.96, ROUGE-2: 72.61, ROUGE-L: 27.38
BERTScore: 74.95

==============================================
==================== [53/100] ====================
Summary:
GAO: The federal government’s system for providing assistance to low- income people is highly fragmented. Each federal assistance program usually has its own eligibility criteria, application, documentation requirements, and time frames. A review of federally assisted transportation services for “transportation- disadvantaged” seniors found that 5 federal agencies administer 15 programs. Service providers told GAO that certain characteristics of federal programs can impede the implementation of practices that enhance senior mobility, the report says.. The report concludes that agencies often face the range of barriers to coordination that they often face. Section 502 Rural Housing Loans (Direct) Section 502 Direct Housing Natural Disaster Loans Section 502 Guaranteed Rural Housing loans Section 504 Rural Housing Repair and Rehabilitation Loans Section 515 Rural Rental Housing Loans. Section 521 Rural Rented Assistance (Section 8 and Rent Supplement) (inactive) Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation (in active) Section 207 Mortgage Insurance for Manufactured Home Parks Section 207/223(f) mortgage Insurance for Existing Multifamily Properties. Section 213 Mortgage insurance for Cooperatives Section 221(d)(3) Below-Market Below- market. Before fiscal year 1992, the Section 202 program also supported the development of housing for the disabled. The Section 515 program’s Congregate Housing subprogram requires properties to provide supportive services. Section 221(d)(3) Mortgage Insurance Section 236 Mortgage Insurance and Interest Reduction Payments (inactive) Section 236 (d)(4) mortgage insurance and interest reduction payments (in active) Section 221 (d) mortgage Insurance and interest Reduction Payments ($1,000 to $1,500) ($2,500 to $5,000) Housing developments can be assisted by multiple programs. In general, both HUD and USDA programs target families at lower income levels. HUD has specific goals for increasing housing opportunities for the elderly. Only 4 of 23 housing assistance programs require property owners to provide supportive services to the elderly, according to HUD’s 2004 Annual Performance Plan. It is the only federal housing program that targets all of its rental units for elderly households with very low incomes.. It subsidizes the development and operating costs of multifamily properties for elderly Households with Very Low Incomes.  HUD administers four service-related programs that can be used in conjunction with subsidized housing programs. The Congregate Housing Services Program provides grants for the delivery of meals and nonmedical supportive services to elderly and disabled residents of public and multifamily housing. The Neighborhood Networks program encourages property owners, managers, and residents to provide supportive services or ensure appropriate services are available in the community. While HUD provides up to 40 percent of the cost of supportive services, grantees must pay at least 50 percent. according to the type of facility. USDA’s Section 515 Program, which provides loans to construct or to purchase and substantially rehabilitate multifamily rental or cooperative housing and recreational facilities in rural communities. Tenants eligible to live in program properties may also receive rental assistance through HUD or USDA programs. The Congregate Housing subprogram funds the development of assisted, group living environments that must provide meals, transportation, housekeeping, personal services and recreational and social activities. Generally, HUD and USDA do not provide funding for the services required under these housing programs.  HUD’s Assisted Living Conversion Program provides private nonprofit owners of eligible properties with grants to convert some or all of their units into assisted living facilities for the frail elderly. Applicants for Section 202 funding must demonstrate that services will be available at the development or in the community where new construction is proposed. The facilities must provide supportive services such as personal care, transportation, meals, housekeeping, and laundry. The reconfigured facilities must include enough community space to accommodate a central kitchen or dining area, lounges, and recreation. of HUD-insured and -assisted housing to develop computer centers. HUD does not fund each center’s planned costs but encourages property owners to seek cash grants, in-kind support, and donations from sources such as state and local governments, educational institutions, private foundations, and corporations. The ROSS grant program links public housing residents with appropriate services. This program differs from the Service Coordinator Program in that it is designed specifically for public housingResidents. The program is free and open to the public. In Plain City, Ohio, residents of a Section 515 property receive meals five times a week in the community’s senior center. A local hospital donates the food and a nursing home facility prepares it. The senior center uses the funds collected from the lunch for its activities. In Carolina, Dolan Manor, a Section 202 housing development, has established a relationship with a volunteer group from a local church. The volunteer group provides a variety of services such as transportation for the residents. Guthrie Properties, also a Section 515 property, has established a relationship with the local Area Agency on Aging. The agency assists residents of Guthrie Properties in obtaining a variety of services, including meals and transportation to a senior center. Some elderly residents of public and federally subsidized housing may also obtain health-related services through programs run by HHS. For example, HHS’s Public Housing Primary Care Program provides public housing residents with access to affordable comprehensive primary and preventive health care. The United Way provides most of the funding for the senior center in Guthrie. the Medicaid Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) Waiver Program, which is administered by HHS’s Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. HUD has identified these waivers as an innovative model for assisting the frail elderly in public housing. In addition, eligible elderly residents of federally subsidized housing may receive health care through the Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) Like the HCBS waiver program, this program, like PACE, is also administered by the CDC. enables eligible elderly individuals to obtain needed services without having to live in an institutional setting. The program integrates Medicare and Medicaid financing to provide comprehensive, coordinated care to older adults eligible for nursing homes. Figure 1 provides information on the housing assistance programs that can use federally funded supportive services programs that assist the elderly. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to answer any questions at this time. For further information on this testimony, please contact David G. Wood at (202) 512-8678. Mortgage Insurance Program provides mortgage insurance for the construction or substantial rehabilitation of nursing homes, intermediate care facilities, board and care homes. All insured facilities must provide supportive services, but these services vary. All facilities must be designed for frail elderly persons who need assistance with at least 3 activities of daily living. The program is funded by the U.S. Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Association (FHLM). FHLM is the largest mortgage insurer in the United States, with $1.2 trillion in insured mortgages. increasing the number of elderly households living in privately owned, federally assisted multifamily housing served by a service coordinator. (4) increasing elderly families’ satisfaction with their Section 202 units. USDA does not have specific goals related to the elderly in its fiscal year 2004 Annual Performance Plan. As GAO has previously reported, virtually all the results that the federal government strives to achieve require the concerted and coordinated efforts of two or more agencies. This shared responsibility is an outgrowth of several factors, including the piecemeal evolution of federal programs and service delivery efforts. owners and local organizations and through programs provided by HHS. For example, property owners can establish relationships with local nonprofit organizations, including churches, to ensure that residents have access to the services that they need. In Greensboro, North Carolina, we found several examples of such partnerships. At their discretion, propertyOwners may establish relationships that give the elderly access to meals, transportation, and housekeeping and personal care services. Although GAO did not obtain data on the extent to which such services are made available at all public and federally subsidized multifamily housing, in site visits to HUD and USDA multifamily properties, we find several examples. ROSS program has five funding categories, including Resident Service Delivery Models for the Elderly and Persons with Disabilities. Resident Services funds can be used to hire a project coordinator and assess residents’ needs for supportive services. The Elderly/Disabled Service Coordinator Program has not provided new grants since 1995 but still services existing grants. The Service coordinator program provides funding for managers of multifamily properties designated for the elderly and disabled. The program is funded by federal, state, and local assistance programs. to hire coordinators to assist residents in obtaining supportive services from community agencies. Service coordinators can be funded through competitive grant funds, residual receipts (excess income from a property), or rent increases. According to HUD’s fiscal year 2003 Performance and Accountability Report, service coordinators were serving more than 111,000 units in elderly properties. Elderly residents of public and federally subsidized multifamily housing can also receive supportive services through partnerships between property owners and community agencies, according to HUD. The program awards grants to public and nonprofit private entities to establish the clinics. The organizations must work with public housing authorities to obtain the physical space for the clinics and to establish relationships with residents. Currently, there are 35 grantees, 3 of which are in rural areas. According to a program administrator, although clinics are not specifically geared toward public housing designated for the elderly, they can be established at such properties. Elderly residents of federally subsidized housing may also be eligible for the program's assistance.

ROUGE-1: 78.83, ROUGE-2: 72.46, ROUGE-L: 34.48
BERTScore: 63.13

==============================================
==================== [54/100] ====================
Summary:
In addition, while the process is mandatory, the implementation details may be tailored and, in some cases, integrated with other acquisition activities and documentation. According to DOD Software Assurance Program officials, the DITSCAP approving authority is not expected to evaluate whether the risks have been identified appropriately. If the program manager has not identified risks from foreign suppliers, the process cannot be expected to mitigate them. DOD also requires weapon programs to protect certain types of information during transfer of technology to foreign entities. be evaluated periodically to assess changes in the status of suppliers and adjustments to program security requirements. Require the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration to work with other organizations as necessary to ensure that weapon program risk assessments include specific attention to software development risks and threats. For example, certification and accreditation processes, such as DITSCAP, should include verification that software is up to snuff. DOD agreed certification activities can assist in addressing insider threats in software development. of information assurance software products, such as firewalls and intrusion detection systems, in accordance with National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security Policy No. 11. This policy requires the use of one of three nationally recognized evaluation and validation standards. To assist systems in meeting information assurance requirements, DOD has developed the Defense Information Technology Security Certification and Accreditation Process (DITSCAP) This process includes a review by a designated approving official who certifies that the software meets the requirements for information assurance and security. Under the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002, all executive agencies, including DOD, are required to ensure that information security policies, procedures, and practices are adequate. DOD is required to carry out an information assurance program that includes the development of essential information assurances technologies and programs. These procedures are intended to mitigate system vulnerabilities from operational threats, such as external hacking and unauthorized access to information systems. But they do not apply to internal threats that could affect the integrity of the software, like the insertion of malicious code during software development. with exploitation or insertion of malicious code with the use of foreign research facilities and software development companies. Multiple requirements and guidance are in place to ensure the protection of U.S. national security interests. They generally acknowledge the inherent risk associated with foreign access to classified and export-controlled information and technology by establishing procedures to manage such access. In addition, 12 of the programs used the Technology Assessment/Control Plan and the Program Protection Plan to ensure that risks associated withforeign participation on the program were addressed. The process includes a requirement for a threat assessment, but does not articulate how this information should be developed or reported. As such, it does not direct program managers to consider foreign involvement in software development as a risk or threat that needs to be addressed for information system security. The process results in an agreement between the program manager, the intended user of the system being certified, and the approval authorities that defines critical schedule, budget, security, functionality, and performance issues. It does not specify how the threat assessment should be carried out. Assessment/Control Plan and the Program Protection Plan address the risks associated with the potential release of information to foreign governments. Documents do not provide information on specific suppliers who will be performing work, such as software developers. It evaluates the risk of releasing critical military capability or sensitive information and technology against the benefit of the sale to the United States. The plan also outlines the planning requirements for the possible release of sensitive information to the foreign entities involved in cooperative programs or purchasing military equipment. The documents also outline the risk assessment procedures for releasing sensitive information. limits access to U.S. citizens with appropriate security clearances and establishes eligibility policies for contractors determined to have foreign ownership, control, or influence. Further, an additional DOD directive requires programs containing classified military information to have controls to prevent the unauthorized release of this information to foreign recipients. In addition, the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) controls foreign access to defense articles and services through the establishment of the export license and authorization process. U.s. entities, including defense contractors, may apply to the Department of State for authorization to export controlled information and technology to qualified foreign recipients, The GAO is sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others upon request. This report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512- 4841. Staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix III. To determine how the Department of Defense (DOD) measures security, visit DOD.gov/security. reviewed. John Neumann, Brian Mullins, Delores Cohen, Shelby S. Oakley, Christopher Miller, Gary Middleton, and Marie Ahearn made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. needed to meet mission requirements. Program offices were most knowledgeable about the foreign-developed software for the onboard portions of their programs. 4 program offices were able to identify all the software produced by foreign suppliers, and 11 program offices could identify at least some of the software. Onboard software is that which actually runs the weapon system, even if that software is not located on the main component. For example, onboard software for a missile system could include software located on a remote platform used to guide the missile toward its target. and contractors reported very little knowledge about the level of foreign involvement for offboard software. This software, sometimes referred to as ground based, interacts with the onboard system to provide updated information in support of operational activity. Offboard software is often used to check for errors or malicious code and to produce, maintain, or verify onboard software. Program officials from 10 of the programs we reviewed indicated they had verylittle knowledge of the offboard component of their programs. For example, one program uses standard mission planning software that interacts with onboard flight software. versions or when software just requires editing and enhancing the older code rather than developing new code. Ten of the programs reviewed accepted legacy software without fully identifying the sources of development. Software is also developed as part of the hardware components it is tasked with managing. This embedded software is used to control other electronic hardware products, either onboard or offboard the weapon system, and is often often used to monitor and control the weapons system's systems. It can also be used as a basis for developing or modifying the new software. Software code that is poorly developed or purposely injected with malicious code could be used to disrupt these and other DOD information systems. DOD has reported that countries hostile to the United States are focusing resources on developing information warfare strategies. In 2001 there was a significant increase in suspicious attempts by foreign entities to access U.S. technology and information and that trend is expected to continue. Information systems technology was the most sought after militarily critical technology by these entities, according to a DSS report. The U.s. defense industry is at the forefront of advanced design and development of weapon systems. To protect the United States, DOD relies on a complex array of computer-dependent and mutually supportive organizational components. These systems are, in turn, connected with other systems operated by contractors, other government agencies, and international organizations. In addition, performance requirements for weapon systems have become increasingly demanding, and breakthroughs in software capability have led to a greater reliance on software to provide more weapon capability, the agency says. The U.S. Department of Defense is responsible for protecting the nation's national security. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. weapon systems based on recommendations from DOD officials and on our internal knowledge of the systems. While our selection of programs cannot be generalized to the population of all DOD systems, the systems selected varied by product type, represented each of the military services, and represented a range of DOD contractors. The systems reviewed were the Abrams System Enhancement Package, AH-64D Apache, Bradley Upgrade, C-130 Avionics Modernization Program, C/17 Globe Master, Comanche Reconnaissance Attack Helicopter (RAH-66) and F/A-18 Super Hornet. or subcontractors to develop, modify, or remediate software code specifically for DOD shall each have a security clearance commensurate with the level of the program in which the software is being used. Primary vendors on DOD contracts may have subcontractors who employ cleared foreign nationals that work only in a certified or accredited environment. DOD software with coding done in foreign environments or by foreign nationals shall be reviewed by software quality assurance personnel for malicious code. Vendors of COTS software that demonstrate efforts to minimize the security risks associated with foreign nationals will be given preference in product selection or evaluation. developers for their offboard software, including those portions that may have been developed by foreign suppliers. Officials for 13 of the programs reviewed had almost no insight into the use of foreign developers for any COTS software placed on their systems. Even when procured directly from a known supplier, program officials could not guarantee whether additional subcontractors were used for software development. Officials from five programs told us that the cost of identifying and managing foreign software suppliers, especially for COTSSoftware, could be substantial. purchased from lower tier subcontractors. While we did not specifically ask for information on foreign suppliers responsible for embedded software, officials for two of the programs reviewed stated that this software tends to include more reused and COTS software. These officials indicated that this could limit the visibility of the software suppliers because acceptance testing was usually only performed to prove functionality. Further, DOD and prime contractor officials told us that it is sometimes difficult to determine whether the actual hardware subcontractor developed embedded software or if it was done by a software developer hired by that subcontractor. In some cases, this information was available early in the proposal process. For example, officials from one program office said they were effective in determining software suppliers at the prime and subcontractor levels. However, only five of the prime contractors reported that they were required to notify the program office concerning their decisions on software subcontracting. Once a winning bidder is selected, it is possible for the government to use that information to make a decision on the software supplier for the project. It is possible to use this information to help the government choose the right software suppliers for a project. selected, more information is often available to the program manager. Some knowledge of foreign software development was available as a result of procedures in place because their programs contained classified or technical program information. Four programs reported they had very few foreign suppliers because handling restrictions for classified information precluded the involvement of such suppliers. While limited information on the supplier and location of foreign entities performing software work was available from export licenses, contractors request approval directly from the State Department, which may not refer the application to DOD or the individual program offices. we solicited information and documentation from the prime contractor for each system using contacts provided by program office officials. We received information from 15 of the prime contractors through written responses, on-site interviews, and other means such as telephone conversations. We also obtained several security and software related documents such as the Program Protection Plan, the Software Development Plan and other program specific documents, like the contract, for the systems we looked at. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. best practice for improving software development and is generally performed to improve the quality and functionality of software code. In terms of security, peer review can reduce the likelihood that an individual programmer can insert malicious or other harmful code. Through dedicated software testing, teams assess the quality of the software to uncover gaps and make it as defect-free as possible. However, on eight of the programs we reviewed, decisions on the amount of code to test were made based upon the risks and benefits to the functionality of the system to be tested. software is increasingly responsible for advances in weapon system capabilities. Current methods of testing focus on the quality of software and related functionality and failures, which will not necessarily uncover malicious intent. As the amount of software on weapon systems increases, it becomes more difficult and costly to test every line of code. Further, DOD cannot afford to monitor all worldwide for software-related risks. It is essential that DOD and program managers take appropriate steps to identify and manage software- related risks. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. the contractors who are developing the system and are therefore more knowledgeable about what functions are needed from the software. Officials from eight of the programs we reviewed said they expect contractors to ensure quality and security on their systems. Because contractors for the weapon systems we reviewed had not received specific direction from program managers to address risks from foreign suppliers in software development, they tended to focus on development efforts aimed at meeting stated requirements, such as software quality and functionality. DOD and SEI officials said that the amount of effort needed to comprehensively test every line of code to ensure complete security could be physically impossible.  SEI experts confirmed that the models they have developed do not include a security element and are not intended to certify that improved processes will be safer. Officials from one contractor we interviewed that employs practices consistent with SEI’s highest level indicated that unless software security is a specific contract requirement, they would not modify their practices to address associated risks.told us that rigorous software development could help improve the quality and functionality of software by decreasing the number of errors in software code. They also said that alone their models should never be expected to completely address software security risks. number of software defects and therefore improve overall software quality, but alone the practices cannot be expected to address malicious software development activities intended to breach security. DOD’s approach to software development and acquisition generally is more cautious than other agencies’. The Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Networks and Information Integration) and the Federal Aviation Administration Chief Information Office are co- sponsoring a project aimed at developing ways to provide safety and security assurance extensions to integrated software maturity models. The project will be led by SEI and will include the Department of Energy, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and SEI. The Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Networks and Information Integration) established the position of Deputy Director for Software Assurance in October 2003. Since its inception, the office has initiated working groups intended to focus on.criteria for software intensive systems and the application of software product maturity measures. Another working group is tasked with developing a proposal for a centralized clearinghouse of software best practices, but DOD has not approved any proposals. In October 2003, theOffice of the assistant secretary of defense established a position of deputy director for software Assurance. The Tri-Service Assessment Initiative began in 1999 to strengthen software acquisition and development as well as address repeated performance shortfalls attributed to software. Task forces conducted detailed assessments of software-intensive programs to identity potential improvements in overall software acquisition processes. A source selection criteria working group is tasked with clarifying the policy on source selection. DOD has also begun policy-level initiatives focused on better software management and on identifying and specifying software security processes and technologies to protect systems and network capabilities from various internal and external threats. DOD estimates that it spends about 40 percent of its Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation budget on software. About $8 billion of that amount may be spent on reworking software because of quality-related issues. Carnegie Mellon University’s Software Engineering Institute (SEI) has developed models and methods that define and determine organizations’ software process maturity. Better software development practices are seen as a way to reduce the cost of software development in the U.S. and around the world. the inclusion of acquisition personnel and other organizations as necessary. DOD indicated its intent to develop a database to identify, track, and maintain information on security risks from specific software suppliers. DOD agreed that it should ensure that program risk assessments include specific attention to software development risks, including those from foreign suppliers. However, DOD indicated that centralized information on software suppliers is necessary because the cost of collecting and maintaining this information would require resources and assets beyond those of individual program managers. But we made no change to the recommendation because the program managers should be responsible for collecting this information until such a database is developed. development sources. DOD does not require program managers to identify and manage suppliers or the potential security risks from foreign suppliers. Given the global nature of the software industry, DOD also cannot afford to exclude all foreign suppliers from its programs. While program managers should be allowed discretion in managing their acquisitions, they are responsible for knowing more about who is developing software and where and for working with DOD’s software assurance resources, and other organizations as necessary. Unless this is done early in the process, risks can be identified and assessed accordingly. Despite the risks associated with foreign access to defense systems, DOD acquisition policy does not require program managers to identify and manage the amount of foreign involvement for software development in weapon systems. While DOD has taken steps to strengthen software acquisition practices, it has yet to implement practices to better manage software development security risks in weapon programs. DOD initiatives have presented top level findings and recommendations within DOD and in public forums, but they have not externally published reports or obtained funding for implementing the recommendations. We have previously made recommendations to DOD to adopt more effective software development practices and to increase oversight of software intensive systems. place too much responsibility for risk mitigation on program managers. DOD agreed that software security risks should be defined for DOD weapon programs, but noted that program managers should not be solely responsible for defining security requirements. Instead, DOD stated that program. managers should be able to rely on external resources to gain threat information on suppliers and that. formulation and oversight of security practices should be a collaborative function among several offices within. DOD also provided separate technical comments that we incorporated into the report as appropriate. We do see the value of involving other DOD resources to provide coordinated evaluation of broader security concerns. We recommend that the Secretary of Defense take the following three actions to address risks attributable to software vulnerabilities and threats. Require program managers, working with software assurance experts, acquisition personnel, and other organizations as necessary, to specifically define software security requirements, including those for identifying and managing software suppliers. These requirements should then be communicated as part of the prime development contract, to be used aspart of the criteria to select software suppliers, we say. DOD agreed with our findings that malicious code is a threat that is not adequately addressed in current acquisition policies and security procedures. Killing of the extent of foreign involvement in software development varied greatly for the 16 weapon system programs we reviewed. Overall, the knowledge program managers had was based on the function of the software being developed, the manner in which it was acquired, and the specific handling requirements. While none of these programs could fully identify all foreign-developed software for their systems, six program offices had significant knowledge of foreign software developers. We met with software experts at the Software Engineering Institute of Carnegie Mellon University to obtain information on software development practices. Patriot Missile System, Tactical Tomahawk Missile, and Wideband Gapfiller Satellites. Using their respective command liaisons to initially contact each office, we distributed a structured set of questions to solicit information. To learn more about program practices for managing and mitigating the use of foreign-developed software, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-missile-programs-using-foreign-developed-software-and-how-they-do-it. company wanted to maintain the software expertise within the company. While restricting foreign access solely for economic reasons could result in a decrease in software development security risks, it might also preclude foreign suppliers that could offer new capability or lower costs to the government. For example, contractor officials for three weapon systems told us that they restrict foreign involvement because it costs too much to develop and monitor security procedures to separate foreign nationals from classified and sensitive information. Not because they feel their involvement is a risk to the program. contractor did not want to create dedicated partitions, such as firewalls, required to prevent employees from a foreign subcontractor from accessing unauthorized information in the system design database. Software managers for one program told us that when foreign nationals modify or update software they had developed, it was necessary to isolate test facilities to meet security requirements. The officials said that, in similar cases, contracting decisions might sometimes be made in favor of U.S. suppliers to avoid costs and delays. Because of security requirements, test facilities have to be isolated. impact when integrated with these system level risks and do not specifically focus on foreign suppliers used in software development. Software generally only becomes a concern for program managers as it begins to affect the cost or schedule of the program. For several programs we reviewed, contractors made risk identification and mitigation decisions for business reasons and to avoid additional resource burdens. It is possible that using software development practices to increase efficiency could lead to an increase in security vulnerability by encouraging the use of legacy and COTS software, unless risks are managed appropriately. always the case within the weapon programs where software is developed or acquired. Program officials for most of the systems we reviewed did not make foreign involvement in software development a specific element of their risk identification and mitigation efforts. Risk mitigation efforts emphasized program level risks, such as meeting program cost and schedule goals, instead of software security risks. Because onboard software is the most critical for meeting mission requirements and other program goals, program managers placed greater emphasis on the quality, functionality, and usually, the security of this software. program managers discretion in managing foreign suppliers used for software development. This policy consists of general guidance for meeting overall acquisition management principles. For software acquisition, program managers are encouraged to develop open software systems architectures, use COTS computer system products, and allow incremental improvements based on reusable software. All of these practices, while having the potential to benefit cost and schedule for weapon programs, could result in greater software vulnerabilities by introducing potentially malicious code from unknown software. The policy instructs program managers to use systems engineering practices, when applicable, that focus on cost, schedule, and performance.

ROUGE-1: 72.26, ROUGE-2: 67.17, ROUGE-L: 29.60
BERTScore: 64.54

==============================================
==================== [55/100] ====================
Summary:
SIPP data for April 2013, the latest month in common from data released for the full SIPP sample. It is not possible to precisely identify the Social Security beneficiary status of children on the SIPP. An estimated 3.2 million (37%) were in families in which Social Security was reported as having been received on behalf of at least one of the children in the family. Another 1.9 million (22%) lived in families where a parent or guardian reported receiving Social Security benefits. poor, in that nearly all TANF dollars go to families that are poor on a pre-transfer (pre-TANF) basis. Social Security plays a much greater role in reducing poverty among children than does TANf. The estimates presented in this report are based on survey data and are subject to respondent misreporting. It is not possible to precisely identify the Social Security beneficiary status of children on the SIPP. The SIPP collects information on Social Security receipt and the reasons for receipt for persons age 15 and over. The U.S. Census Bureau Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) data are used in this report. The most recent SIPP data are from the 2008 panel, which is designed to interview a representative sample of families every four months over a 64-month period. The SIPP collects detailed information on family composition, labor force participation, income, and program participation among families and their members in each of the 64 months they are included in the survey. With children, other data sources must be used. Security benefits may have been received by an extended family member (e.g., grandparent, aunt or uncle, cousin, niece or nephew) or an older adult sibling. For this latter group, children may incidently be affected by Social Security, but not directly as a matter of policy aimed at them. For the former group, Social Security's effect on child poverty is more directly related to Social Security policy, whereas for the latter group the effect is more related to children's incidental family living arrangements. as living in families in which Social Security benefits were reported, either on their own behalf, or on behalf of another family member. All children of a parent (or guardian) who are under the age of 18 are identified as Social Security child beneficiaries. To some extent, this method will overstate the number of children under age 18 who received Social Security, as potentially some, but not all, children of the parent may be Social Security beneficiaries. For more information, visit the Social Security Administration website. status is to estimate poverty by excluding Social Security from family income and comparing the result to the extent of poverty when Social Security is added back into family income. Figure 3 shows, for example, that 47.8% of children living in families that received Social Security would have been considered poor based on their families' incomes from sources other. In families where Social Security benefits are received on behalf of children or by parents or guardians, Social Security reduces their poverty rate from 54.2% to 27.2%. Social Security plays an important role in reducing poverty, not only among the aged but among children. Children may be eligible for Social Security benefits when a parent dies, becomes disabled, or retires. In addition to receiving Social Security, children may economically benefit from Social Security by living with other family members who receive benefits. This report examines the effects of Social Security on child poverty. The estimates presented in this report are based on a CRS analysis of U.S. Census Bureau Survey of Income and Program Participation.  aggregate Social Security benefits paid on behalf of children in December 2012 amounted to about $1.712 billion, or about $20.5 billion on an annualized basis. In FY2013, combined federal and state TANF expenditures, in the form of who would otherwise be counted as poor, were $4.485 billion. Of this amount, nearly half (49.2% ) went to families that had total incomes, excluding Social Security , below the poverty line, which is more than five times the estimated federal cash welfare spending under the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program. cash aid to families, amounted to an estimated $8.7 billion, of which approximately $4.3 billion (49%) was from federal funds. Families with children reported receiving about $6.053 billion in Social Security benefits in April 2013. Of these benefits, an estimated 44.1% (about $2.671 billion, or about $32.050 billion on an annualized basis) went to families who were poor based on their total cash income, excluding any benefits they received. worker who met the program's insured status requirements. In December 2012, 3.3 million Social Security beneficiaries (5.7% of all beneficiaries) were children under the age of 18. Among child beneficiaries, 1.2 million were children of deceased workers, and about 322,000 were dependent children of retired workers. The average monthly benefit among child beneficiaries in December 2012 was $525. Average monthly benefits of children of disabled workers were $525 per month in the same month of 2012. Children may be eligible for Social Security benefits when a parent dies, becomes disabled, or retires. For children of disabled or retired workers, the child's benefit is generally equal to 50% of the parent's primary insurance amount (PIA) before adjustments. (The PIA is based on the parent’s Social Security earnings record.) Social Security is a work-related entitlement, in which benefits are determined on the basis of workers' employment and earnings history, without respect to current income. Children of deceased workers are generally entitled to benefits equal to 75% of the deceased parent's PIA before adjustments. Stepchildren may be eligible in some cases, as may some legally adopted grandchildren, with their benefits. Child benefits generally apply to all biological children of a worker (assuming that paternity/maternity has been established) and to legally adopted children. The family maximum cannot be exceeded regardless of the number of recipients entitled to benefit under the deceased or retired worker's earnings record. A maximum family benefit applies, varying from 150% to 188% of. the PIA of the retired, disabled, or deceased parent. being determined on the basis of their grandparents' earnings record. Children may receive benefits until they reach age 18, and if in high school, through age 19. Disabled children can receive benefits indefinitely as long as the disability was incurred before reaching age 22. In addition to receiving Social Security benefits in their own right, children may economically benefit from Social Security by living with other family members who receive benefits. As noted above, children can qualify by being a child of a retired or disabled worker receiving social Security or a survivor of a deceased worker.

ROUGE-1: 53.30, ROUGE-2: 50.48, ROUGE-L: 23.67
BERTScore: 62.07

==============================================
==================== [56/100] ====================
Summary:
long-term contracts, as well as the re-renewal of shorter term contracts begun in the 1990s. To offset the budget authority requirements for Section 8 contract renewals, the Congress encouraged HUD in 1995 to begin using available unexpended budget authority that had accumulated over the years. Renewing expiring contracts will require a sharp increase in budget authority over the next few years. The sharp growth in expirations has two causes: First, the number of contracts expiring for the first time will increase sharply in the coming years.  HUD provides housing subsidies through nearly 4,300 contracts with local housing agencies and state housing finance agencies. Housing agencies receive a fee from HUD for administering the tenant-based program. As the federal budget deficit grew larger, HUD reduced contract terms to reduce the amount of budget authority it needed to set aside to fully fund the contracts over their whole terms. HUD’s actions have resulted in contract lengths ranging from as long as 15 years to as short as 1 year. HUD estimates that the cost of Section 8 contract renewals will increase from $2.5 billion in fiscal year 1997 to $10.5billion in fiscalyear 2002.  HUD does not factor the effect of this requirement into its budget estimates for Section 8 tenant-based assistance. Reserves accumulate in the housing agencies’ reserve accounts because the agencies do not make housing assistance payments to landlords for housing units not under lease. The build-up of reserves is indicative of long-standing problems in HUD’s tenant- based program, the report says. It adds that HUD could not determine whether housing agencies actually needed additional funding or were using available reserves for contingencies. was, in part, required by law. To build up reserves, HUD based its estimate of the amount of budget authority needed to fund the program on two conservative assumptions. HUD assumed that all certificates were in constant use, even though the leasing of housing units would necessarily take some time to accomplish. As a result, the larger housing agencies, especially those receiving new certificates every year, developed significant reserves. For instance, currently, a statutory requirement exists that once a once a housing certificate is used, it is no longer required to be renewed. Under the certificate program, an assisted household pays 30 percent of its adjusted income for rent. In contrast, households with vouchers may elect to pay more or less than 30 percent. HUD enters into contracts with local and state housing agencies, including public housing agencies. These agencies certify applicants for eligibility, inspect units found by the tenant for compliance with housing standards, and verify that the lease terms meet HUD’s requirements. When the housing agencies pay the rent subsidies to owners of private rental housing for the assisted households, HUD also pays the housing agency a statutorily determined administrative fee. In fiscal year 1998, the Congress appropriated $25 billion in discretionary budget authority for the Department of Housing and Urban Development’s programs. HUD provides rental housing assistance that enables about 4.7 million low-income households to obtain safe, decent, and affordable housing. HUD assists about two-thirds of these households through its Section 8 housing assistance program. In fiscal year 1996, HUD spent about $7 billion to provide tenant-based rental assistance.. HUD predicted an annual need of $150 million for fiscal years 1998 through 2002 to amend its contracts with public housing agencies. In the past, HUD field offices deducted tenants’ expected contributions to rent from the local fair market rent. HUD did not compare these estimates with the actual cost of that assistance for the most recently completed year. As a result, HUD overfunded many tenant-based contracts, the report says. The report says HUD should have taken into account the amount of budget authority each housing agency is likely to need annually to operate its tenant- based program. It should also have taken account of the cost to HUD of assisting low-income families to live in decent housing. 15 years—may not have been sufficient to provide adequate rental assistance over the life of the contract. In fiscal year 1995, HUD began reducing the terms for renewed expiring contracts from 3 to 5 years to 1 year. This change to shorter contract terms has made estimating contract renewal needs more certain because changes in housing costs or tenants’ incomes could be predicted more easily over the shorter period. Because of the greater certainty about the future costs, HUD does not appear to need additional funding for tenant-based amendments beyond fiscal year 1998. stated that the Budget Office was unaware of the program office’s budgeting assumption that all tenant-based certificates are in constant use. As stipulated by current appropriations law, after a certificate is turned in by the current holder, the housing agency must wait 90 days before reissuing it to a new household. But because the budget estimate assumes constant use, the effect is to estimate more funding than will actually be needed. HUD could recapture such excess funding when it analyzes the housing.  HUD’s accounting and information systems did not contain reliable, complete, or accurate data on Section 8 contracts. As a result of these problems, HUD had to continually revise its Section 8 estimates and often request of expiring contracts. HUD could not assure the Congress that its Section8 budget requests for fiscal years 1992 and 1993 were reasonably accurate. HUD continued to experience problems developing accurate and reliable Section 8 contract renewal and amendment estimates. For example, the OIG found that because of a breakdown in the budgeting process, the Department's budget office did not use more reliable estimates developed by the program offices for the initial fiscal year 1996 budget submission.  HUD and the Office of Management and Budget formed a joint team to evaluate HUD’s fiscal year 1992 contract renewal and cost amendment estimates. The team determined that HUD was unable to accurately estimate Section 8 contract renewal needs. HUD has a lengthy history of budget estimating problems and faces some uncertainty now about personnel to oversee and make policy for the budgeting function. We are concerned with the agency's ability to sustain such recent corrective actions and implement those it has planned, the authors say. The authors are not making recommendations at this time. not available from its accounting system at the time. HUD’s fiscal year 1998 budget request contained errors and insupportable estimates. HUD plans to no longer extend expiring tenant-based contracts with excess budget authority within the program reserves. HUD has recognized the need for improving coordination and oversight among program, budget, and financial management officials in order to achieve more reliable budget estimates. Although HUD recognizes these problems and has plans to correct them, it is too soon to measure these problems.  HUD has placed all departmental budget operations under the Office of the CFO. HUD also is in the process of implementing two changes directly related to the budget estimate. All program divisions are hiring a chief financial officer to mirror the operations of the Department’s Office ofThe C FO. HUD will consolidate the 10 accounting divisions in HUD’S field offices into one office responsible for all accounting operations. The agency also has implemented a risk management program, directed by the office, to protect HUD's fiscal integrity. budget authority for programs that are at the level of the tenant-based and project-based Section 8 programs. The standards do not, however, require agencies to disclose such information below the major budget account level. Each agency should disclose information that is most useful to the users of their financial statements. In a note to its fiscal year 1996, the Department of the Treasury said it would disclose the amount obligated for certain programs, including the number of programs that would be funded by the federal government. the program office to ensure adequate oversight. At the time of our review, a chief financial officer for the tenant-based program had not been hired. Second, the Office of the CFO is developing a model to analyze all budget submissions, including the contract renewal estimate. Previously, the departmental budget office accepted the cost estimates with only limited review of the supporting documentation that detailed how the estimates were developed. Although the Office Of The CFO also plans to develop budget estimating policies and procedures that will be used in the future. unanticipated costs. HUD valued the welfare supplement at $138 per unit ($46 in 1997 and $92 in 1998) HUD developed the revised unit cost using only the program’s historical expenditure data from the tenant-based information system. HUD would not supplement the average unit cost with additional amounts even if they made sense from a policy standpoint unless the supplementary amounts could be supported with historical or other data. The amount to reflect the impact of welfare reform and an amount to cover contingent costs. 1997, HUD determined that this amount was unnecessary. HUD found that its assumption that housing agencies would begin to feel a significant impact from welfare reform starting in 1997 was not borne out by what was happening across the country. Instead, the states’ early experiences with the impact of welfare reform showed little or no increased cost to the program as a result of the falling incomes of assisted housing residents. As a result, adding a cost factor to address the impact on welfare reform was not necessary. In addition to the inflated unit cost estimate, HUD’s fiscal year 1998. determine whether cost estimates are adequately supported. In commenting on a draft of this report, HUD agreed with the report's major findings and conclusions. HUD also provided several comments to improve the report’s factual representation and to ensure clarity. HUD believed that we should recognize that its initial estimate of the impact of welfare reform on fiscal year 1998 budget needs was based on the best information available. We agreed and made changes to reflect this concern. The report was released to the public on Tuesday. its tenant-based contract renewals by over $1 billion. This error was caused by an ineffective internal budget process that lacked adequate oversight and did not make effective use of actual expenditure data for the program. HUD’s estimate contained contingency costs that could not be justified on the basis of program contract renewal estimate. Although program officials said that the funding was needed to cover unanticipated costs in the program, they could not provide supporting information to justify their request. Subsequently, HUD adjusted its fiscal year 1998 budget request and removed this request for funding. In February 1997, HUD used a value of $6,386 as the average unit cost for renewing tenant-based housing assistance contracts. The value is based on the program’s actual expenditure data for fiscal year 1996. But it also includes several supplementary amounts for administrative fees paid to housing agencies, contingent or unexpected costs, and increased program expenditures caused by residents losing their welfare assistance in 1997 and 1998. We and HUD determined that adding these three amounts to theaverage unit cost either could not be justified or was not necessary. the office of the comptroller, and the departmental budget office could have prevented this error. For example, the program office’s comptroller reviewed the actual disbursement data obtained from the accounting system but did not review the final average unit cost calculation until after HUD submitted its budget to the Congress. The second supplementary amount was for covering unknown costs or contingencies. For this supplement, HUD added approximately $204 to the unit cost, or 2 weeks of disbursements. Also, HUD did not conduct an independent review of the added costs and underlying basis for the estimate. modify its information system to calculate the actual average cost per unit before completing the annual settlement process at each housing agency. HUD plans to improve the security over access to the unit tables within the information system and to compare monthly the number of contracted units in the system to the previous month’s total to reconcile any differences. Finally, to make sure that HUD settles all program costs at the end of the year with the housing agency with the help of a third-party agency, HUD will change the way it calculates program costs. and 1996 also appeared to be overstated. To help correct the deficiencies with its accounting and budgeting for Section 8 contracts, HUD implemented a new Section 8 tenant-based information system in fiscal year 1995. The system contains the actual cost incurred by each housing agency for providing rental assistance. HUD officials believe that these improvements will correct past problems and enhance their efforts to more accurately estimate their Section 8 budget needs.. HUD plans to eliminate overfunding and improve the accuracy of the budget estimating for contract renewals.  HUD’s tenant-based information system is generally reliable, the report says. The report provides a draft of this report to HUD for review and comment. The Congress directed HUD to recapture unexpended budget authority that was not needed to meet the current obligations of the Section 8 tenant- based program. The U.S. House of Representatives is scheduled to vote on the bill on Thursday, June 14. The vote is expected to be followed by the Senate vote on June 21.  HUD recaptured $7.7 billion of the excess budget authority and placed it in the Preservation Account. About $1.2 billion was left in the participating housing agencies’ accounts as a reserve for contingencies equal to about 2 months of assisted housing payments to landlords. The remaining $1 billion was not recaptured because it represented amounts that had not yet been credited to housing agencies' reserve accounts at the time of the recapture. Also established the Section 8 Reserve Preservation Account as an accounting repository for recaptured excess budget Authority. After two congressional rescissions totaling $4.2 billion, about $3.5 billion remains in the Reserve Preservation Account. While a reserve for contingencies is prudent, it is not clear that a reserve of $1.2billion is reasonable and necessary. A report from HUD’s tenant-based information system shows that, in fiscal year 1996, housing agencies used $353 million in excess budget authority to cover contingencies. In fiscal year 1997, HUD used about $300 million in extra budget authority. Housing Authority Directors Association reviewed HUD’s budget formulation process for the Section 8 tenant-based program. We found that HUD had problems with its budget submission; but we also found thatHUD had corrective actions planned or in process to improve its budgeting process. HUD overestimated its need for funding to amend existing housing assistance contracts because accurate data were not available, we found. We discussed programmatic, budgeting, and financial management issues with HUD officials from the Offices of Public and Indian Housing, Budget, the Chief Financial Officer. Housing said that the report presents a balanced assessment. The CFO and officials of the housing office provided several comments to improve the report’s clarity, and we incorporated them as appropriate. Accurate budget estimates are essential to federal agencies meeting their fiscal responsibilities because such estimates facilitate sound policy decisions and effective funding trade-offs. Since 1989, its estimates of Section 8 contract renewals have been either too low or too high. This inability to accurately forecast has been a problem since 1989. $9.9 billion. This was HUD’s second attempt to estimate this figure. The Department revised its initial estimate after an independent accounting firm determined that critical data used could not be verified because they were maintained manually. Price Waterhouse LLP performed tests on a statistical sample of 158 housing agencies to confirm the accuracy of HUD's estimate. HUD concluded that the amount of unexpended budget authority that was not needed to meet existing housing assistance needs at the beginning of fiscal year 1998 would be $9. 9 billion. contingencies, far less than the amount that HUD has reserved for this purpose. During fiscal year 1996, an additional $1.4 billion in excess budget authority accrued. HUD plans to adjust its reserve level after it examines in more detail housing agencies’ actual use of available unexpended budget authority in fiscal years 1996 and 1997. HUD would need to annually review each tenant-based housing assistance contract it has with housing agencies with the intent of recapturing amounts above the level prudently needed. $9.9 billion of budget authority excess to program needs has accumulated in housing agencies’ reserve accounts. Congress rescinded $4.2 billion, and after other adjustments, the current balance is about $3.5 billion. Figure 2.1 provides a chronology of the actions taken by the Congress and HUD to identify and control Section 8 tenant-based funding. In May 1997, HUD estimated that the amount of unexpended budget authority that exceeded the amount needed to meet contract requirements was $20.7 billion. HUD recaptured $7.7billion of this excess balance and retained the difference of $2.2billion. provided the amount of unspent budget authority credited to each housing agency at the end of the agency’s fiscal year. A second means for HUD to improve its reporting of excess unexpended budget authority in the Section 8 tenant-based program is through its financial statements. We believe that to adequately address economic contingencies, such as rising rental rates or falling tenant incomes, HUD should better informed in the future of the amounts of excess budget authority. We recommend that the Secretary of HUD direct the Office of the Chief Financial Officer to modify the agency's consolidated financial statements so that they identify the portions of the unexpending appropriations. of available unexpended funds would far exceed the $1.6 billion that HUD disclosed in its fiscal year 1998 budget request. HUD intentionally established program reserves during the early years of a multiyear housing assistance contract to help fund the program in the later years. HUD is not required to and does not currently report in its annual budget justifications the aggregate amount of excess budget authority credited to housing agencies’ reserve accounts. Until HUD’s recent improvements to its information system, such reporting could not be done accurately.  HUD reviewed and discussed the results of Price Waterhouse LLP’s independent evaluation of available unexpended funds in the tenant-based program. We contacted national associations representing housing agencies. These organizations were the Council of Large Public Housing Authorities, the National Association for Housing and Redevelopment Officials, and the Public. We discussed the need for retaining unexpending funds in housing agencies’ program reserve accounts with housing agencies' program directors and other HUD officials. We also discussed the needs of housing agencies with HUD's Chief Financial Officer and Inspector General.

ROUGE-1: 54.68, ROUGE-2: 51.19, ROUGE-L: 21.88
BERTScore: 69.25

==============================================
==================== [57/100] ====================
Summary:
risk assessment and providing Letters of No Prejudice earlier than traditionally allowed in the New Starts process to Houston Metro. FTA has also stated its amenability to waiving its risk assessment and financial reviews for non-pilot program projects. The agency has also granted a waiver from federal performance bonding requirements to the Bay Area Rapid Transit Oakland Airport Connector pilot project, which it has also done for other non-Pilot programs. The project is currently in the final design phase of New Starts. In its November 2008 report, FTA determined that it would not relax, modify, or waive its risk assessment and financial capacity reviews prior to advancement into final design. Houston Metro retains risks in a number of critical risk areas including finance since there is no equity capital investment by the private sector partner. Officials said that they considered transferring more risk to the privatesector to meet FTA’s threshold to waive certain New Starts evaluation requirements, but decided against doing so because of their concern that private sector assuming certain risks to meet the threshold may be too much. use of a rigorous and systematic evaluation process to distinguish among proposed New Starts investments. The New Starts grant process is closely aligned with the conventional design-bid-build approach, whereby the project sponsor contracts with separate entities for the design and construction of the project. In 2005, in 2005, FTA, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York were the first agencies to use this approach to evaluate New Starts projects. In 2010, the Federal Government changed the way it evaluates New Starts grants. The New Starts process is perceived by project sponsors as intensive, lengthy, and burdensome. FTA’s prescribed review times of 30 and 120 days for entry into the preliminary engineering and final design phases are apparently arbitrary, a 2007 Deloitte study found. In particular, the study found that the review times are generally longer than the 30- to 120-day prescribed review period for a project to be considered for the New Starts program. The study also identified opportunities for streamlining or simplifying the process. eligible for a simplified and accelerated review process that is intended to substantially reduce the time and cost to the sponsors of New Starts projects. This can include major modifications of the requirements and oversight tools. For example, FTA may offer concurrent project approvals into preliminary engineering and final design. The modification of any of FTA’s New Starts requirements and Oversight tools will be on a case-by-case basis if FTA determines enough risk is transferred to the New Starts program to warrant such a change. The risk-assessment process, which aims to identify issues that could affect a project's schedule or cost, may also be modified. that FTA required them to submit and resubmit entire project documents to FTA multiple times, which led to delays. FTA officials told us the length of time for reviews depends on a number of factors, most importantly the completeness and accuracy of the project sponsor’s submissions. In addition to the costs of delays, the design of the New Starts project approval process—which is closely aligned with the conventional design- bid-build process—is also to blame for delays, they say. FTA’s risk-assessment process delayed project development. Consultants to the Dulles Silver Line project sponsor told us that through the New Starts process, FTA has complete control over a project's schedule. Project sponsors have to put project work on hold while waiting for FTA's approval to advance into the next project phase. Construction activities on the Silver Line could not begin until the approval of a full funding grant agreement, they said. Some of the time- savings benefits of the design-build approach were lost. FTA has yet to grant three pilot project sponsors any major streamlining modifications of the New Starts project approval process. FTA officials told us that none of the pilot projects has demonstrated a sufficient transfer of risk or financial investment by the private sector to enable FTA to relax its normal New Starts evaluation requirements. Thus far, FTA has only assessed the Houston Metro pilot project to determine the extent to which FTA could streamline the New starts process. The three pilot projects are the first to be assessed by FTA. To evaluate the effectiveness of a pilot program, a sound evaluation plan is needed and should incorporate key features. Without such an evaluation plan, FTA is limited in its decision making regarding its pilot program. The plan should include well-defined, clear, and measurable objectives; measures that are directly linked to the program objectives; criteria for determining pilot program performance; a way to isolate the effects of the pilot program; a data analysis plan for the evaluation design; and a detailed plan to ensure that data collection, entry, and storage are reliable and error-free. Starts process, such as Letters of Intent that announce FTA’s intention to issue a full funding grant agreement. Over the past 30 years, FTA has made very limited use of these tools by only to obligate future funds. We found that the governments of the U.S. and Mexico did not use these tools properly. We also found that under current statute, these tools count against FTA”s available funding for New Starts projects under the current surface transportation authorization. The report was published by the Center for American Progress, an advocacy group. granting three Letters of Intent and four Early Systems Work Agreements to transit projects. The Deloitte study noted that New Starts project sponsors miss the opportunity to use alternative methods including design-build and design- build-finance-operate-maintain. However, use of these tools is not without risk, as they could be misinterpreted as an obligation of federal funds when they only signal FTA’s intention, the study said. The study concluded that the greater use of the tools could be beneficial. used conditional approvals to incorporate more flexibility into their funding processes and help encourage a greater private sector role in transit projects. Without an evaluation plan to assess the results of its pilot program, FTA may also lose some valuable information Congress intended the agency to obtain through the pilot program’s establishment. FTA may want to turn to the experiences of these other modal administrations and governments and use existing, long-standing tools to incorporated more flexibility in the New Starts process to help facilitate transit projects that use alternative approaches. FTA officials noted that the agency has made use of tools such as Letters of Intent and Early Systems Work Agreements in the past in order to streamline the New Starts process. FTA officials acknowledged the need for an evaluation plan to assess the pilot program’s results and stated they will be working to develop one. Further, FTA officials stated that FTA is working to developed a plan to evaluate the effectiveness of the pilot. of our recommendations, and that it will evaluate the potential for greater use of these tools in the future. Congress authorized FTA to establish its Public- Private Partnership Pilot Program to demonstrate the advantages and disadvantages of these approaches in transit. The pilot project studies those projects that use alternative approaches that integrate a sharing of project risk and incorporate private equity capital. To date, only one of the pilot projects is expected to be funded by bonds issued through the state of Nevada and with contributions from the area resorts and hotels. The program is intended to show where FTA can grant greater flexibility of some of its New Starts requirements to projects within the program. Congress will be limited in its decision making about the pilot program’s potential broader application. FTA officials told us that they have not yet developed an evaluation plan for its pilot program. The alternative approaches we reviewed have protected the public interest in various ways to ensure the public receives the best price for a project and to create incentives for the private sector partner so that the project progresses and operates based on agreed-upon objectives. Project sponsors we found that the alternative approaches protect the public's interest. potentially increase private sector bids and that they would still be able to achieve some of the benefits of using an alternative approach without equity capital investment by the private sector. While it may be too early for FTA to grant major streamlining modifications with the other two pilot projects, FTA still has the ability as part of its pilot program to further experiment with the use of existing tools that could encourage a greater private sector role while continuing to balance the need to protect the public interest. FTA has the able to use conditional approvals in the New. has not yet illustrated how this can be done. This is because, on the one hand, no pilot project has demonstrated enough of a transfer of risk. On the other hand, the potential challenges posed by the New Starts requirements, including delays and additional costs, may discourage the private sector from assuming enhanced financial responsibility in these alternative approaches. Despite this apparent impasse, FTA sill has the unique opportunity to take advantage of the fundamental changes to its New Starts evaluation requirements to streamline the process. and equity capital is invested by the private sector. In addition to major modifications, FTA may also make use of other tools (not unique to the pilot program) to expedite the review process. These include Letters of No Prejudice that allow a project sponsor to incur costs with the understanding that these costs may be reimbursable as eligible expenses. FTA can also use Letters of Intent to signal an intention to obligate federal funds at a later date when funds become available for the project. United States generally provides public transit agencies a cheaper source of funding because they can borrow more cheaply than the private sector. FTA distributes billions of dollars of federal funding to transit agencies for the construction of new, large-scale projects. Bay Area Rapid Transit Oakland Airport Connector (design-build-operate-maintain), Denver Regional Transportation District East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects. Houston Metro North and Southeast Corridor pilot projects ( design- build-finance- operate-m maintain) FTA identifies and recommends new fixed-guideway transit projects for federal funding. Over the last decade, the New Starts program has resulted in funding state and local agencies with over $10 billion. New Starts is FTA’s largest capital grant program for transit projects. Since the early 1970s, a significant portion of the federal government”s share of new capital investment in mass transportation has been decide which projects to recommend to Congress for funding. We have previously identified New Starts as a model for other federal transportation programs. FTA must prioritize transit projects for funding by evaluating, rating, and recommending potential projects on the basis of specific financial commitment and project justification criteria. Using criteria set by law, FTA evaluates potential transit projects and assigns ratings to them annually. These evaluation criteria reflect a range of benefits and effects of the proposed project, such as cost-effectiveness, as well as the ability of the project sponsor to fund the project and finance the continued operation of its transit system.initiated through the New Starts process, resulting in full funding grant agreements. Congress authorized FTA to establish the Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program. Pilot program allows FTA to study projects that incorporate greater private sector involvement through alternative project delivery and financing approaches. Project sponsors are looking to transit projects that use alternative approaches to deliver and finance new transit projects, along with federal funds. But because of its sequential and phased structure, FTA’s New Starts program is incompatible with transit projects using these approaches, authors say. They say Congress and FTA have taken steps to streamline New Starts by establishing the pilot program. The New Starts project approval process poses particular challenges for project sponsors using alternative approaches for their transit projects. The challenges they raised include (1) delays, (2) additional costs, and (3) the loss of other potential benefits, such as enhanced efficiencies and improved quality. The sequential and phased New Startsproject approval process can create schedule delays as project sponsors await federal approval. The amount of money involved in the New Starts process can be significant. The process can also create additional costs and delays. FTA has employed a contractor to determine whether risk is effectively transferred from the public to private sector for its pilot program projects. In the United States, the private sector has played a more limited role in the delivery and financing of transit projects than in some other countries. Since 2000, seven New Starts projects were completed using alternative approaches (see table 1). These projects have focused on delivery, rather than financing, and have used alternative funding methods such as EASI. Available in U.S. alternative approaches may help ensure more predictable funding for maintenance and operations since these activities can be subject to unpredictable public sector budget cycles. Because alternative approaches for transit projects may include operations and maintenance standards in the contract, the private sector might be responsible to fund these activities within the overall contract price. Expanded FTA efforts could facilitate the implementation of transit projects that use alternative approaches and protect the public interest through the use of tools such as standardized contracts, technical assistance, and financial assessments. We recommend that the Secretary of Transportation direct the FTA Administrator to take the following actions: Incorporate greater flexibility, as warranted, in the Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program. further streamlined. As more transit projects use alternative approaches, FTA may not be able to readily accommodate these approaches, ultimately disadvantaging transit project sponsors. We provided a draft of this report to DOT and FTA for review and comment. DOT has agreed to consider our recommendations and provided comments through e-mail from FTA officials. In their comments, FTA officials stated that the agency has ongoing and planned efforts as part of its Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program that they believe address the intent of the pilot program. on how project sponsors and DOT can protect the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches. We conducted this performance audit from October 2008 through October 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions. We also held in-depth interviews with FTA on its steps to protect thepublic interest in federally funded transit projects with greater private sector participation including programs like FTA’s Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program. FTA’s pilot program is expected to demonstrate potential benefits to using alternative approaches in transit. Project sponsors cited a range of potential benefits, such as achieving cost and time savings, as well as potential advantages to the public sector. A separate entity was created to oversee the project's development and the private partner provided one-third of the project’S funding, including private equity capital, in exchange for periodic payments based on performance and ridership. 2010 Winter Olympics. DOT outlined some of these same benefits and advantages in its 2007 Report to Starts Process, and Options Exist to Expedite Project Development. Public Transportation: Improvements Are Needed to More Fully Assess Predicted Impacts of New Starts Projects. Highway Public-Private Partnerships: More Rigorous Up-front Analysis Could Better Secure Potential Benefits and Protect the Public Interest. High Speed Passenger Rail: Future Development Will Depend on Addressing Financial and Other Challenges and Establishing a Clear Federal Role. Highways: Increased Reliance on Contractors Can Pose Oversight Challenges for Federal and State Officials. Railroad Bridges and Tunnels: Federal Role in Providing Safety Oversight and Freight Infrastructure Investment Could Be Better Targeted. Is Likely for New Starts and Small Starts Programs, but Improvements Needed to the Small Starts Application Process. GAO-07-917. Washington, D.C.: July 27, 2007. Public Transportation: Preliminary Analysis of Changes to and Trends in FTA’s New starts and Small starts programs.GAO-06-910T. Washington,. D.c.: June 27, 2006. Equal Employment Opportunity: DOD’S EEO Pilot Program Under Way, but. Improvements Need to be made to DOD's Evaluation Plan. FTA officials have plans to develop an online toolset for employees to help them provide technical assistance to project sponsors on these alternative approaches. This assistance is to include checklists to help determine whether a project should use an alternative approach, risk matrices and a financial feasibility model. In June 2009, the House of Representatives’ Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure approved a bill that would require the FTA to consider alternative approaches to transit projects. The bill was passed by the House Transportation Committee and the Senate Transportation Committee in June 2009. technical assistance for its staff on how to structure and evaluate alternative approaches to transit projects. Because these efforts are either planned or in their early stages, we are retaining our recommendations. FTA officials provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and DOT. The report also is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In addition to the individual named above, Steve Cohen, Assistant Director; Jay Cherlow; Patrick Dudley; Carol Henn; Bert Japikse; Joanie Lofgren; Maureen Luna-Long; Amanda K. Miller; Tina Paek; Amy Rosewarne; Tina Won Sherman; and Jim Wozny made key contributions to this report. GAO-09-712. Washington, D.C.: August 12, 2009. interest in public-private partnerships through the use of quantitative and qualitative public interest assessments. We have previously reported that more rigorous, up-front analysis could better secure potential benefits and protect the public interest. For example, a Value for Money analysis is a tool used to evaluate if entering into a project as a public/private partnership is in the public's best interests. The use of such tools can help lay out the expected benefits, costs, and risks of the project. Conversely, not using such tools could potentially allow aspects of thepublic interest to be overlooked. The United Kingdom, and British Columbia in Canada, among others, require a Value for Money analysis for all transportation projects over a certain cost threshold. Domestically, Florida requires avalue for money analysis for public- private partnerships, one of which was recently conducted on the Florida Turnpike. Public-private partnership is the best project delivery option available, according to the U.S. Department of Transportation. The U.K. requires a Value For Money analysis if a project costs more than about $24 million, while British Columbia requires one if the cost is over $46 million. Project sponsors can assess if one public-private partnership option is more advantageous than another. For example, Bay Area Rapid Transit used a Value for Money analysis in its original iteration of the Oakland Airport Connector to assess which alternative project delivery approach would be more advantageous. Project sponsors can also use Value for money to give a range of possible project costs when coupled with a sensitivity analysis. A sensitivity analysis developed for the Canada Line suggested that a design-build-operate-maintain approach provides more value. assessments such as Value for Money analysis provides a more comprehensive project assessment. Project sponsors can also use financial assessments such as value for money analysis for other reasons. For example, it can assist in determining which project delivery project costs could have varied from $47 million more to $270 million less than expected, depending on the level of risk. A further example of how project sponsors can use Value for money is to enhance communication about a project. They can lead to more-informed discussions and provide transparency in the selection of the project delivery approach. tests examine not only the economic value of a project but also other factors that are hard to quantify, such as design quality and functionality. In the United Kingdom, Value for Money analysis includes qualitative factors such as the viability, desirability, and achievability of the project. Provinces such as Canada’s British Columbia and Australia's Victoria also include qualitative factors in their financial assessments. Government officials stated that including both quantitative and quantitative factors in financial assessments is a good idea. Money analysis, cautioned that the assessments are not without limitations. For example, officials and consultants told us that these analyses are inherently subjective and rely on assumptions that can introduce bias. Assessments can include the assumption that the public sector will likely have higher construction costs due to a history of cost overruns. In the United Kingdom, an “optimism bias” of 15 percent is added to a public sector comparator in part to account for this. Consultants noted that there is subjectivity in valuing risks as detailed data on the probability of particular project risks occurring are unavailable. Project sponsors seek to protect the public interest through an emphasis on performance. Performance specifications focus on desired project performance and not design details. When specifications are focused on performance, bidders can offer a range of design and technology options as well as follow best practices that meet best practices for project delivery. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Project sponsors have sought to use performance standards to protect the public interest. These standards are what the private sector partner must meet to be compensated during the project. In contrast, one project sponsor noted that performance specifications should not be used when conditions of the facility or surrounding environment, for example, are unknown as unforeseen circumstances could occur that would require more specific design specifications. Also said that projects with a range of technology options must undergo the environmental review process at the highest possible level of design given the effect of different technologies on the environment. be obtained through bidder information sessions and from consultants. Project sponsors then conduct a request for qualified bidders to gain more detailed input from the private sector on a project. The request can establish a higher threshold of responsibility for private partners compared to traditional procurements in which a private partner is selected based primarily on bid price. Thus, sustained and iterative interaction between the project sponsor and theprivate sector can refine the project’s scope and terms and determine how best to use the funds. project’s construction, operations, and maintenance phases, helping to ensure adequate performance. If the private sector partner does not meet the standards, then it is penalized with no, reduced, or delayed payments. Standards for construction include delivering a completed project or project element within a set schedule. For example, the Canada Line had 400 milestones that it needed to complete and have certified in order to continue to receive timely payments during the project's construction period. Performance standards for operations and maintenance cover all aspects, also called key performance indicators. or a significant number of functions in connection with a project. Risk transfer involves assigning responsibility for a project risk in design and its effect on construction that would normally be borne by the project sponsor. In transferring responsibility and risk for multiple project elements to the private sector partner, the project sponsors often has less control over the procurement. The private sector partners may have the opportunity to earn a financial return commensurate with the risks it has assumed. By transferring these project risks, theproject sponsor creates incentives for the privatesector to keep the project on schedule and on budget. which transferred ridership risk but not the ability to set fares. Officials we interviewed stated that the private partner progressively faced financial difficulties due to low ridership revenue, which led to the collapse and ultimate buyback of the partnership by Transport for London. If a transit project is built as an extension of an existing system, the private sector partner may not want to operate a single segment of a publicly owned system. According to officials, private investors are reluctant to assume Ridership risk of any portion of a system operated by an entity they do not control.  connector project initially tried but ultimately was unable to transfer ridership risk. Private sector concessionaire (under the project’s original iteration) would not have fare-setting authority. This was also the case with the Canada Line, where the agreement was structured to incorporate a limited transfer of ridershiprisk to the private sector partner. Although the project sponsor wanted to transfer full ridership. risk to the concessionaire, it learned that private investors would not finance a deal with full Ridership risk transfer due to their inability to control factors. that are not identified during surveys of a project site. Past experience in projects demonstrates the difficulty of transferring these risks to the private sector. Denver Regional Transportation District chose not to transfer ridership risk for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects given that it wanted to retain the right to set fares. Another example is the United Kingdom’s Croydon Tramlink project, which will link London to the south coast of England and the south-east of England in one of the world's busiest rail links. East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ long-term design-build-finance-operate-maintain concession. This caused the private sector to estimate a $25 million charge for taking on this risk. When the project sponsor decided to retain one aspect of the environmental risk related to several unknown remediation elements, the cost estimate of transferring the remaining environmental risk was dropped from $25m to $9m. Permitting requirements and other environmental risks may become too time-consuming and costly for the privatesector to address. Project sponsors can transfer a range of key project risks to the private sector. These include those related to design, financing, construction performance and schedule. But some risks may not be transferable. For example, it may be too costly for project sponsors to transfer certain risks, such as ridership and environmental remediation. The private sector may want to charge an additional premium to take them on, the authors say. They say the federal government’s share of project risks should not be transferred to theprivate sector. The project sponsor decided to transfer limited ridership risk to the private sector. Denver Regional Transportation District originally planned to transfer all environmental remediation risk for its trains. Officials said it may be difficult to transfer to theprivate sector because of the additional premium the privatesector charges to address unknown factors. The project sponsors said the move was done to induce the concessionaire to increase ridership by providing quality customer service. The private sector partner will be responsible for 10 percent of its payments during operations and maintenance based on ridership figures. The Manchester Metrolink Phase II light rail project was a 17-year concession agreement. The private partner had responsibility to design, construct, finance, operate, and maintain this project. The project sponsor retained the authority to set fares. In this project, payments to the private sector partner during operations were based entirely on ridership revenue. The concession was ultimately bought by Transport for London. It was designed to expand theMetrolink System in order to connect two of the city’s existing stations. The project sponsor for Manchester Metrolink had to break two existing public-private partnership concession agreements to accommodate extensions to its system. Consultants to the Manchester project told us that breaking a concession agreement can be very expensive and can damage the relationship between the project sponsor and the private sector partner. Similarly, to accommodate increased ridership, theProject sponsor for Docklands Light Railway decided to build platform expansions. However, the privatesector partner was not willing to take on this additional work, requiring the project sponsors to take the extra steps. The Docklands Light Railway serves a redevelopment area east and southeast of London. The Lewisham Extension was the United Kingdom’s first transportation public-private partnership for both project delivery and financing. The Croydon Tramlink light rail project was a 99-year light rail projects in the UK and Canada. It was financed in part or full using private equity investment, and was the first public-to-private project partnership in the U.K. and Canadian history. a design-build alternative approach. Denver Regional Transportation District and the private sector completed the Transportation Expansion project 22 months ahead of schedule and within budget. The South Florida Commuter Rail Upgrades saved 4 to 6 years by completing all upgrades as a single project, but incurred slightly higher costs than estimated for the conventional approach. In the United Kingdom, the three Docklands Light Railway extensions were built using design- build-finance-maintain approaches. However, the use of alternative approaches does not guarantee cost and schedule benefits. its costs plus provide a return on investment. Since the private sector partner borrows to finance its costs, it has equity at risk if it does not meet standards. Bank lenders protect their investments by ensuring that the privatesector properly develops a concession agreement and then delivers on it. This situation can create incentives for theprivate sector partner to deliver according to the terms of the agreement, the authors say. They say it can also provide incentives for project sponsors to deliver on their promises to project sponsors. The public interest is further protected by this integration of responsibilities. The bank lender and concessionaire provide additional project oversight through the monitoring of cost overruns and schedule delays, among other issues. To better protect the public interest, project sponsors have also incorporated clauses into project agreements that protect public interest. For the Croydon Tramlink, the private sector partner contributed 30 percent of project costs. In the case of the Canada Line, theprivate sector partner did not miss any of its 400 payment milestones. Refinancing gains refer to savings that occur when the private sector revises its repayment schedule for its equity investment by taking advantage of better financial terms. The governments of the United Kingdom as well as Victoria and New South Wales, Australia, require that any refinancing gains achieved by private concessionaires generally be shared with the government. Some foreign governments have recognized the importance of protecting the public. The public interest is at the heart of the highway public-private partnerships, says the government's report. The private partner provided over one-half of the project’s funding for construction. The public sector terminated the concession to further expand the system. One of the two private sector partners subsequently went bankrupt, and the concession agreement was then taken over by Transport for London. The Nottingham Express Transit light rail project used a 27-year contract to maintain and upgrade the system's infrastructure, including track, tunnels, trains, and stations. In return, the private sector would receive periodic payments based on its performance. of service including the availability, frequency, and reliability of service and conditions of facilities. Some projects have also incorporated standards that link to increased ridership to provide incentives for the private sector partner to provide good customer service. For example, Nottingham Express Transit has 20 percent of its payments to the privatesector based on ridership. Additionally, the draft concession agreement for Denver’s metro area has a 20 percent ridership link to private sector payments. The London Underground chose to emphasize key performance indicators in four areas—availability, capability, ambience and service points. allow for flexibility under certain circumstances. For example, Houston Metro’s North and Southeast Corridor projects’ concession agreement incorporated this flexibility by including an operations and maintenance agreement for the first 5 years after service begins with the option for renewal. According to a consultant that works on the project, this approach was chosen in part because the project sponsor wanted to protect the public interest in the project. The project sponsor also said it was in the interest of the city to have a long-term concession agreement. project sponsor an option to break and buy back the agreement for a set price. In contrast, in the previously mentioned example of Manchester Metrolink, concessions for phase 2 were terminated by the project sponsor to allow for system expansion in a third phase. According to consultants we interviewed, the terminations could have been avoided if the initial concessions had been shorter. Shorter concession periods are thus being used as a means to revisit terms and rebid if desired. In addition to clauses that allow project sponsors to revisit concession agreement terms, Both of the London Underground’s maintenance 30-year concession agreements are reviewed for scope of work and costs by a public-private partnerships arbiter every 7.5 years. The concessionaire has the ability to request an extraordinary review by the arbiter if costs rise above a specified threshold. Periodically revisiting terms, or shorter concession periods, can also allow for changes such as system extension. One of the Docklands Light Railway extensions has breakpoints at the years 2013 and 2020 in its concession agreement. other clauses that allow for flexibility can also protect the public interest. Denver Regional Transportation District’s draft concession agreement includes clauses specifying both triggers that could lead to default and terms of compensation in case of default. Other advisors to project sponsors told us that a clause specifying the sharing of “refinancing gains” between the project sponsor and concessionaire could also help to protect public interests. These provisions help to minimize disputes, according to the advisors to the project sponsors, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Infrastructure’s surface transportation reauthorization blueprint proposed that an Office of Expedited Project Delivery be created within FTA. Such support is not currently available for project sponsors of transit projects that use alternative approaches. Project sponsors and their advisors noted that as there is little public sector institutional knowledge about public- private partnerships in the United States, projects may be carried out without the benefit of previous experiences. We defined traditional financing to include federal grants (such as New Starts program grants), state delivery and alternative financing. to a greater private sector role in transportation, as evidenced by its newly established Office of Innovative Program Delivery for public-private partnerships. Congress has taken a greater interest in facilitating alternative approaches as well. Quasi- governmental entities established by foreign governments have better equipped project sponsors to implement alternative approaches, including public- private partnerships. FTA could consider these international models and expand its current efforts in transportation public-Private partnerships to support agreater private role in the transportation industry, says the FTA. report, we noted that formal consideration and analysis of public interest issues had been conducted in U.S. highway public-private partnerships. Since that report, the Federal Highway Administration’s Office of Innovative Program Delivery has been established to provide support. The office is intended to offer outreach, professional capacity building, technical assistance, and decision-making tools for highway-related public- private partnerships. It also provides an easy, single- point of access for project sponsors and other stakeholders. In the 1800s, the private sector played a central role in financing early transportation infrastructure development in the United States. Original sections of the New York City Subway were constructed from 1899 to 1904 by a public-private partnership. Another example is the City of Chicago’s “L” transit system, which was built from the 1920s to the 1950s by a private-sector partnership. In the U.S. today, private sector participation and investment in transit is not new. the 1880s through the 1920s and operated by the Chicago Rapid Transit Company, a privately owned firm. The construction of the system was financed by the private sector. In following years, transportation infrastructure development became almost wholly publicly funded. Conditions placed on federal transportation grants-in-aid limited private involvement in federally funded projects. More recently, there has been a move back towards policies that encourage more private and public blending of funding, responsibility, and control in transportation projects. The federal government has progressively relaxed restrictions on private participation in highway and transit projects serving public objectives. points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Key contributors to this report are listed in appendix II. Our work was focused on transit projects that involve greater private sector participation than is typical in conventional projects. In particular, we focused on the role of the private sector in the delivering and financing of U.S. transit projects compared with other countries. We also looked at the benefits and limitations of and the barriers, if any, to greater privatesector involvement in transit projects. GAO: Private Sector Sponsorship of and Investment in Major Projects Has Been Limited. GAO-04-419. Washington, D.C.: March 25, 2004. Highways and Transit: Private sector sponsorship of and investment in major projects has been limited. GAo-04/419.5, 2006. U.S. Department of Transportation: Privatesector Sponsorship and Investment In Major Projects has been Limited. Government Accountability Office: March 25/04, 2004, and March 4/05/06, respectively. Some countries have further protected the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches by establishing quasi- governmental entities to assist project sponsors. Entities such as Partnerships UK, Partnerships Victoria, and Partnerships BC are often fee-for-service and associated with Treasury Departments on the provincial and national levels. Quasi-governmental entities can further protect the publicinterest through the benefits they provide, the GAO says. In a previous GAO, the agency said DOT does not provide similar support for transit projects. exists at the federal level, nor does federal guidance identify public interest considerations in transportation. Stakeholders include public transit authorities, transit agency employees, mass transit users and members of the public who may be affected by ancillary effects of a transit public-private partnership or alternative project delivery approach. defining the public interest is a function of scale and can differ based on based on scale. The public interest in transit may refer to the many stakeholders in public- private partnerships, each of which may have its own interests. Interviewed have attempted in part to protect the public interest by ensuring the use of competitive procurement practices. These practices are not unique to alternative approaches and are sometimes used in conventional procurements. Federal law and regulations generally require federal contracts to be competed unless they fall under specific exceptions to full and open competition. Nevertheless, project sponsors told us that maximizing the use. of these competitive procurement Practices helps to maximize the public's interest in transit projects, the authors say. The authors say the public should be able to have a voice in how transit projects are funded. The FTA defines alternative approaches, including public-private partnerships, as those that increase the extent of private sector involvement beyond the conventional design-bid-build project delivery approach. These alternative approaches contemplate a single private sector entity being responsible and financially liable for performing all functions of the project. The benefits are not assured and should be evaluated by weighing them against potential costs and trade-offs, the FTA says. The agency says states should also reexamine their own public- private partnership policies for transit projects. entities all develop guidance such as standardized contracts and provide technical assistance to support transit projects that use alternative approaches. According to an advisor for project sponsors, contracts for these partnerships and approaches generally follow a standard model. The United Kingdom’s standard contract outlines requirements as well as factors to consider from a project’S service commencement through termination, which is periodically updated to reflect lessons learned. For example, after the government of the United.Korea decided to build a new rail line, it decided to use an alternative approach. To determine how transit projects that use alternative approaches have been used in the United States, we collected and reviewed descriptions of the projects, copies of the concession or development agreements, planning documents, and documentation related to the financial structure. We conducted, summarized, and analyzed in-depth interviews with project sponsors, private sector participants, international stakeholders, and experts regarding the competitive procurement process, robust concession agreements, and Value for Money analyses. We also examined international mechanisms that were implemented for projects including Croydon Tramlink, Docklands Light Railway, London Underground, Manchester Metrolink. Transit public-private partnerships have been implemented in Australia, Brazil, Canada, France, Hong Kong, Malaysia, the Philippines, South Africa, Thailand, and the United Kingdom. International projects generally require a government subsidy to supplement farebox revenues for construction as well as operations and maintenance. According to World Bank officials, the U.K. and Canada are leading countries for private equity investment in transit. The United Kingdom has the most experience using different public- private partnership models. The World Bank- sponsored report was published in May. United Kingdom and Canada use conditional approvals to help encourage a greater private sector role in transit projects. If those conditions are not met, the project loses its government funding. This conditional approval occurs after the department reviews projects, in part to address the risk of cost increases. It thus provides a signal of project quality to the private sector to help maintain a competitive bidding. The UK Department for Transport grants a conditional approval announcing the government’s intent to fund a project before it receives private sector bids. process. If the agreed-upon cost, schedule, and risk transference are not met, the government withdraws its funding. United Kingdom Department for Transport officials told us that they have experience withdrawing funding when such conditions have not been met. We also found that other U.S. Department of Transportation modal administrations have also withdrawn funding for transit projects when they have not met the agreed conditions. We have asked Transport Canada for comment and will update this article if we receive a response from Transport Canada. potential universe of countries with significant experience in transit public-private partnerships. We determined that we would collect the most valuable and relevant information from countries that share a similar political and cultural structure to the United States. Given our limited resources, we decided to select only two of the three remaining countries. Thus, we ultimately identified Canada and the United Kingdom for our international site visits. Issues discussed in the report related to the interpretation of foreign law, including issues related to state-to-state agreements. completed or had already carried out substantial planning. The potential universe of projects contained 10 completed projects including: Denver Regional Transportation District Transportation Expansion Light Rail. We also included 3 eliminated the John F. Kennedy Airtrain, Portland MAX Airport Extension, and Las Vegas Monorail projects. We decided to select all three of the ongoing pilot projects—Bay Area Rapid Transit Oakland Airport Connector, Hudson-Bergen Light Rail Transit Minimum Operating Segment 1, and Bay Area Rapid transit Extension to San Francisco International Airport. The Oakland Airport Connector project is to be a 3.2-mile system that will connect the Oakland International Airport to the Bay Area Rapid Transit’s Coliseum Station. In its original iteration, the project planned on using a design-build-finance-operate-maintain project delivery approach that included private sector financing. Lower-than-expected ridership predictions due to the economic climate, among other factors, led BART to move forward with a different alternative approach for the project. officials said that in many cases, the private sector partner would need the authority to increase or decrease transit fares based on ridership trends. However, because raising fares involves political considerations, including equity for low-income transit users, officials told us that most project sponsors retain the right to set fares. Some project sponsors that have tried to transfer ridership risk while retaining fare-setting authority have run into difficulties, officials said. According to project sponsors and transit experts, the Bay Area Rapid Transit’s Oakland Airport is a good place to start. European Union countries are required to have multiple bidders for procurements. Procurements with only one bidder are less competitive and can result in less attractive bids. For example, although Bay Area Rapid Transit prequalified three contractors for the first version of its Oakland Airport Connector, two contractors withdrew during the negotiation period due to concerns about the project affordability. Bay AreaRapid Transit negotiated with the sole remaining bidder on costs for nearly a year but then let the Request for Proposals expire with no bids. Value for Money evaluations examine total project costs and benefits. They are used to determine if a public-private partnership approach is in the public interest for a given project. Value for Money tests are often done by comparing the costs of doing a proposed project. against an estimate of the costs. of procuring that project using a public delivery model. The I-595 Corridor Roadway Improvements Project in Broward County was one of the projects assessed. The Bay Area Rapid Transit’s Oakland Airport Connector was also assessed. Bay Area Rapid Transit says a contract will be awarded in December 2009. The project was originally to use a design-build-finance-operate-maintain approach. The private sector can be held responsible for the condition of a transit project for longer durations than under the conventional design-bid-build approach. A greater private sector role in transit projects can also potentially offer certain advantages to the public sector, including increased financial flexibility and more predictable operations and maintenance funding, the authors say. private sector can bid to provide something different than what was agreed upon under preliminary engineering. Houston Metro’s private sector partner told us it would like to begin some construction activities on the North and Southeast Corridors, but will not be able to begin until a full funding grant agreement is awarded. FTA officials responded that they allowed Houston Metro to carry out someConstruction activities in advance of their receiving a fullfunding grant agreement. Moreover, Houston Metro officials told us that the private sector has to delay its work until the funding process is completed. Project sponsors, stakeholders, and transit experts we interviewed told us that potential cost and time savings can be key incentives for using alternative approaches. Minnesota Metro Transit’s Hiawatha Corridor (one of the seven completed New Starts projects that used an alternative approach) was completed 12 months ahead of schedule compared to using the conventional design-bid-build approach. This saved an estimated $25 million to $38 million since early completion led to avoided administration costs using is really needed, the report says. A conventional design-bid-build contract is generally not flexible enough to allow for enhanced efficiencies and design improvements. This allows the private sector to potentially generate and apply innovative solutions in the design of the transit system. For example, Denver Regional Transportation District’s Transportation Expansion Light Rail project (another of the seven New Starts projects) used a design-build approach. A lessons-learned report following the project's completion stated that the project sponsor was able to incorporate 198 design modifications. design-bid-build approach. Project sponsors may be able to benefit from certain efficiencies and service improvements by transferring long-term responsibility of transit operations and maintenance. DOT’s 2007 Report to Congress on transit public-private partnerships stated that the private sector may be. able to add value to transit projects through improved management and innovation in a project.“We took several steps and considered various criteria in selecting which domestic transit projects to study as part of our review of alternative financing and project delivery practices,” the authors say. Minnesota Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver’s Transportation Expansion light rail offered proposal stipends to private sector entities that submitted formal bids. Stipends add costs that must be weighed against the benefits they provide. Project sponsors have encouraged early and sustained interaction with the private sector to test the project's marketability and whether and in what form private sector participation is advantageous. Such feedback can be helpful in the development of a project's plans and plans for the future, the authors say. include the private sector. The Canada Line project sponsor used a list of essential elements agreed upon by the public agencies funding the project. The Hiawatha Corridor project used a request for qualifications to select bidders and solicit private sector’s review of project details. Minnesota Metro Transit told us that input from the privatesector produced several good ideas that were incorporated into the project, such as a shared risk fund to provide an incentive for theprivate sector to reduce construction delays. The pilot projects are part of the Federal Transit Administration's "Transit for All" program. The Canada Line light rail project in the Vancouver area is a 35-year design-build-finance-operate-maintain concession agreement. Payments to the private sector were based on performance and ridership revenue. The private sector was also given the ability to set fares. The project is in the ninth year of its contract. It is designed to link Vancouver with its international airport and neighboring employment and population centers in anticipation of the light rail line's arrival. The line is expected to open in 2015. No completed New Starts projects have been privately financed and therefore, none of these projects have used private equity financing. One project, the Las Vegas Monorail, a 4-mile fixed-guideway system serving the resort corridor along Las Vegas Boulevard in Nevada, was financed with tax-exempt revenue. However, there have been very few examples of completed non-New Starts-funded new fixed-Guideway projects that have been private financed. The private sector role is to design and construct the project or to design, construct, operate and maintain the project. and local public grants, taxes, and municipal bonds, and defined conventional project delivery to refer to the design-bid-build approach. We defined innovative financing to include loan or credit assistance such as the Transportation Infrastructure Financing and Innovation Act, Private Activity Bonds, Tax Increment Financing, State Infrastructure Banks, Grant Anticipation Notes, and Revenue Bonds. Finally, we defined alternative financing to referring to public-private partnerships that involve private equity capital such as concession agreements and defined alternative approaches as ones that transfer greater risk to the private sector. private sector bidders to incorporate these funds into their financial plans without having to individually apply as otherwise required. The Federal Highway Administration has also carried out three pilot programs that have allowed projects to move more efficiently through its grant process by modifying some of its requirements. These pilot projects waived certain aspects of the federal-aid highway procurement provisions, such as moving forward with final decision prior to a National Environmental Policy Act decision, and allowed federally funded highway projects to use alternative approaches including design-build. Pilot program allowed project sponsors in two states to contract with the private sector at a much earlier point in the project development cycle than was previously allowed. FTA does not yet have an evaluation plan to accurately and reliably assess the pilot program’s results, including the effect of its efforts to streamline the New Starts process. Having helped pave the way for design-build to become the standard project delivery approach in highway projects, pilot program has been a big success for the federal government. The Federal Highway Administration has not yet granted project sponsors any major streamlining modifications. The Federal Aviation Administration has granted 90 of these multiyear awards since 1988. The Federal Highway Administration grants early conditional approvals to highway project sponsors seeking Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act funds. The FAA uses Letters of Intent in its Airport Improvement Program to establish multiyear funding schedules for projects that officials said allow project sponsors to proceed with greater certainty regarding future federal funding compared to the broader program. It also helps prevent project stops and starts, officials said. It is intended to encourage greater private sector involvement in projects. the reauthorization of the existing transportation bill, the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users, and awarding a full funding grant agreement for the project. Denver Regional Transportation District officials told us that following this approach will likely increase the cost. FTA officials said these additional costs stem from a lack of funding available in a surface transportation authorization period rather than FTA’s New Starts requirements. Tax-increment financing funding was a major funding source for the $2.6 billion project. One ongoing New Starts project did not apply to be part of the pilot program, but is using an alternative approach. The Dulles Silver Line is using the design-build approach with partial funding of the local share coming from area businesses. In contrast, international project sponsors have delivered transit projects using a wider range of alternative approaches, including public-private partnerships, beyond the more commonly used design- build in the United States (see table 2). According to the U.S. Department of Transportation, the majority of international transit projects have been delivered using a range of approaches. For the East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects, Denver Regional Transportation District officials also told us that since enough design work will be completed during the New Starts preliminary engineering phase, no additional design work is needed. However, as required by New Starts, they will again prepare the design documentation for the final design and full funding grant agreement approval phases, potentially contributing to schedule delays. FTA officials said that the resubmission of the documentation is necessary because the project will need to be fully funded before construction can begin. The East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects initially had a 700-page design specification document for their commuter rail vehicles. After industry review and feedback that the specifications would lead to customized vehicles that would be expensive and difficult to operate and maintain, the project sponsor responded by creating a 15-page performance specifications document for the vehicles. An advisor noted that the use of design specifications is more challenging with transit projects than in highways and other sectors given the technology issues and environmental concerns. The advisor also noted that design specifications are difficult to use on transit projects due to technology issues. Denver's East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects are to connect the city’s main railway station with its airport and other parts of the city. The project is using a design- build-finance-operate-maintain approach, which includes financing by the private sector. The private sector partner will be selected through a competitive proposal process to deliver and operate the project under a long-term agreement. It may also contribute to additional project costs borne by the public sector when other alternative approaches are used. Denver Regional Transportation District East Corridor and Gold Line, and Houston Metro North and Southeast Corridors. FTA views these projects as currently having the most private sector potential and thus designated them as their three Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program projects. We also decided, given our limited resources, to select two of the remaining three completed projects. Minnesota Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver Regional Transportation district Transportation Expansion. These two projects have successful collaborations with their respective departments of transportation, including their highway counterparts. payments tied to operations to the private sector over a number of years. By using the design-build- finance-operate-maintain approach, Denver may have more financing flexibility. With a longer payment period, project stakeholders told us that the transit agency could conserve funds in the short term to help it construct other new transit projects on time. Additionally, Denver could potentially extend the payments 20 years longer than if a bond were used and private sector were not involved in financing the project. Regional Transportation District East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects incorporate payment deductions. Low performance, such as delayed trains and littered or unclean railcars, persists. If low performance continues over a period, the project sponsor can terminate the concession agreement and rebid the project to another private partner. Project sponsors also protect the public interest in transit public-private partnership and other alternative approaches through the incorporation of private equity capital. When a private sector partner finances a project using equity capital, the private sector uses payments received from the project sponsors to repay. Public-private partnerships incur added costs when the private sector provides the financing for the project. Denver Regional Transportation District anticipates spending $15 million in advisory fees for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ request for proposals submittals. The municipal bond market in the U.S. may not necessarily require.that the conventional project delivery approach may notnecessarily require. that the public-private partnership approach be used for all projects, according to a report by the Center for American Progress.

ROUGE-1: 76.89, ROUGE-2: 70.22, ROUGE-L: 21.81
BERTScore: 59.38

==============================================
==================== [58/100] ====================
Summary:
Education(GAO/OCG-99-5, Jan. 1999). Risk-BasedCapital:RegulatoryandIndustryApproachestoCapitaland Risk. High-RiskSeries:StudentFinancialAid. StudentLoanLenders:InformationontheActivitiesoftheFirst IndependentTrustCompany. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Ordersbyvisiting: Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. between $2,500 and $20,000. Some secondary markets reported that their trustee charged this initiation fee each time they issued bonds to raise capital. Annual trustee fees reported by ineligible lenders ranged between $4,500 to $75,000, depending on a number of factors. These lenders reported that the fees could be a flat fee or calculated as a percentage of outstanding loan balances or on the outstanding balance of bond issues. Ineligible lenders reported the annual costs are used to pay for trustee fees. Some ineligible lenders feared that the provision of HEA that makes trustees fully responsible for trustee-held loans might have an impact on costs. They reported that costs did not significantly increase or decrease after the 1998 amendments were enacted and that they did not see a change in the role of the trustee. According to ineligible lenders, the trustee’s decision to charge administrative fees on a per-loan basis rather than as a flat fee, and the additional services the trustee will perform for the ineligible lender, such as payroll services, are key factors. maintain the arrangement and cover the necessary services provided by the trustee. Some eligible and ineligible lenders reported that a variety of other factors could influence the size of both initiation and annual fees. Some of these factors included the structure of the trustee arrangement and the complexity of the the geographic region in which the trustee and ineligible lender operate. The trustee handles paperwork associated with the guarantors and servicers involved in the loan transactions, and carries out administrative activities associated with obtaining financing to originate or purchase loans. the loan servicing organization it has chosen. In addition, some trustees review the structure of the financing method used by the ineligible lender to raise the capital necessary to originate or purchase loans. This review might include examining a rating agency’s report on the transaction. Trustees and ineligible lenders also reported that their contracts included similar clauses covering trustee and ineligible lender resignations. For example, they reported that trustee resignation clauses allow the trustee to resign from the arrangement by giving a specific number of days’ notice. 60 or 90 days. If ineligible lender is unable to locate another trustee within that time period, the resignation clause sometimes provides for additional time to obtain a new trustee. Most trustees and ineligible lenders reported that the trustee would probably remain in place until a new one can be engaged, even if the designated time periods have elapsed. The trustee arrangements we reviewed were also similar in the requirements placed on the ineligible lender and the amount of monitoring the trustee performed. For example, trustees generally require ineligible lenders to abide by HEA requirements. Eligible lender trustees and ineligible lenders reported limited day-to-day interaction. One trustee reported no daily interaction. Some trustees reported that they interact with the ineligible lender only when it is necessary to sign forms, such as quarterly reports that must be submitted to the Department of Education. Trustee arrangements come with some protections, but not all trustees feel they have enough protection to oversee the loan servicer, the report says. The report says the trustees perform limited monitoring activities and mostly review annual reports and audits. the names of the parties involved in each trustee arrangement, the lender identification numberassociated with each arrangement, and the outstanding loan balances. These data represent the best information available, and an Education official acknowledged that the list might be incomplete. In determining the total outstanding balance of loans associated with trustee arrangements, we included information only for arrangements that allow ineligible lenders to originate or purchase student loans and securitizations of these loans. We included balance info only for the Student Loan Marketing Corporation’s privatized business and the ineligible lenders it owns. We focused our review on trustee arrangements created to allow ineligible lenders to originate or purchase student loans. To determine the number of existing trustee arrangements, we obtained data from Education’s lender database. We are sending copies of this report to the Honorable Richard Riley, Secretary of Education; eligible lender trustees; ineligible lenders; and other interested parties. Copies will also be made available to others on request. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please call me at (202) 512-7215. Ineligible lenders fall into two categories: secondary marketsthat have not been designated as an eligible lender for a state and private companies that wish to make and hold student loans. Eligible and ineligible lenders agree that participation by ineligible lenders increases competition among lenders and can, in turn, contribute to improved service and lower costs for student borrowers. Some ineligible lenders, however, believe that two factors—HEA requirements and the general evolution of financial markets could affect their participation in student loan markets. For example, some secondary markets raise capital increasing the amount of loan capital available to students. government were owed monies on an ineligible lender's loans, it could recover those funds by withholding the SAP on the eligible lender trustee’s self-originated loans. Because ineligible lenders do not receive any payments directly from Education, it does not have an ability to collect liabilities by offset. Obtaining a trustee arrangement does not appear to be a widespread problem among ineligible lenders to date. If eligible lenders remain unclear and therefore continue to interpret the 50-percent rule as applying to loans they hold as a trustee, the number of trustees could decline. To determine the protections offered the federal government by trustee arrangements, we identified and synthesized applicable legislation and regulations. We also interviewed eligible and ineligible lenders, guaranty agencies, servicers, Education officials, and other student loan market participants on the responsibilities of an eligible lender trustee. We obtained the perspectives of participants on whether trustee arrangements have a positive or negative effect on lenders’ participation in the student Loan Market. We identified past, current, and potential problems lenders faced in using trustee arrangements. lenders we interviewed, current initiation and annual trustee fees do not prohibit them from conducting business in the student loan market. Trustees and ineligible lenders reported similar criteria used by trustees to evaluate ineligibles before they entered into arrangements. For example, trustees reported that most important in deciding whether to enter an arrangement is the business reputation of the ineligible lender. These organizations must use a trustee to originate or purchase loans, because these organizations must Use a Trustee to Originate or Purchase Loans. Four ineligible lenders reported they had a difficult time obtaining their current trustee arrangement. Several others said that finding a trustee in the future would become more problematic. Ineligible lender representatives expressed concern that because trustees also originate student loans for themselves, trustees may decide to end their eligible lender trustee services rather than continue to provide the mechanism for a competitor to do business. A few ineligible lenders stated they were uncomfortable with trustees having the final say as they originate student loan loans for their competitors. The Federal Reserve is expected to announce a plan to consolidate student loan institutions in the coming months. penalties, refuse to make future payments, or recover payments already made to lenders and agencies for such things as interest subsidies and insurance claims. In 1998, HEA was amended to include a provision stating that eligible lenders that act as trustees are responsible for meeting statutory and regulatory requirements for the loans they hold as trustees. According to Education officials, the HEA provision that holds trustees responsible for an ineligible lender’s loans allows the federal government to recoup the losses from the eligible lender trustee rather than the ineligible lender. The Department of Education reports that approximately 125 trustee arrangements exist between eligible and ineligible lenders. These arrangements account for approximately $400 million in student loans. servicer problems that may result in loan guarantee loss can also occur on loans held by eligible lenders and are not unique to trustee arrangements. The Department of education reports that about 125 trustee arrangement exist between ineligible and eligible lenders. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. by selling tax-exempt bonds to investors. Report is concerned primarily with trustee arrangements used to enable ineligible lenders to make and hold student loans. At FFELP’s outset, the government expected to share the program's financial risks with state-designated guaranty agencies. When states failed to establish such agencies, the Congress enacted legislation with several incentives to increase lender and guaranty agency participation. In providing these incentives,. the Congress kept the financial risk almost entirely with the federal government. Congress has since shifted some risk back to the guaranty agencies and lenders by reducing the maximum reimbursement and insurance rates on defaulted loans. These actions were intended to encourage both lenders and guaranty agency to work with borrowers to prevent them from defaulting on their loans. Apart from the defaults that occur when borrowers fail to repay their loans, some loans lose their federal guarantee because lenders, servicers, or Guaranty agencies fail to follow the Department’s requirements for making, servicing, and collecting loans. ineligible lenders are generally not subject to financial safety and soundness reviews by government agencies. Most eligible lender trustees also hold student loans in their own name and receive regular FFELP- related payments from the government for those loans. Given these issues, some ineligible lenders believe their market presence could diminish in the future. The presence of an eligible lender from whom the government can recoup its financial losses is critical since Education has no direct oversight authority to ensure that ineligible lenders are operating their programs in accordance. Education administers and oversees federal student aid programs authorized by HEA. Among these financial aid programs is FFELP. The five principal entities involved are students, schools, lenders, guaranty agencies, and Education. Most lenders contract with a third-party entity to service the loan and collect payments from borrowers. If the student defaults on the loan, the lender files a claim with the guaranty agency for reimbursement of most of its loss. In general, HEA designates which entities are eligible to makeFFELP loans to students. The most direct protection comes from an HEA provision that holds eligible lenders fully responsible for any loans they hold as trustees. For example, a loan may lose its guarantee because of servicing errors or because of negligence on the part of the servicer or the lender. When these problems occur, the federal government will not reimburse the guarantor. To ensure the government’s investment in FFELP is secure while allowing ineligible lenders to participate in the program, the HEA must be changed. The 125 arrangements represent liaisons between 16 eligible lender trustees and 31 ineligible lenders. Ineligible lenders can be further grouped as 17 secondary markets and 14 other ineligibles. Costs of trustee arrangements fall into two categories—payments to initiate the agreement and annual fees to maintain it. The ineligible lenders we interviewed reported that initiation costs were generally a flat fee ranging from $1,000 to $2,000.for $25.3 billion in outstanding loans— approximately 19 percent of the outstanding balance of all FFELP loans as of December 1999. stated he had turned down eligible lender trustee business because the additional trustee-held loans would put the bank above its 50-percent allocation of student loans. Most ineligible lenders we interviewed stated that the number of available trustees has decreased as eligible lender banks have merged with each other in recent years. Recent mergers include First National Bank of Chicago and Bank One, Norwest and Wells Fargo, and Firstar Bank with Star Bank and Mercantile Bank. The number of eligible lender trustees is expected to grow over the next few years.  HEA currently states that a bank functioning as an eligible lender cannot have as its primary consumer credit function the making or holding of student loans. Education interprets the act to mean that the lender’s FFELP loans cannot total more than one-half of the lender's combined consumer credit loan portfolio, including home mortgages held by the lender or its subsidiaries. This provision is commonly known as the 50-percent rule. The student loan market in the future is expected to be much larger. holding FFELP loans that total more than one-half of their combined consumer credit loan portfolio applies to loans held by the trustee for an ineligible lender. Education agreed with our recommendation that it clarify its interpretation of how the HEA provision applies. Education said that it has not yet decided which policy to establish nor how to formalize the decisionOnce it is made, Education did not say when it expected to implement our recommendation. We incorporated technical comments, which we incorporated where appropriate, into our report. of the Student Loan Marketing Association, including any subsidiary of the Holding Company, or an agency of any state functioning as a secondary market. The majority of organizations making loans to students fall into one of these eligible lender categories. However, organizations that do not meet HEA criteria may still participate in FFELP by contracting with an eligible lender to serve as its trustee. These ineligible lenders include: a Rural Rehabilitation Corporation; under certain circumstances, any nonprofit private agency functioning in any state as asecondary market; and a consumer finance company subsidiary of a national bank. Lenders have expressed confusion regarding application of the rule. Some ineligible lenders and other student loan market participants believe that the 50- percent rule applies to loans held as a trustee. Education officials told us that although Education has inconsistently applied the regulations in the past, it currently interprets the provision as excluding trustee-held loans in determining the lender’s primary consumer credit function. But Education has not formally promulgated its interpretation of the 50 percent rule, officials said. The regulations do not specifically address these loans. an eligible lender is defined as under certain circumstances, a national or state chartered bank, a mutual savings bank, or a savings and loan association. A pension fund as defined in the Employee Retirement Income Security is an insurance company that is subject to examination and supervision by an agency of the United States or a state. An eligible institution is also defined as the Student Loan Marketing Association or the Holding Company. A single state agency or a single nonprofit private agency designated by the state is an eligible institution. believe the federal government is likely to recover its losses from trustees. Most financial institutions that serve as eligible lender trustees are subject to federal (and in many instances, state) oversight. Among the most important of these regulations are those dealing with minimum capital standards. These capital standards provide benchmarks against which regulators can assess the safety and soundness of a bank’s operations as well as its financial condition. Education officials stated that because of this, they believe the government will recover the losses.

ROUGE-1: 77.50, ROUGE-2: 71.62, ROUGE-L: 28.77
BERTScore: 51.84

==============================================
==================== [59/100] ====================
Summary:
Congress appropriated $38.346 billion for all versions of the MRAP. The full FY2011 DOD budget request of $3.4 billion was authorized by the Ike Skelton National Defense Authorization Act for FY2011 ( P.L. 111-383 ). In the President's FY2012 DOD budget proposal, there was no request for procurement funds for the MR AP program. Citing an operational requirement for 27,344 MRAPS to support CENTCOM operations, DOD requested $3,195 for theMRAP vehicle program for FY2012. The House and Senate Armed Services Committees recommended fully funding the FY2012 OCO budget request. As previously noted, many older MRAPs shipped to Afghanistan are reportedly not being used because their size and weight severely limit their effectiveness. If a large number of MRAPS are, in fact, not being use, the budget request could be in jeopardy. The House Committee on Appropriations recommended fully Funding the FY 2012 OCO Budget request. The FY2012 budget request includes $.765 billion for survivability and mobility upgrades; and $.03 billion for automotive and ballistic testing. Pentagon agreed to loan 300 MRAPs in Afghanistan for one year to 15 allied nations currently. If these vehicles are not being used, is there a better use for them elsewhere or are they to be left in country after the eventual departure of U.S. forces? Some say the vehicles were shipped to Afghanistan, as some say, for symbolic as opposed to operational reasons and, if so, what is the total cost for these unused vehicles to be shipped and maintained in theater? About 85 MRAPs are already out on loan to Poland, Romania, Georgia, and the Czech Republic. All countries that are loaned MR APs can request an extension on the loan and the borrowing countries are responsible for the costs associated with maintaining these vehicles. The Government Accountability Office (GAO) says the loans could help to reduce allied casualties and help to recoup some of the associated procurement costs of the vehicles. In August 2009 briefings to the House Armed Services Committee Air and Land Forces, and Seapower and Expeditionary Forces Subcommittees, the GAO said that the loans would help reduce casualties in Afghanistan. contract for additional M-ATVs over and above the original 8,100. According to DOD, as of July 21, 2011, 14,749 MRAPs had been delivered to Afghanistan. Reports suggest that many of the older model MR APs deployed to Afghanistan are not used, as they are considered too large and bulky for tactical missions. Congress might wish to explore the performance characteristics of these modified M- ATVs in greater detail with DOD to ensure that a proper balance between protection and operational utility is reached. M-ATVs initially enjoyed success in Afghanistan, but reports suggest insurgents have increased the size of IEDs. In response to the enhanced IED threat, two additional layers of Israeli-made armor plates are being installed to the M-ATV's underside. New padding and crew harnesses inside the vehicle reportedly will enable the M/ATVs to withstand explosions twice as large as before. If U.S. decides to look for "the next best thing" in terms of tactical wheeled vehicles, they could run the risk of significant redundancies and not being able to afford recapitalizing and replacing the HMMWV fleet. DOD reportedly concluded a $245 million dollar contract with Oshkosh to acquire 5,100 sets of armor. Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology & Logistics Ashton Carter supposedly intends to outfit all of the almost 7,000 M-ATVs in Afghanistan with these armor kits. There are concerns that additional armor might have an adverse impact on vehicle mobility, which was the prime consideration for the development of the M- ATV. Their current classified capability. While additional armor and interior improvements could improve M-atV survivability up to a point. Mine-Resistant, Ambush-Protected (MRAP) vehicles are a family of vehicles produced by a variety of domestic and international companies. They generally incorporate a "V"-shaped hull and armor plating designed to provide protection against mines and improvised explosive devices (IEDs) DOD originally intended to procure three types of MRAPs. These included Category I vehicles, capable of carrying up to 7 personnel and intended for urban operations; Category II vehicles, able to carry up to 11 personnel; and Category III vehicles. The Army and Marines first employed MRAPs in limited numbers in Iraq and Afghanistan in 2003. The vehicles are intended to be used primarily to clear mines and IEDs, capable of carrying up to 13 personnel. DOD officials have stated that the casualty rate for MR APs is 6%, making it "the most survivable vehicle we have in the Army" and the Marines" MRAP's have been used for route clearance and explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) operations in Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere. DOD has approved an acquisition objective of 25,700 MRAP vehicles for all services. Of this total, 8,100 will be the new MRAP-All Terrain Vehicle (M-ATV) designed to better handle the rugged terrain of Afghanistan. DOD officials have indicated that this requirement may increase depending upon the operational needs in Afghanistan. Some defense experts suggest that the Joint Program Office's estimates seem too high. The M-1 Abrams main battle tank was said to have a casualty rate of 15%, and the up-armored HMMWV, a 22% casualty rate. Of the almost 15,000 Army MRAPs, about 5,750 will be assigned to infantry brigade combat teams, according to a June 2010 Army briefing. About 1,000 MR APs will be used for home station and institutional training, and approximately 1,500 will be placed into logistics and route clearance units. However, with the increase of U.S. forces deploying to Afghanistan and Secretary of Defense requirements to make better use of MRAP's, these plans have been adjusted. The Marines are reportedly still developing their ground vehicle strategy. MRAPs have proven to be 10 times safer than HMMWVs in protecting soldiers during IED attacks. As many as 40,000 lives had been saved in Iraq and Afghanistan, according to the Pentagon's Joint Program Office for MR APs. In an interview with outgoing Secretary of Defense Robert Gates, it was suggested that MRAP's were 10 times more likely to survive an IED attack than other vehicles. The Marines are currently developing a sea-based expeditionary Marine force. noted that "the introduction of MRAP, M-ATV and eventually the JLTV creates a potential risk of unplanned overlap in capabilities," a risk that needs to be managed. Defense officials have also been asked if there is a need for the MRAP/M-ATVs and JL TV programs, as these programs share as many as 250 requirements. Some analysts question the need for three distinct tactical wheeled vehicle programs, particularly in light of anticipated defense budget cuts.

ROUGE-1: 77.86, ROUGE-2: 70.16, ROUGE-L: 27.12
BERTScore: 59.95

==============================================
==================== [60/100] ====================
Summary:
Climaticevents influencing prices include cold weather, which increased energy usage, anddry conditions, which decreased the availability of hydroelectric power. During 2005, Point Carbon analysis indicates 79% of the variance (R 2 ) inallowance prices was explained by changes in fuel prices (particularly for electricpower), with 23% ofthe variance explained by the weather. This linkage betweenallowedance prices and the power market is not a linkage between power market and CO2 prices, according to Point Carbon. surprising, as the power sectorconducted the majority of trades in 2005 and therefore significantly influencedprice development. Kaasik argues that the evidence from the past year indicates that fuelprices influence carbon prices, but not the reverse. He sees allowance prices as a derivative of natural gas and coal pricing, at least in theshort-term. Assuming natural gas-fired and coal-fired generation are the marginalcost suppliers of power, allowance prices will respond positively to increasingnatural gas prices or decreasing coal prices. electricity price byinfluencing the marginal price of electricity. The EU-ETS has provisions for linking its trading scheme to the JointImplementation (JI) and Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) components of the Kyoto Protocol. How this has evolved during the firsttrading period is illustrated by Figure 3 . Figure 3. There is a Very Long-Term Correlation Between CO2 and Electricity Price: Link Via Marginal Producer Source: Margus Kaasik, Eesti Energia, Carbon Market: EUETS (May 9, 2006) p.11. The EU-ETS traded 362million metric tons of CO 2 in 2005, valued at 7.218 billion euro. Brokers wereresponsible for 57% of the volume, exchange markets did 15%, and bilateraltransactions accounted for 28%. Of the exchange market volume, the EuropeanClimate Exchange (ECX) had the largest share at 63%. The average price for an allowance traded in 2005 was 19.9 euro, withbrokered and exchanged allowances averaging 20.6 euro and bilateral transactionsaveraging 18.2 euro. in 2005, as indicated in Figure 1 below. Inparticular, allowance prices dropped from almost 30 euro to about 9-11 euro inApril and May, sparked by a series of reported over-allocation of allowances inseveral Member States. The EU-ETS is a maturing but still narrow market. Monthly volumes areincreasing, but have never exceeded a 1.6% monthly average. By July 2006, allowance Prices had recovered to about 17euro in July. Figure 1. CO2 Market: Even If No "Big" News Highly Volatile Source: Margus Kaasik, Eesti Energia, Carbon Market: EUETS (May 9, 2006),p. 14. Germany's 2005 emissions were only 474 million metric tons; thus the reduction isonly 0.6% from last year's emissions. In addition, Germany is proposing to permitevery new power station built between 2008 and 2012 to opt out from CO 2 caps andthe ETS for 14 years. These emissions increases will be in addition to the planned cuts to CO 2 emissions. Germany's proposed ETS allocation for the second trading period would be 5.6%. This would be a decrease of 5.8% from the previous allocation. Small installations (between 20MW and50MW) account for 30% (about 3,000) of the total facilities covered under the ETS. 36% of the covered installations produced less than 10,000 metrictons of CO 2 annually. Germany is attempting to have some planned coal-fired powerplants, which will be large producers ofCO 2, able to opt-out of the Ets for 14 years. The somewhat weak emissions data available at the time of the EU questionnaire suggest this is unlikely to happen. non-CO 2 greenhouse gases, which account forabout 20% of the EU's total greenhouse gas emissions. The first trading period began January 1,2005. A second trading period is scheduled to begin in 2008, covering the period of the KyotoProtocol, with a third one planned for 2013. Under the Kyoto Protocol, the then-existing 15 nations of theEU agreed to reduce theiremissions by 8% from 1990 levels under a collective arrangement called a "bubble" By 2001,collective greenhousegas emissions in the EU were 2.3% below 1990 levels. Kingdom and the incorporation of EastGermany into West Germany. Several countries, including Ireland, Spain, and Portugal, experiencedemissions growth of over 30% during this period. In light of the Kyoto Protocol targets, the EU adopted a directiveestablishing the EU-ETS that entered into force October 13, 2003. The importance of emissionstrading was elevated by the accession of 10 additional central and eastern Europe countries to EUmembership in May 2004. Collectively, these 10 countries' greenhouse gas emissions dropped 22.6%from 1990-2001. of Environmental Ministers and European Parliament was to achievea new car fleet average CO 2 emissions rate of 120 grams per kilometer by 2005. This objective was not met in 2005 and is unlikely to be met by 2010. Voluntary commitments by the European, Japanese, and Korean AutomobileManufacturers Associations in 1998 and subsequently endorsed by the EC set targetsof 140 g CO 2 /km by 2008/2009. At the end of 2005, the average new car emissionsrate is about 160 g CO2 /km. the appropriate direction. Germany is attempting to direct its second NAP toward carbon-intensive, coal-fired electric generating facilities rather than low-carbon alternatives. Reluctance by countries to redirecttheir NAPs and an inconsistent price from the ETS make the long-term effect of theETS uncertain. Norway, a non-EU country, also has an emissions trading system that beganoperating on January 1, 2005. Norway's system covers 51 facilities in the energy andprocess sectors such as oil refining and iron and steel processing. likely to influence the future direction of Norway's trading system. The government had indicated earlierthat it would consider expanding the [trading] system from 2008 to include as manysources of emissions as practical through an upstream system. With the adoption of the EU ETS designfeatures, Norway seems to move away from this option. The IEA states: The government has indicated that it will not expand the trading system to include all sources of emissions from 2008. The ETS is expected to be in place by 2015. The carbon tax is levied on about 64% of the country's CO 2 emissions. Other parts of Norway's industry, particularly its offshore oiland gas sector, are covered by the carbon tax of almost 40 euro per metrictonne of CO 2. The firstphase of the trading program covers the period 2005-2007, with a second, expandedphase to begin in 2008. Developing its initial trading scheme independently of the EU, Norway's"Quota Quota" scheme is expected to be completed by the end of 2009. The transportation area has become a major source of concern. The sector is not a part of the ETS and is not likely to be included before the third trading period. Instead, transport controls are based on voluntaryagreements with automobile manufacturers to improve fuel economy, fuel-economylabelling of cars, and promoting fuel efficiency by fiscal measures. As announced in 1996, the objective of the EU Council is to achieve improvenew car fleet average CO 2 emissions rates. Thecornerstone is the agreements with automobiles manufacturers to achieve Improvenew Car Fleet average CO2 emissions Rates. CO 2 emissions in the EU continue to rise because of increased miles driven,increased size and weight of cars, and falling car occupancy rates. Attempts to balance the burden between ETS and non-ETS sectors have already created tension in the industry. The EC 2005progress report also notes that despite EU's effort to increase information on fuelefficiency and CO 2 emissions for consumers, the effectiveness of the effort seemslow. "A significant impact on consumer's decisions could not yet be noticed" have to be covered by the non-ETS sectors --commercial, residential, and transportation. An assessment done for GreenpeaceInternational states that the German NAP II places "a disproportionate burden foremissions reductions on the non theETS sectors" in terms of meeting its commitmentsunder the EU Burden Sharing agreement. Policies to fill in the gap reportedly include oneplan to reduce emissions by 3 million tons by training German drivers to drive moreeconomically. The EU-ETS system involves an interplay between definitions and proceduresthat are EU-wide. that while three-quarters of all emissionsare produced by the largest 7.5% of installations, the small installations are responsible for less than 1%. Whether the ETS shouldcontinue to cover the roughly 3,500 facilities under 10,000 metric tons annuallyremains a hotly debated issue. In choosing a gradual, incremental approach to emissions trading, the EU isrelying on other programs to control greenhouse gas emissions in other sectors, suchas transportation. Some sectors not covered by theETS may grow faster than sectors covered by ETS, creating difficulties forcompliance. The EU's Emissions Trading System (ETS) is a cornerstone of the EU's efforts to meet itsobligation under the Kyoto Protocol. It covers more than 11,500 energy intensive facilities acrossthe 25 EU Member countries. Covered entities emit about 45% of the European Union's carbon dioxide emissions. The trading program does not cover emissions of sulfur dioxide. The U.S. has a sulfur dioxide (acid rain) control programcontained in Title IV of the 1990 Clean Act Amendments. The EC looked at five criteria: (1)environmental effectiveness, (2) economic efficiency, (3) the potential effects on competition, (4)feasibility, and (5) existence of alternative policies and measures. It felt that starting with a relativelysmall number of economic sectors and sources that contribute significantly to total emissions would "substantially" satisfy these criteria. As noted, the six sectors chosen emit about 45% of the EU15's CO 2 emissions. The coverage for individual countries varies widely; and those that are nationwide. The groundwork for the system is theKyoto Protocol, which (1) defines the pollutants and sets the countries' emissionstargets. Within this framework, the EU defines the elementsthat make the EU-ETS work, including industry participants, the unit of trade, trading periods, settling upprocedures, and linkages within and beyond the EU. With respect to emissions years and sinks, EU defines baseline emissions years, sinks, and national inventoryand compliance requirements. companies, governments, industryassociations, market intermediaries, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) asked which of 12 topics they felt were most important to them. Table 3 indicates thetop five topics according to governments surveyed, along with their correspondingranking by other stakeholders. The five issues are discussed below. Source: European Commission, Review of EU Emissions Trading Scheme (November 2005), p. p. 1. The European Commission's review of the ETS was published in November 2005. TheEC's linking directive allows operators to fulfil their allowance obligations under the EU-ETS using credits derived from JI and CDM projects. "Certified Emissions Reductions" (CERs) under the CDM must be issued by the Clean Development Mechanism Executive Board. Emissions Reduction Units (ERUs) under JI are transferred from one country toanother -- an exchange that cannot begin until the second trading period. Several EU countries have established carbon funds topursue JI or CDM opportunities. of non-delivery, such as an emissions reduction purchaseagreement (ERPA), prices are in the range of 8-12 euro. In contrast, for CERsalready issued, or where the sellers take the risk, prices are  13-15euro. The real impact of CDM and JI on theEU-ETS system will not be fully known until the second trading period, when EUdemand for credits will increase substantially and other non-EU countries wouldbe implementing their own Kyoto compliance strategies. Table 5 illustrates the scope of potentialharmonization issues facing the EU-ETS. One issue of particular interest is the effort to increase the use of "benchmarking" standards in setting allocations. Table 5: NAP HarmonizationIssues Source : Adapted from Fiona Mullins, EU ETS Implementation: Room forHarmonisation (The Royal Institute of International Affairs, 2005). Click here for more information on the European Union's ETS harmonization program. Click here to read more about the European Commission's harmonization programme. aspects of the EU ETS, and the Commission can and does seek to increase the degree of harmonization through guidance notes. The economic value of allowances is nowhere more evident than indiscussions of new entrants. Germany is proposing to permit new coal-fired powerplants built between 2008-2012 to opt-out of the ETS for thefirst 14 years of operation. In its survey of ETSstakeholders, the EC found that 85% of all respondents favor a harmonized approach to new entrants and closures. Nearly 75% believed that those allowances should beprovided free. to the ETSis inevitable. As stated by Grubb and Neuhoff with respect to allocation: The final way in which the EU ETSdiffers from many other trading systems is in the devolution of allocationresponsibilities, in this case to its 25 Member States. This was an essential part of thedeal that enabled the adoption of the Directive. Member States would have neverceded to the European Commission the power to distribute valuable assets to theirindustries. Nor is theEU ETS unique in devolving powers of allocation: it is typicalin a number of US systems. based on best available technology and practices, rather than on historical emissions. The EC does not have the authority to scrutinizeallocations at the facility level, so any allocation harmonization would be on avoluntary basis ("soft harmonization") Also, allocation schemes, such asbenchmarking, may not be suitable for some industries. In many ways, diversity between Member countries with respect to respect to emissions is a major obstacle to a harmonized ETS. The ETS is expected to be implemented by the end of 2015. aredirection with respect to new entrants and long-term investment. Another area in which several Member States would like more harmonizationacross the EU is the definition of a combustion installation. Concernsrevolve around ambiguity in the current definition. The ETS applies to energyactivities for all sectors with combustion installations above 20 MW of thermal rated input, oil refineries, coke ovens, and, subject to size criteria, iron and steel, cement,lime, glass, ceramics, and pulp and paper facilities. The figures in this column indicate the number of installations with active registry accounts on 30 April 2006. They differ from figurescommunicated in earlier press releases because they are updated for installations that opted-out for the first trading period, opted-in, andinstallations without open accounts. As all data are held in the CITL and national registries, no data are available for those Member States without an active registry. a. The figures are allowances allocated to existing installations at the start of the scheme. installations at the start of the scheme but put aside mainly for new entrants andauctioning (in the cases of Denmark, Hungary, Ireland, and Lithuania). d. Due to technical problems in the national registries of the Czech Republic, France, the Slovak Republic, and Spain, the CITL did not receivewholly reliable information on the installation level surrenders from these Member States. Some commentators have suggested that annual average 2005-2007 allocations that are actually 44.1. Commission" (created in 1998) stressed that the 2008 program be ascomprehensive as possible, suggesting that the system could include close to 90% ofthe country's greenhouse gas emissions. To achieve this coverage, the Commissionenvisioned a hybrid system of quotas, depending on cost-effectiveness andpracticality considerations. Arguing in favor of regulating CO 2 emissions at theproducer (upstream) level from mobile sources and some stationary sources, theQuota Commission states: For these emissions, regulation at the producer level will not create weaker incentives for reducing emissions thanregulation at the consumer level. those process emissions which arerecommended for inclusion in the system. Regulation by quotas should be imposed at the end-user level in cases where the processes originate with major industrial companies. For process emissions stemming from a series of small sources, e.g.emissions of N 2 O from commercial fertilizers, regulation should beimposed on retailers, or importers in order to avoid unacceptably high systemcosts. The Commission's recommendation that "regulation by quotas be imposed inpart on the producer" may be overtaken by development of the EU ETS. opportunities forcost-effective allowance trades. In deciding on its trading program, the European Commission (EC) adopted a"learning-by-doing" approach to prepare the EU for the Kyoto Protocol's emissions limitations. The wider the scope of the system, the greater will bethe variation in the costs of compliance of individual companies. This argues in favour of a comprehensive trading scheme across differentMember States covering all 6 greenhouse gases and sinks, and encompassing all emissionssources. A comprehensive trading program is estimated by the EC to reduce Kyoto compliance costs to EU countries by 3billion euro. The 1997 Kyoto Protocol now in force. Countries that ratified the protocol are developing appropriate implementation strategies to begin reducing theiremissions of greenhouse gases. The European Union (EU) has decided to use anemissions trading scheme (called a "cap-and-trade" program) to help it achieve compliance at least cost. The decision to use emissiontrading to implement the Kyoto Protocol is at least partly based on the successful emissions tradingprogram used by the U.S. The EU has also used other market-orientedmechanisms permitted under the Protocol. of Reaching Kyoto Target to EU Member States in 2010 (in billions of 1999 euro) Source: EC Green Paper (Mar. 8, 2000), p. 27. For a variety of reasons, the EC chose a trading system with limited coverage rather than acomprehensive system covering all sources and gases. Some European analysts have noted that EUpolitics played an important role in preventing serious consideration of a comprehensive program. A significantly wider coverage could have beenprovided only by an upstream system, which had been excluded by the [European] Commission at the beginning of the process. political: an upstream scheme would have toomuch looked like a tax. There areconsiderable uncertainties surrounding the emissions of the fluorinated gases [HFC, PFC, SF 6 ] andthe absorption of carbon dioxide by sinks. Allocating allowances, monitoring emissions andenforcing compliance of small mobile emitters, such as private cars, raise complex technical technical issues. (8) Not surprisingly, this reason was not employed by the EC in explaining its decision to create a less comprehensive trading scheme at this time. 13. With the over-allocation issue in the first trading period, it is likely that theEC will take a harder stance in reviewing NAPs for the second trading period. In general, the originalEU-15 countries have to reduce their emissions caps the most to meet their share of the EU's requirements under the Kyoto Protocol. Several countries facingdouble-digit percentage reductions. As indicated, EU-15 states, on average, have toreduce their emissions on an annual basis. caps 6.8% (119 million metric tons) from their current levelsto meet their requirements under the Kyoto Protocol-based second trading period. In contrast, as a group, the newer countries and the EU as a whole are in substantiallybetter shape. (28) Table 4: Comparison of 1st and 2nd TradingPeriod ETS Caps (in millions of metric tons of CO 2 Equivalent unlessotherwise noted) Source: Based on data provided in Annex 1, European Commission, "FurtherGuidance on Allocation Plans for the 2008 to 2012 trading period" (Brussels, Dec. 12, 2005) p. 11. absolute reductions for the phase 2008-2012. In general, the EC has seen the over-allocation issue as part of the"learning-by-doing" process that should help the EU in implementing the secondtrading period beginning in 2008. The new 2005 emissions data givesindependently assessed installation-level figures for the first time and so providesMember States with an excellent factual basis for deciding upon the caps in their national allocations plans. The plans are subject to approval by theCommission, which will also be making extensive use of the new data. to the number of installationssubsequent to the respective Commission decision (e.g., opt-ins or opt-outsof installations) At first glance, it would appear that the EU would have little difficulty meeting its Kyoto Protocol requirements during the second trading period. However, there are other considerations. First, countries with potentialsurpluses may want to retain at least some of that surplus to help fuel their countries' economic growth. Second, possibly at the expense of a Member State that needs allowances. the extent to which surplus credits would be created via JI, the EC linking directive, requires that such credits (including from CDM) be "supplemental" to acountry's domestic efforts. A third consideration is the overall commitment of the Kyoto Protocol. Some sectors period for the original 15 Member States can becovered by trading with the newer Member States that anticipate a surplus. Inaddition, potential CERs and ERUs from the CDM and JI respectively may helpmaintain limits on allowance costs. some modest emissions targets (i.e., to put the EUon the path toward meeting the Kyoto requirements) Table 2 provides the national emissionsallocations and 2005 emissions levels for 21 EU countries as recorded by the CommunityIndependent Transaction Log (CITL) by the compliance deadline of April 30, 2006. The 2005 emissions totalreflects emissions from 8,980 sources representing more than 99% of the allowances allocated. Noncomplying sources are subject to a 40-euro penalty for each tonof emissions in excess of surrendered allowances under the ETS. resulted in revisions were excessive allocation of allowances. Excessive allocation problems resulted from statesthat left a gap in how they would achieve their target, to be filled with measures to be defined later. Ex-post adjustments by states are not allowed; such adjustments are seen by the ECas potentially disruptive to the emissions market and creating uncertainty for companies. For the 2005-2007 period, the European Union is not attempting to meet the Kyoto Protocolbut to get experience with emissions trading with other countries. The Climate Action Network (CAN), a network of 365non-governmental organizations, stated the following: Emissions limits set by MemberStates for the first phase were a major disappointment. CAN: To ensure maximumenvironmental benefit of the ETS and the overall success of the system as awhole, they need to be strengthened considerably. The Kyoto targets requireambitious caps with new entrants. The EU is not on the path to the Kyoto requirements nordeveloping the trading market. This "over-allocation" does not includethe 73.4 million metric tons of allowances held in reserve by the various countries. third, trading period. Allocating allowances according to output and not differentiatingaccording to the carbon intensity of the project would provide an incentive to developlow carbon alternatives. An example provided by Grubb and Neuhoff: New entrant reserves should be basedon output or capacity, and avoid differentiating according to the CO 2 -intensity of thenew investment. In particular, giving more to coal than gas plants would be an incentive for development of low-carbon alternatives. The manner inwhich new entrants receive allowances may have a significant effect on the long-termdirection of investment -- whether it is directed toward low- carbon opportunities orused to support continuation of current economic development. rewardsinvestment in new coal facilities, which would conflict with objectives to tackleclimate change. The damaging effects would be amplified ifcarbon-intensive new entrants not only receive free allowances for the period2008-2012 but also receive promises for subsequent periods. The proposed treatment of coal-fired powerplants by the German Government shows how difficult it will be to direct future investment toward low-carbon projects. However, it could be argued that the long-term success of the ETS and theEU's commitment to Kyoto rests on such agreements. questionnaire conducted by theEuropean Environmental Agency's Topic Centre on Air and Climate Change. Most Member States would welcome harmonization of the treatment of new entrants and closures across the EU. Analogous to the U.S. acid rain program, EU states have set up reserves toprovide allowances to new entrants. In general, these allowances are provided free,as that is widely seen as helping boost new investment. Most states have yet to dip intotheir reserves for new entrants; however, the importance of the reserve will increase as the ETS enters its second, and eventually third, phase. only 20% ofFrance's greenhouse gas emissions are covered, compared with 69% of Estonia's emissions. National Allocation Plans (NAPs) are central to the EU's effort to achieve its Kyotoobligations. Each Member of the EU must submit a NAP that lays out its allocation scheme under the ETS. These NAPs are assessed by the EC to determinecompliance with 11 criteria (12 for the EU) for the first trading period, and for the second period. to the individual Member's NAPs, the EC harmonizes the NAPswith respect to penalties, allocation method (e.g., grandfathering), monitoring, andregistries. It allows Members flexibilitywith respect to allocations to individual participants, the extent to which banking ispermitted, and whether to permit the auctioning of up to 10% of allowances in thesecond trading period. As a result of this framework, there are significant differencesbetween Members with respect to participant definitions, industry level emissionscaps and allocations, and enforcement. the second period) delineated in an annex to the emissionstrading directive. Criteria include requirements that the emissions caps and other measures proposed by the state aresufficient to put it on the path toward its Kyoto target. For the first period, the EC approved most of the necessary NAPs by the end of 2004. Thelast NAP was approved June 20, 2006 (from Greece). In general, the primary problem the EC foundwith NAP's that was that they did not guarantee Kyoto compliance. share of phase 1 allocations. Modestvolume for a new system is not surprising; trading volumes under the U.S. CleanAir Act Title IV sulfur dioxide trading program were very thin in the beginning. Even after several years of operation, SO 2 allowances prices can changeunpredictably and inexplicably. Some reasons for ETS allowance price derivatives are explicable. ETS market responded to a variety of regulatory,climatic, and economic events over the first trading period. Regulatory eventsinclude the late approval of NAPs for several countries, along with the resultingover-allocation causing the sudden market correction in May.

ROUGE-1: 82.18, ROUGE-2: 75.12, ROUGE-L: 26.17
BERTScore: 56.60

==============================================
==================== [61/100] ====================
Summary:
an unmet health care need was much higher among children with no insurance than children with insurance. Shared decisionmaking between families of children with special health care needs is another goal for the MCH Services Block Grant. Multiple components determine whether a family is receiving family-centered care. These components include the amount of time spent with health care providers, their level of attentiveness, sensitivity to families' values and customs, and the relevance of information provided to families, according to the grant's website. and whether the family felt like a partner in their child's health care. The 2009-2010 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs found that families with insurance coverage were more likely to report family-centered coordinated care than families without insurance coverage. Another approach to ensuring family- centered, community-based care is the medical home. Medical homes provide patients access to primary care medical providers and a coordinated care team. They have been associated with improved care outcomes and outcomes for children with special health needs. injuries that require medical care. Accessing these additional services may create additional access and financial burdens on families. Children with special health care needs may qualify for Medicaid or CHIP, and they are more likely to have health insurance. In the 2009-2010 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs, access to preventive and health care services is measured by a series of questions on use of services and unmet needs. Overall, 76% of children did not have an unmet need for specific health care Services in the year prior to the survey. 47% of children with special health care needs had a medical home in 2011-2012. Access to care is often cited as a barrier to health services. State toll-free hotlines provide callers with state-specific Medicaid enrollment information. In 2012, state toll- free hotlines recorded 1.3 million calls regarding Medicaid enrollment. The Maternal and Child Health Services provides coverage for maternal and child health services in the U.S. It also provides care for the elderly and disabled. The proportion of children with health insurance coverage varies considerably by race, ethnicity, and poverty status. 81% of children living in households at or below the federal poverty level have health insurance. Children who were uninsured (54%) were less likely than those covered by public insurance (84%) to have received preventive health care in the past year. Children with special health care needs often need health, mental, and social services beyond preventive care. They also are more likely to have at least one preventive care visit in the prior year. Overall, 84% of children had one preventive health care visit in the year preceding the 2011-2012 National Survey of Children's Health. Non-Hispanic white children had the highest rate (86%) of preventive health Care visits in the preceding year, followed by non-Hispanic black children. There was slight variation among racial and ethnic groups; non- Hispanic black children had a higher rate of preventive Health Care Visits than Hispanic white children (87% vs. 85% in the previous year). Women who receive late or no prenatal care are more likely to experience complications of childbirth, including low birth weight. The rate of pregnant women entering prenatal care in the first trimester is generally higher among non-Medicaid populations than among women enrolled in Medicaid. Lack of insurance coverage and lack of access to a primary care provider may be reasons women do not receive prenatal care. These barriers tend to be higher among racial and ethnic minorities. Among Medicaid enrollees, researchers have identified limited availability of maternity care providers. In 2012, the infant mortality rate for women enrolled in Medicaid was 10.3 infant deaths per 1,000 live births, compared with 7.7 for those not in the Medicaid program. Prenatal care is recognized as an important factor in the health and well-being offamilies. For more information, visit the Human ResourcesSA website or call 1-800-273-8255 or go to http://www.HRSA.org/. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. HRSA differentiates between health "performance" measures and health "outcome" measures. Performance measures include data on breastfeeding, oral health care, the suicide rate, and the teenage birth rate. Outcome measures include the infant mortality rate and the child death rate. States are required to report data on these maternal and child health indicators by county, race, and ethnicity. The most recent data reported to HRSA by the states are shown in Figure D -1 , although current reporting years vary among the states. Of the 50 states, Mississippi had the highest IMR (9.97 per 1,000 live births) and New Hampshire had the lowest (3.95) IMR is generally higher in the South and Midwest, and lower in other regions. Risk factors for infant mortality, including higher rates of teenage births, prematurity, and inadequate prenatal care in the first trimester, disproportionately affect low-income people.single-year linked birth and death certificate information on IMR. Comparing data from both HRSA and CDC, the data show similar variability in rates by state and region. The MCH Services Block Grant is to fill gaps in public health services for low-income mothers and children. States are required to use at least 30% of their block grant allocations for preventive and primary care services for children. Projects funded by SPRANS include MCH workforce development, genetic services, and diagnostic and treatment services for hemophilia. CISS grants fund projects that support integrated maternal and child health services at the community level. The law provides that block grant funds are to be used by the states "to provide and to assure mothers and kids"  SPRANS has additional funding of $5 million to develop Family to Family Information Centers through FY2017. The CISS program is initiated whenever the MCH Services Block Grant appropriation exceeds $600 million. Of any amount appropriated over $600m, 12.75% is set aside for CISS. These funds are distributed on a competitive basis to public and private organizations. entities that propose activities focusing on areas with a high infant mortality rate are given preference. The MCH services block grant is part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CISS grants and contracts support development and expansion of integrated services at the community level. Public or private organizations or institutions are eligible for these grants. Strategies used include maternal and infant health home visiting; projects to increase participation of obstetricians and pediatricians in Title V and Medicaid; integrated maternal and child health service. CISS is a HRSA-administered discretionary grant program that funds projects which seek to increase service delivery capacity at the local level and to promote community-based health systems.  SPRANS projects must support national needs and priorities or emerging issues. Projects must also have regional or national significance. 15% of MCH Services Block Grant funds are set aside for SPRANS programs. The FY2016 budget included appropriations language that provided SPRANS set-aside funds for oral health ($5.00 million); epilepsy ($3.64 million); sickle cell ($2.96 million); and fetal alcohol syndrome ($0.48 million). SPRANS may also be used for genetic disease testing, counseling, and information development and dissemination programs. has sometimes provided specific directives for certain programs, including set-asides for the programs listed above. In FY2016, these congressional directives comprised about 16% of SPRANS funding. In addition, the Family-to-Family Health Information Centers program funds family-staffed and family-run centers. The F2F HICs provide information, education, technical assistance, and peer support to families of children with special health care needs. They also assist in ensuring that families and health professionals are partners in decisionmaking at all levels of care. Most of the provisions created under the ACA included mandatory appropriations for FY2010 through FY2014. The Postpartum Depression program was authorized but has not been funded. This program provides funding to states for abstinence education. Abstinence from sexual activity outside of marriage must be the exclusive focus of the programs funded by these grants. The ACA appropriated $50 million for each of FY2010 and FY2014 for the abstinence education program. This appendix provides a summary of those provisions. The appendix also includes a list of provisions that were added or amended by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. through FY2014 for this program. P.L. 113-93 (the Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014), which was enacted on April 1, 2014, extended the Title V Abstinence Education block grant ($50 million per year) through FY2015 (i.e., September 30, 2015). P. l. 114-10 , the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, increased the TitleV Abstinent Education blockGrant to $75 million peryear for FY2016 and FY2017. SSA §511, Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting Programs. This program provides grants to states, territories, and tribes for the support of evidence-based early childhood home visiting programs. support in-home visits by health or social service professionals with at-risk families. The ACA appropriated a total of $1.5 billion for FY2010 through FY2014 for the home visitation grant program. P.L. 113-93 extended funding for the program through the first six months of FY2015 and also provided $400 million for FY2016 and $400million for FY2017. Of the amount appropriated for this program, 3% must be reserved for research and 2% for education. and ethnic diversity, and other related subjects; (3) financial literacy; (4) parent-child communication; and (5) educational and career success. The ACA appropriated $75 million annually for each of the five fiscal years FY2010 through FY2014. The Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014 extended PREP ($75 million per year) through FY2015. P.L. 114-10 (the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015) extended PREp ($75million per year). evaluation, and 3% for making grants to tribal entities for home visitation services to Indian families. This program provides grants for epidemiologic research, improved screening and diagnosis, clinical research, and public education to expand understanding of the causes and treatments for postpartum depression and related conditions. The ACA authorized funding of $3 million for these grants for FY2010, and such sums as necessary for each of FY2011 and FY2012. The new early childhood home visitation grant program is collaboratively administered by the Administration for Children and Families and the Maternal and Child Health Bureau at HRSA. The MCH Services Block Grant is authorized to receive $850 million annually. The final appropriation for FY2016 was $638.2 million. Of the amount appropriated, an estimated $550.8 million was for block grants to states (86%) and $77.1 million for SPRANS (12%) Full-year appropriations for FY2017 have yet to be enacted. Figure 2 shows historical and current funding in total and for the three components of the MCH services block grant. The program also receives 15% of funds remaining above $600 million. The MCH Services Block Grant was appropriated $638.2 million in funding for FY2016. The majority of this funding is distributed to the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and Palau. Some of these funds are reserved for CISS grants, and others are devoted to research via the SPRANS grants. Title V of the Social Security Act established seven broad goals for the program. 12.75% of any amounts appropriated above $600 million must be reserved for CISS. The first $422 million is distributed to each state based on the amount the state received under the consolidated MCH programs in 1983. Any funds above that amount are distributed based upon the number of children in each state who are at or below 100% of the federal poverty level. The program is funded by a formula that takes into consideration the proportion of low-income children in a state compared to the total number ofLow Income Children in the United States. The MCH Services Block Grant provided services to over 34 million children in FY2013. Of those children, nearly 15 million had Medicaid or CHIP coverage. Changes to public and private insurance markets under the ACA may affect the number of pregnant women and children served by the block grant. One general concern with block grants may be that federal funds are being used to address state-specific issues and are not held accountable to national concerns. Congress should ensure that block grant funds can and should be redirected to meet other maternal and child health goals, and not decreased.  states may be best suited to use block grant funds in situations where there is wide variability in burden and cost. Filling in the gaps left by Medicaid and CHIP is one such area, due to variable enrollment eligibility among the states. As mentioned earlier, the indicators discussed in this report are referred to as outcome measures and performance indicators by HRSA. improvement in these measures is an objective of Title II of the MCH Services Block Grant Act of 2013. The report was compiled by the HRSA, CDC, and the Department of Health and Human Services. direct health care services for low-income mothers and children and children with special health care needs (63.3%), followed by enabling services (18.7%), population-based services (10.5%), and infrastructure (7.6%). Although the expenditures nationwide are inverse to their location in the MCH pyramid, the distribution of funds between service categories varies widely by state and depends on the needs of each.and preventive health care that are not otherwise available through other funding sources or providers. MCH Services Block Grant funding was $638.2 million in FY2016. Funding for MCH services is not determined solely by federal funding. States are required to provide $3 for every $4 of federal block grant funding. Other local, state, or federal funds may be used to support MCH activities, and certain MCH programs generate income through insurance payments and Medicaid reimbursements. Figure 3 shows national Title V block grant partnership funding by source of funding for FY2015. The MCH Services block grant has several reporting mechanisms required by the ACA. poverty level (FPL) as a proportion of the total number of children below 100% of the FPL nationally. Each state must contribute $3 for every $4 of federal funds awarded. States may use no more than 10% of their federal allocations for administrative costs. States are required to maintain at least the state's FY1989 level of funding for maternal and child health programs. Block grant funds are awarded each fiscal year in quarterly installments and remain available for expenditure for the current and subsequent fiscal year. In FY2014, 59 states and jurisdictions received MCH Services Block Grant Funding. These programs directly served 2.0 million pregnant women and 36.9 million children (aged 1 to 22), including 2.7 million children with special health care needs. Data on these measures as reported by the states and aggregated by HRSA can be found on the Title V Information System and Discretionary Grants Information System websites.reported to HRSA by theStates can be. found in Appendix E (see Table E-3 and TableE-4 ). Figure 4 shows the proportion of children, pregnant women, infants, children with special health care needs (CSHCN), and others served nationally by the MCH Services Block Grant. In FY2014, there were nearly 50.4 million persons served by Title V programs. The largest category of individuals served nationally are children aged 1 to 22, followed by women of childbearing age and infants, and pregnant women. Title V Programs serve women and children who are covered by private and public insurance. Maternal and child health services, research, training, demonstrations, and other activities funded by the block grant must be linked to one or more of these goals. The MCH Services Block Grant is not a single program, but rather a combination of block grants to states and two discretionary grant programs. This combination of approaches provides flexibility to states in achieving maternal and childhealth goals, while allowing both Congress and HRSA to maintain a degree of control in guiding national initiatives. The issues related to the MCH Service Block Grant span the intersection of clinical health services,. prevention, and public health. Title V of the Social Security Act (SSA) authorizes funding for services and projects that are intended to improve the health of mothers and children. This report focuses on the MCH Services Block Grant, which receives the largest single appropriation under Title V. The Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) administers the grant. The grant is administered by the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting Program. Title V was converted to the MCH Services Block Grant in 1981 by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) OBRA 1981 consolidated the existing categorical programs listed above into a single block grant. The consolidated block grant was intended to give the states more flexibility in determining how to use federal funds to address maternal and child health. Title V was also used to fund poisoning prevention programs, genetic disease programs, hemophilia treatment centers, adolescent pregnancy grants, and sudden infant death syndrome programs. The MCH Services Block Grant currently has three components: block grants to states, a set-aside for Special Projects of Regional and National Significance (SPRANS), and another set- aside for the Community-Integrated Block Grant. It required that each state receive, at a minimum, the combined funding of the programs that were consolidated under OBRA 1981. Additional changes were made to the block grant under the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989. These changes increased the authorization of appropriations, called for greater accountability, and created stricter rules. The new performance measurement system has three tiers: NPMs, national outcome measures (NOMs), and evidence-based/informed strategy measures (ESMs) Beginning with the annual report for FY2016, each state Title V program selects 8 out of 15 N PMs for programmatic focus during the five-year reporting cycle. A comprehensive list of national performance measures is provided in Appendix E . In addition to state-reported measures, the Maternal and Child Health Bureau administers two surveys, the National Survey of Children's Health and the National survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs. The Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) funds more than 700 projects each year through discretionary grants. The MCHB Discretionary Grant Information System (DGIS) electronically captures performance measures (see Table E-5 ), program, financial, and abstract data, and products and publications about these discretionary grants from the grantees. The data collected are used by M CHB project officers to monitor and assess grantee performance as well as assist in monitoring and evaluating MCHb's programs. collection, and the average number of performance measures each grantee will be required to report is reduced. Further, the structure of the data collection has been revised to better measure the various models of programs and the services each funded program provides. This revision will allow a more accurate and detailed picture of the full scope of services provided through grant programs administered by MCHB. It is hoped that this revision will give a better picture of what is available to the public in the form of grants and loans. performance measures (NPMs) for MCH were instituted in 1997. In 1998, HRSA introduced the Title V Information System (TVIS) to collect and publicly report state-level Title V data. This interactive, web-based system provides public access to Title V performance measures by state. Since 2011, all states have reported annually on their progress toward achieving the targets they set for 18 National Performance Measures. That will end with the FY2015 annual report (see Table E -1 ). Changing trends in MCH risk factors, outcomes, health services, data sources, and advances in scientific knowledge, in conjunction with budgetary constraints led the The notice pertaining to changes in the DGIS was published in the Federal Register on March 15, 2016. MCHB's purpose in revising the performance measures is to better measure progress toward program goals. The overall number of performance measures has been reduced from prior DGIS data. The revised measures will more accurately capture the scope of services provided through the Title V Block Grant. It is hoped that the measures will better align with and support the Block Grant, specifically population domains and National Performance Measures, where reasonable. Title V programs, including the Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant, serve women and children who are covered by public and private insurance. There is no federally prescribed means test coverage status was unknown for 27% of children receiving Title V-funded services. By law, at least 30% of federal block grant funds must be used for primary and preventive care for children with special health care needs. State matching funds and other sources of maternal and child health funding are not required to follow the allocation requirements of federal funds. Title V requires the state agency or agencies administering the Title V program to create an agreement coordinating block grant services with the state's Medicaid program. Beginning in 2015, the result of that Needs Assessment will be integrated into the Application/Annual Report for that reporting year, with updates to follow in the interim years. The primary purpose of this coordination effort is to make Medicaid services accessible, to enroll those who are eligible, and to provide services to those who need them. The goal is to improve access to health care for those in need. has been successful in targeted communities. Some have argued that the decentralized nature of block grants makes it difficult to measure program performance and accountability. The quality of services provided under block grant funding is not currently tracked. However, the existing data required by Title V may be used to determine whether states are efficiently funding their gap areas with block grant funds. In addition to the MCH Services Block Grant, Title V contains a Health and Human Services (HHS) Block Grant. The HHS Block Grant provides funding for health and human services. Access to quality health care for mothers and children is measured by several questions in the National Survey of Children's Health. Progress toward national health objectives, such as reduction of the infant mortality rate, has shown past improvement but has stagnated in recent years. Due to the flexibility of funding, varying circumstances in states, and other societal issues, it is impossible to globally track the direct impact of maternal and child health block funding. However, Title V funding is only one component affecting these measures. Other federal and state programs and policies, including Medicaid and WIC, as well as complex societal issues,. also affect the health and well-being of low-income children and their families. In FY2012, 33% of pregnant women who received Title V-funded services were covered by private health insurance. 56% were enrolled in Medicaid, 4% had no insurance coverage, and the insurance coverage status of 7% of Title V clients was unknown. Among children ages 1 to 22 years old, 34% were covered. by Medicaid. 4% werecovered by CHIP, 29% were. covered byprivate health insurance, and 6% hadNo insurance coverage.as well as those who have no insurance Coverage. and submit an annual report to the Secretary on all Title V activities. States must provide a list of activities and recipients of Title V funding, along with a description of progress toward meeting national and state health objectives. The reports must be presented in a standardized format. While the measures are designed to standardize reporting across the states, they are not intended to replace state-by-state reporting. The measures are intended to provide a framework for state-to-state comparisons. They are not meant to replace individual state- to state reporting. through FY2017 (i.e., September 30, 2017) Appendix B. Source of Funding for Title V Block Grants to States, the District of Columbia, and Other Jurisdictions, by State, FY2015 Appendix C. MCH Services Block Grant Funding History Appendix D. Selected Maternal and Child Health Measures, by state Appendix E. National Title V Performance and Outcome Measures Table E -1 shows the national performance measures for Title. V for FY2011-FY2015. Table E-2 shows thenational performance measures. for FY2016 and later years. Title V was enacted by Congress in 1935 as part of the Social Security Act (SSA, P.L. 74-271) to promote and support the health of mothers and children. Two grant programs were established to enable states to improve maternal and child health services. The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 replaced the term "crippled" with the term 'children with special needs' in the original Title V of the SSA. The term 'special needs' is now used to refer to children with disabilities.  Block grants to states provide funding for core public health services provided by maternal and child health agencies. These core services are often presented as a four-level pyramid. The four levels of services are infrastructure building, population-based, enabling, and direct health care. Infrastructure building services are foundation-building activities that provide for the development and maintenance of health services systems. These services increase a health system capacity by supporting training and other workforce development activities, as illustrated in Figure 1. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. coordinating health care systems and data system architecture, providing funding for applied research, and developing guidelines. Population-based services promote core public health functions such as universal screening, health promotion, and disease prevention campaigns. Direct health care services provided under Title V are intended to fill the gaps in primary care. Enabling services are services that facilitate access to care, such as case management, transportation, purchase of insurance, and coordination with other programs. These include newborn screening, lead screening, immunization, oral health, and injury prevention. for-profit entity. States must submit to the Secretary of HHS an application that includes a statewide needs assessment (to be conducted once every five years) and a plan for meeting the needs identified in the needs assessment. The needs assessment must identify statewide health status goals (consistent with national health objectives, such as Healthy People 2020); the need for preventive and primary care services for pregnant women, mothers, infants, and children; and services for children with special health care needs. The plan to address the needs Assessment must include a description of how the plan will be implemented. There is still variation among states in terms of capacity for collecting and reporting data. Priority needs that were frequently identified in states' FY2013 MCH Services Block Grant applications include family support services, oral health services and childhood obesity treatment and prevention. The statute requires states to provide the number of individuals served, either in the state or in the U.S. as a percentage of the total population. The state may annually adjust the strategic plans as their priorities change. The federal government provides funding for MCH services in the form of grants to states. with special health care needs (CSHCN), and 40% for services for either of these groups or for other appropriate maternal and child health activities. Services funded by the block grant may include prenatal care, well-child care, dental care, immunization, family planning, and vision and hearing screening services. Block grant funding is also used to support school-based health care services. They may also include inpatient services for children with special health needs, screening services for lead-based poisoning, and counseling services for parents of sudden infant death syndrome victims. States may not use the block grant funds to provide cash payments to recipients of health services, or for the purchase of land, facilities, or major medical equipment. Funds may not be used for inpatient services, other than for children with special health care needs, high-risk pregnant women, and infants (unless approved by the Secretary of HHS) Block grant funds cannot be used to satisfy any requirement for the expenditure of federal funds, and may not transfer block grant money to any other program. person or by phone, by the Title V block grant. States are also required to report expenditures by the four broad categories of service (direct health care services, enabling services, population-based services, and infrastructure-building services) Maternal and child health measures provide information on the overall health of mothers and children in each state. Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), when available, are also presented as a point of comparison. The numbers provided by states may be estimates if the actual numbers are not available. state's population. Distribution of funds depends on the needs of the states' populations. Direct health care services may cost more per person served than other services. Although the formula block grants to states are intended to fill gaps in a broad range of health services provided to women and children, certain uses of block grant funds are not included in the formula. The report provides data on state and national indicators and funding, and summarized in the program participation and reporting section of this report. The full report is available on the HRSA's website. grant funds on national health indicators such as IMR. Congress and the executive branch cannot direct states to specifically target one data point with block grant funding, but may use other approaches. Programs such as the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting Program and Strong Start have been promoted by policymakers as direct approaches to improving this particular health objective. Healthy Start, a national program that targets the infant mortality rate in selected communities, has been promoted as an alternative to block grant funds. Children with special health care needs (CSHCN) are defined by HRSA as "those who have or are at increased risk for a chronic physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional condition" CSHCN includes children with disabilities who receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI, formerly §1615 [c] of the SSA); lead-based paint; and low-income women and children. Over time, additional programs targeting these children were added to the Public Health Service Act (PHSA) and SSA. The Personal Responsibility Education program is administered by the Administration for Children and Families. It is designed to educate adolescents on both abstinence and contraception for prevention of pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS. The adulthood preparation subjects are (1) healthy relationships, including marriage and family interactions; (2) adolescent development, including the development of healthy attitudes and values about adolescent growth and development; and (3) body image, racial and ethnic identity.Funds were not appropriated for this program. avoid duplication of effort among the programs. State block grant administrators must also coordinate with other related programs, including the Special Supplemental Program for Women, Infants, and Children. Most state MCH and Medicaid agencies have created interagency agreements that outline the expected areas and levels of coordination. Most states specify the services provided by each agency under the agreement. Commonly, the Title refers to the block grant program, not to the individual program or the program's funding source. The federal government provides block grants to states for health, developmental disability and family planning programs. V agency contracts with health providers to provide the services. Agency administering the state's Medicaid program assumes the responsibility for reimbursement of those services. States may also include coordination with other services, such as WIC, under the agreement. HRSA's 2008 analysis recommended specific components for interagency agreements and provided a model interagency agreement. Adoption of a model agreement could build upon the Title V effort to ensure coordination among the block grant, Medicaid, and other programs. The SPRANS program is a HRSA- administered discretionary grant program for research and training for maternal and child health and children. HRSA must report to Congress on the activities carried out under the SPRANS and CISS programs. HRSA has developed national performance measures in coordination with states and grantees. States have also developed and reported additional state-level measures. The first national audit of the program will be performed every two years. The second audit will be carried out every three years, and the third will be every five years, unless there is a change in the program's funding source or the program is terminated. HRSA must annually compile the information reported by states and present the data to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Senate Committee on Finance in a Report to Congress. This report must include a summary of information reported to the Secretary of HHS by the states, and a compilation of specified maternal and child health indicators, nationally and broken down by state. The Secretary must also provide a report on funded SPRANS and CISS projects to those committees. As noted above, a list of other maternal andChild health measures is included in the report. pediatric and family practice workforce data to HRSA. States report the number of obstetricians, family practitioners, certified family nurse practitioners, pediatricians, and certified pediatric nurse practitioners who were licensed in the state in that year. They are also required to report data on whether individuals who are eligible for programs such as Medicaid and SSI are receiving services, or whether pregnant women have access to adequate prenatal care. For example, states report theNumber of Medicaid-eligible individuals who received a service paid for by the Medicaid program.

ROUGE-1: 81.03, ROUGE-2: 74.62, ROUGE-L: 23.72
BERTScore: 55.59

==============================================
==================== [62/100] ====================
Summary:
pipelines and other infrastructure used to transport crude oil and refined products; (3) the downstream segment, which consists of the refining and marketing of petroleum products such as gasoline and heating oil. (4) the renewable fuels segment, where biorefineries produce renewable fuels that are blended with petroleum products at wholesale terminals before being distributed to consumers. Crude oil, petroleum products, and renewable fuels are transported between market participants through an extensive supply infrastructure including pipelines, tanker vessels, rail, trucks, wholesale terminals, and retail outlets. diesel, increasing a refinery’s ability to process heavier crude oils. U.S. refineries primarily produce gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel that are used in the transportation sector, along with heating oil and liquefied petroleum gases such as propane used in home heating. The industry consists of firms of varying sizes that, in addition to operating refineries, may also have operations in other related industry segments. The upstream segment consists of the exploration for and production of crude oil; the midstream segment, which consists of. different fractions based on their boiling points, which can then be further processed into final products. One barrel of crude oil can be processed into varying amounts of gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, and other petroleum products. Through the addition of specialized equipment, refineries can be optimized—or “upgraded” to produce greater proportions of specific types of products. For example, a coker unit upgrades the low-value residual oil from the distillation process into higher value products such as jet fuel.  monthly domestic crude oil production has increased by over 55 percent through September 2013 compared with average production in 2008. According to EIA, increases in production in 2012 and 2013 were the largest annual increases since the beginning of U.S. commercial crudeOil production in 1859. Much of the increase in crude oilProduction has been from shale and other formations, such as the Bakken in North Dakota and the Eagle Ford in Texas. Similarly, crude oil Production in Canada— the largest foreign supplier of crude oil to the United States has also increased significantly in recent years. The rapid growth in U.S. and Canadian crude oil production has lowered the cost of crude oil for some domestic refiners that have the access and ability to process these crude oils. For example, West Texas Intermediate crude oil was $17.60 per barrel less expensive in 2012 than Brent, an international benchmark crude oil from the European North. From 2005 through 2012, total Canadian crudeOil production increased by 32 percent and U.s. imports from Canada increased almost 50 percent. The domestic petroleum refining industry has been and is expected to continue to be affected by several profound changes. Some of these changes, such as the growth in crude oil production in the United States and Canada, are reshaping the industry and creating new business opportunities. To take advantage of some of these opportunities, refiners and other market participants will need to invest—to upgrade refineries to be able to process different crude oils or to build pipelines or rail connections to move more crude oil from production to refining. Constraints have contributed to discounted prices for some domestic crude oils. Increasingly, the crude oil being produced in the U.S. and Canada has different characteristics from the crude oils that some domestic refineries are configured to use. Production of new domestic crude oil has tended to be light and sweet, whereas a portion of new Canadian production has been heavy and sour crude oils, EIA says. Some refineries can use these crude oils to a certain extent, but some have invested in new equipment in order to do so. that it has been inadequate. Some refineries may not have been able to take full advantage of crude oil production increases or had to rely on other more expensive crude oil transportation options such as truck, rail, or barge. Two of the refineries we visited recently installed facilities to enable them to receive crude oil from North Dakota or Canada by rail. According to EIA data, while refinery receipts of crudeOil by these methods of transportation is a small percentage of total receipts, they have increased 57 percent from 2011 to 2012. assumes more domestic crude oil and natural gas resources projects higher export levels. Several stakeholders told us that various issues could mitigate U.S. refiners’ ability to take advantage of growing crude oil supplies. It is unclear whether planned expansions in pipelines and rail transportation will keep pace with growing production, and these infrastructure expansions could be affected by regulatory actions to address pipeline and rail safety. Potential future increases in crude oil exports, which are currently minimal, could put pressure on refiners, stakeholders said. of the system of crude oil pipelines in the United States was constructed in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. The infrastructure was designed primarily to move crude oil from the South to the North. But emerging crude oil production centers in Western Canada, Texas, and North Dakota have strained the existing pipeline infrastructure. Though pipeline capacity has increased, investment increased pipeline capacity to deliver crude oil to a key Cushing, Oklahoma hub by about 815,000 barrels per day from 2010 through 2013. Recent improvements in technologies have allowed companies to extract oil from shale formations that were previously considered inaccessible. In particular, the application of horizontal drilling techniques and hydraulic fracturing have increased U.S. oil production. The process injects a combination of water, sand, and chemical additives under high pressure to create and maintain fractures in underground rock formations that allow oil and natural gas to flow. The United States increasingly relied on imported crude oil to meet growing domestic energy needs during the 1990s and early 2000s. September 5, 2012. Biofuels: Challenges to the Transportation, Sale, and Use of Intermediate Ethanol Blends. Washington, D.C.: June 3, 2011. Vehicle Fuel Economy: NHTSA and EPA’s Partnership for Setting Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards Improved Analysis and Should Be Maintained. GAO-10-336. Energy-Water Nexus: Many Uncertainties Remain about National and Regional Effects of Increased Biofuel Production on Water Resources. Increases in Production and Use. Federal Rulemaking: Improvements Needed to Monitoring and Evaluation of Rules Development as well as to the Transparency of OMB Regulatory Reviews. Energy Markets: Refinery Outages Can Impact Petroleum Product Prices, but No Federal Requirements to Report Outages Exist. Vehicle Fuel Economy: Reforming Fuel Economy. Energy markets: Increasing Globalization of Petroleum Products Markets, Tightening Refining Demand and Supply Balance, and Other Trends Have Implications for U.S. Energy Supply, Prices, and Price Volatility. Standards Could Help Reduce Oil Consumption by Cars and Light Trucks, and Other Options Could Complement These Standards. GAO-07-921. Washington, D.C.: August 2, 2007. Motor Fuels: Understanding the Factors That Influence the Retail Price of Gasoline. GAE-05-525SP. Washington,. D.c.: May 2, 2005. MotorFuels: understanding the factors that influence the retail price of Gas gasoline. GAo-05/525SP: Understanding The Factors That influence the Retail price of gas. GAO will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees and to the Secretaries of Energy and Transportation and the Administrator of the EPA. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao,gov. See appendix IV for EPA’s letter to theGAO. regulations, (2) the Department of Transportation’s Corporate Average Fuel Economy and EPA's greenhouse gas vehicle emission standards. We reviewed agency regulatory impact assessments and industry and other studies on the effect of these regulations on industry. We also summarized the results of semistructured interviews with a nonprobability sample of 32 stakeholders. (See app. II for a list of these stakeholders.) Stakeholders included representatives from refining companies, oil refineries, and other industry groups. environmental organizations, consultants, and officials from federal and state agencies. We also visited several refineries of selected refining companies. We selected these stakeholders to represent broad and differing perspectives on these issues. For example, to select refiners, we considered, among other factors, the size and location of their refineries, and whether they were vertically integrated or merchant refiners. When possible, we used a standard set of questions in interviewing stakeholders, including questions about the effect of the key regulations we reviewed. on additional questions tailored to these stakeholders’ expertise and sought opinions from stakeholders on key issues. Because we used a nonprobability sample, the views of these stakeholders are not generalizable to all potential stakeholders. Similarly, the conditions at the refineries we visited are notgeneralized to all refineries. The stakeholder views we summarize were not necessarily supported by all types of stakeholders, though we identify differing views where appropriate. Stakeholders and information we reviewed identified a number of issues that need to be addressed. This report provides information on the domestic petroleum refining industry and its market and regulatory environment. It addresses what is known about (1) major changes and (2) major factors that may affect the future of the industry. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V.our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. We identified five key regulations that were recently strengthened or proposed: the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Renewable Fuels Standard. changes that have affected the industry and a number of factors that may affect its future. To illustrate major changes over time and to describe the domestic petroleum refining industry, we summarized historical data from the Energy Information Administration. To assess the reliability of EIA data, we took several steps including reviewing documentation, interviewing EIA staff, and consulting with stakeholders. We determined the EIAData to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. The U.S. refining industry is one of the largest in the world. has fallen since 2005, resulting in a smaller domestic market for refiners. U.S. and Canadian crude oil production has increased in recent years, leading to lower crude oil costs for some refiners, according to several stakeholders we contacted. According to EIA data, U.s. production of crude oil reached its highest level in 1970 and generally declined through 2008, reaching a level of almost one-half of its previous peak in 2008. CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards and the RFS have likely recently contributed to declining consumption. The U.S. market is important for domestic refineries because they have historically sold their products domestically. On average, the United States exported almost 1 million barrels per day of domestic petroleum products from 2000 through 2005. According to stakeholders and the information we reviewed, two recently strengthened key environmental regulations—the coordinated CAFE and GHG—could have a significant impact on the refining industry. The refining industry has shifted sales to export markets amid a declining domestic market. As discussed below, the industry could see a decline in sales to the domestic market as a result. According to EIA data, increases in crude oil costs have been the largest component of the recent increases in gasoline prices. The refining component of prices has fluctuated over time but has not increased in a significant way since 2000. The five key environmental regulations affecting the domestic refining industry that we reviewed are concerned with various health, environmental, and other issues. Under the RFS, since 2000, since U.S. refineries have been required to comply with the EPA’s RFS. Retail prices for regular gasoline averaged $3.63 per gallon in 2012, the highest annual average price when adjusted for inflation since 1976. Retail prices have declined in 2013, but are still near historic highs. Market dynamics anywhere along the supply chain can influence consumer prices, beginning with upstream crude oil production, the production of renewable fuels, and the refining of crude oil and gasoline. The refining industry was a low-return industry for much of the prior two decades, according to industry officials and experts. 2013 compared with the first 11 months of 2012. The recession of 2007 to 2009 reduced economic activity and demand for gasoline. Historically high gasoline prices have discouraged the use of gasoline. More stringent fuel economy standards and the RFS are discussed in the next section. The RFS was established in light of concerns about the nation’s dependence on imported crude oil, and decreased consumption of petroleum products may further some of the objectives of the R FS, the authors say. It has contributed to investment in the U.S. Domestic consumption of petroleum products peaked in 2005 at 20.8 million barrels per day. Consumption of gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel peaked in 2007 and declined by over 8 percent through 2012. EIA estimated that petroleum product consumption increased in the first 11 months of international markets. Most of the scenarios in forecasts we reviewed from IHS and EIA project total consumption to increase slightly by 2020, with projections ranging from a decline of 2 percent to an increase of 7 percent compared with 2012 consumption.  consumption has declined since 2005, resulting in a smaller domestic market for refiners. In 2007, EIA projected that U.S. consumption would increase by nearly 30 percent between 2005 and 2030. EIA projects that inputs to refineries in 2020 would be about 1 million barrels per day higher in scenarios with higher domestic consumption—a difference of about 7 percent of 2012 inputs. This difference is equivalent to about eight average-size U.N. refineries, according to several stakeholders we contacted. Faster economic growth tends to increase consumption of petroleum products. Higher prices for crude oil and petroleum products tend to decrease consumption. Changes in consumer behavior, such as reduced driving, along with demographic trends such as an aging population, can also affect consumption. The scenario that assumes high future oil prices projects lower domestic consumption of Petroleum products, the EIA says. The EIA’s forecast scenario with higher economic growth assumptions projects greater future consumption ofroleum products than a scenario with low economic growth. There were 143 petroleum refineries in the United States as of January 2013, with a capacity to process 17.8 million barrels of crude oil per day. Most refining capacity (almost 90 percent) is located in the Gulf Coast, West Coast, and Midwest regions. These refineries employed over 70,000 people in 2013. Refineries process crude oil into products primarily through a distillation process that separates crudeOil into products. The U.S. petroleum refining industry is one of the largest industries in the world. IEA: Global consumption of petroleum products was about 78.9 million barrels per day in 2012. Growth concentrated in Asia and the Middle East and consumption declining in Europe. IEA projects refining capacity may grow even faster, resulting in excess capacity (refining capacity beyond that needed to meet consumption) of nearly 15.5 million barrels a day by 2020, in contrast to an estimated 4.8 million barrels by 2012. The U.S. refining capacity is estimated to be about 4.7 million barrels. All of the forecast scenarios we reviewed from EIA, IEA, and IHS anticipate increases in U.S. crude oil production, but the projections are uncertain and vary widely. The extent of the increase in future crude oilProduction can have implications for future petroleum product exports. The reference scenario in EIA’s most recent forecast projects domestic crudeOil production to approach a historical high of 9.6 million barrels per day in 2020, higher than the reference scenario from the prior year. We reviewed forecasts from EIA, the International Energy Agency (IEA), and IHS. We selected these forecasts because they made projections through 2020. While forecasts are subject to inherent uncertainties, we found these forecasts to be reasonable for describing a range of views about potential conditions of the domestic refining industry. We identified some differences in the metrics reported in the four forecasts and did not make direct comparisons in these instances. We conducted this review and compiled data from relevant scenarios and compared them where appropriate. Since 1949, the United States had been a net importer of petroleum products. In 2011, the U.S. became a net exporter of total petroleum products, EIA says. Exports of petroleum product represented 7 percent of refinery production in 2007. Forecasts generally project that exports will remain strong until 2015, the EIA writes. the extent of the increase in exports is unclear, it says. As a result, exports are expected to increase until 2015 but not as much as previously forecast. EIA scenarios project export levels from 2.6 to 3.4 million barrels per day by 2020. Even the lowest projection for petroleum product exports in 2020 is above 2010 levels. The extent to which domestic refiners are able to export their products will depend on the competitiveness of domestic refiner compared with foreign refiners. The challenges that may inhibit competitiveness and opportunities that may increase it in the future are discussed in the next section of this report. The full report is available at: http://www.eia.org/news/energy/energy-policy. Stakeholders and information we reviewed suggest that various factors may affect the U.S. refining industry’s future competitiveness. Balance between global refining capacity and global demand for petroleum products, costs associated with environmental regulations, exports to nations with stringent fuel standards, and increasing domestic and Canadian crude oil production. IEA data indicate that competition from foreign refiners may increase. New Middle Eastern refineries are intended to be export facilities and may present increased competition to U.s. refiners. per day of excess capacity in 2012. A large share of the new capacity is expected in China, India, and the Middle East. Two refiners indicated concern that capacity additions in some of those regions may present competition for U.S. refiners. Several other stakeholders were optimistic about domestic refiners’ ability to compete in the future. According to IEA,capacity additions in China and India are intended to keep pace with growing consumption in those regions, but not to meet demand. annual RFS standards, and several factors contribute to the delays. RFS Has Had Three Main Effects Stakeholders we contacted and information we reviewed identified three main ways the RFS has affected U.S. petroleum refiners. compliance has recently increased costs for some refiners, (2) required blending of renewable fuels has contributed to declining domestic consumption of petroleum-based transportation fuels, and (3) EPA’s delays in issuing annual RFS Standards may have contributed to investment uncertainty. EPA officials told us that there is no indication that delays have caused significant problems for refiners. EPA delays in issuing RFS standards are important because delays do not change refiners’ compliance periods accordingly. Uncertainty among refiners, renewable fuel producers, and other market participants about how EPA will address the blend wall can affect the RFS. The extent to which RFS increases costs in the future could also be affected by the outcome of any relevant litigation and of to monitor and evaluate progress in developing regulations. The RFS compliance period is set by statute to be a full calendar year, and delays do not change this compliance period. When the RFS standards are issued late, the industry has less time to plan and budget effectively. Several representatives of refiners told us that delays in issuing annual RFS Standards increase uncertainty for refiners renewable fuels is a large component that could contribute to economic hardship from compliance. EPA stated that it adjusted the 2013 deadline to provide additional time to demonstrate compliance. We acknowledge that EPA can extend the compliance deadline. EPA has not issued annual RFS standards on time since 2009. Most recently, EPA issued 2013 standards in August 2013. Uncertainty can affect the market climate within which these investment decisions will be made. EPA may waive the statutory volumes in whole or in part according to statutory criteria, which EPA has identified as potentially factoring in the blend wall, market developments, and other issues. However, EPA has missed the annual deadline for issuing annual standards under the RFS in most years. EPA proposed the 2014 standards on November refining centers. to the length of the regulatory development process, which includes interagency and public reviews. The interagency review process is to ensure that regulations are consistent with the President’s priorities. Under the public review process, EPA must publish a proposed standard in the Federal Register. According to EPA officials, the RFS standards involve complex and controversial issues and balance competing agricultural, energy, and environmental policy interests. In 2009, we recommended that EPA and other agencies track their performance for developing significant regulations against targeted milestones to identify opportunities for improvement. EPA tracks 14 milestones as it develops proposed rules and additional milestones in developing final regulations. For example, EPA tracks when its senior management approves of a document describing the scope of the regulation and the analytical work necessary to develop it. In comments to our 2009 report, EPA said monitoring actual versus estimated performance could help agency managers identify steps in the process that account for substantial time and provide information necessary to evaluate whether time was well spent. In this regard, EPA says it uses an agency-wide Action Development Process. to our 2009 report, EPA stated that it used an internal tracking system along with additional information to develop regulatory management reports to EPA managers and executives. EPA officials told us that they develop RFS regulations using the same procedures used for developing all EPA regulations. However, even with these systems, EPA has not met its statutory deadlines under the RFS in the five annual standards since 2009. EPA has also not conducted a systematic review of RFS rules to ensure that they are being implemented on time. 2013, EPA proposed the Tier 3 standards, and on March 3, 2014, EPA announced the final Tier 3 Standards. The standards establish more stringent vehicle emission standards and reduce the sulfur content of gasoline. additional time for obligated parties to purchase credits, and its inability to adjust the compliance period. EPA stated that the finalTier 3 program is very similar to what it proposed, though EPA made some changes based on public input. EPA provided technical comments to incorporate information from the final rule which we incorporated into the report, as appropriate. review of its experience issuing RFS regulations to identify the underlying causes of repeated delays. EPA has not identified changes in its approach that may help to avoid these delays in the future. The other key regulations that we reviewed have had minimal effects to date because these regulations either have not yet been implemented (Tier 3 standards) or, with respect to the other two, have not affected industry operations or costs in a major way. Without such analyses and a plan to address the underlying cause of the delays, EPA risks repeating them. way, according to stakeholders and information we reviewed. Tier 3 standards were proposed on May 21, 2013, and EPA announced final standards on March 3, 2014. Stationary source GHG requirements have been burdensome to refiners, but several other stakeholders said they have not had a major effect. EPA officials told us they were aware of only three refineries that have received majorSource GHG permits since the GHG permitting program began in 2010. The EPA says it has no immediate plans to change its GHG standards. EPA entered a settlement in which the agency agreed to develop national performance standards. EPA has no current schedule to issue these standards, but it committed in its settlement to issue them. Several stakeholders expressed concern that future standards could impose more strict controls involving higher costs at refineries. A stakeholder told us that until EPA clarifies its approach for NSPS, many refiners will be reluctant to make certain investments in their refineries out of fear of higher costs. The settlement is expected to be finalized by the end of the year. CAFE standards are administered by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 instituted several changes to the CAFE standards. In 2009, the administration announced a new program to increase vehicle fuel economy and reduce vehicle GHG emissions. NHTSA and EPA put the national program into place by issuing coordinated regulations covering vehicle model years 2012 to 2025.equal to taking about 27 million vehicles off the road. As shown in figure 6, fuel economy standards for cars largely remained unchanged from 1990 through 2010, but vehicle manufacturers are now expected to meet increasingly stringent standards. vehicle emission standards, and the RFS—have likely affected the refining industry by reducing the consumption of petroleum fuels. The other three key environmental regulations we reviewed have had minimal effects to date because they have either not yet been implemented or have generally not affected the industry in a major way. According to information we reviewed and two stakeholders we contacted, CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards have contributed to reductions in the Consumption of us that have had a marginal effect on petroleum demand. DOE officials also told us that the impact of the standards has been limited because they affect new car sales. petroleum fuels, but the extent is unclear. These standards aim to reduce oil consumption, and although they do not require changes at the refinery level, they can affect refineries indirectly. CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards will require more efficient vehicles in the future, which may reduce future consumption of fuels. EPA estimated that the model year 2012-2025 standards are projected to reduce U.S. consumption of crude oil by 2.2 million barrels per day by 2025, according to EIA. expected to save 1.3 billion gallons of gasoline in 2013 compared with model year 2011 standards. This is equivalent to about 1 percent of EIA’s projection of gasoline consumption in 2013. A stakeholder told us that the CAFE and GHG vehicle emissions standards have likely had a relatively large impact on petroleum demand declines in the past few years. It is unclear how much declining demand overall can be attributed to these standards versus other factors such as the recent economic recession and higher fuel prices. permits and certain other permits issued to refineries and other stationary sources that trigger GHG emissions thresholds. Since 2011, construction of any new refineries has generally been subject to the use of the “best available control technology’ for GHGs emissions. The best available controlTechnology is determined for each facility based on an analysis of available technologies considering cost and other factors. For example, for refineries, this could involve the installation of heat recovery units, which are energy efficiency improvements.  stationary source GHG requirements do not apply unless an existing refining facility proposes a major modification or a new refinery is proposed for construction. A refining company representative expressed concerns to us about the lengthy permitting process to authorize GHG emission increases. An EPA official said that, in most cases, best available control technologies selected to comply with GHG requirement for refining facilities involve energy efficiency improvement measures that could help refiners reduce fuel consumption and save money. In some cases, delays can occur when the refinery applicant has not yet been approved. approximately $1.5 billion in 2030, including costs for refiners to install and operate equipment to remove sulfur from gasoline. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA is authorized to take certain steps to address emissions from stationary sources, including refineries. EPA recently issued rules concerning how GHGs are to be included in certain existing permitting processes. Specifically, permitting authorities are to include GHG emission control requirements in Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) and Prevention of significant harm to the environment. the current caps, but far more difficult if the caps were lowered. Stationary source GHG requirements could become more stringent in the future. One study estimated that industry could incur additional capital expenses to achieve lower sulfur caps, ranging from $2 billion to over $6 billion dollars depending on the sulfur cap level in the final standards. The current permitting framework is a case-by-case determination that takes into account costs, among other factors, and places no requirement on existing refineries unless they undertake it. The standards set more stringent tailpipe emission standards for new vehicles. The standards generally require refiners to lower the sulfur content of gasoline from 30 parts per million (ppm) to 10 ppm on an annual average basis by 2017. According to EPA estimates, by 2030, annual emission reductions from the Tier 3 standards would generate annual benefits of between $6.7 and $19 billion and prevent up to 2,000 premature deaths annually. EPA estimated that the vehicle and fuel standards would cost. projected combined average fuel economy of about 50 miles per gallon by 2025. The standards are about 80 percent more efficient than required under the 2011 standards. EPA estimated that the 2011-2025 standards may save consumers and businesses $1.7 trillion, reduce oil consumption by 12 billion barrels, and reduce GHG emissions by 6 billion metric tons. On May 21, EPA is authorized to establish certain standards for new motor vehicles and fuels to address air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. To meet the Tier 3 fuel sulfur standards, refiners would need to install or upgrade hydrotreating capacity or take other steps to reduce the sulfur content in fuels. EPA projected that 67 out of 108 refineries would modify or purchase some equipment. The capital costs of installing this equipment and operating costs to run it would average about $0.0065 per gallon, and total $804 million in 2017. A stakeholder told us that Tier 3 would be manageable if EPA maintained the current 80 ppm cap. In particular, CAFE and GHG vehicle standards do not impose requirements on refiners. In general, U.S. refineries are among the most sophisticated in the world. RFS and Tier 3 standards could impose requirements with potential associated costs on some refiners, but they would not apply to exported fuels. They apply only to fuels sold in the United States regardless of where they are produced. IEA has pointed out that refiners in many parts of the world face similar challenges. Some U.S. refiners may benefit from any trend toward higher quality and more stringent environmental performance standards. Actions refiners take to reduce gasoline sulfur to comply with proposed Tier 3 standards could enable them to export to markets that already require low sulfur gasoline. On the other hand, representatives of a refiner pointed out that refiners could undertake such investments on their own—without Tier 3. If such exports were sufficiently economically attractive. Increasing domestic and Canadian crude oil production. increasing domestic andCanadian crude oilProduction. The LCFS would change the mix of fuels and vehicles in California to reduce emissions. The original LCFS statewide reduction targets for gasoline, diesel, and their substitutes started at 0.25 percent of 2010 values in 2011 and increased to 10 percent by 2020. In 2013 a state Court of Appeal found that CARB must correct certain aspects of the procedures by which the LCFS was originally adopted. CARB officials subsequently announced a regulatory package would be proposed in 2014, and that the 2013 standards will remain in effect through 2014. not provided EPA with the proper information to proceed with processing the permit. The Clean Air Act requires that EPA approve or deny such permits within 12 months of receiving a complete application. LCFS is the subject of several ongoing lawsuits, which resulted in a 4-month delay in some regulatory activities and uncertainty about the status of the regulation. According to a study conducted by a consultant on behalf of industry, the ongoing legal challenge has increased fuel prices by about $0.01 per gallon to date. California refiners have thus far been able to comply with LCFS requirements by blending lower carbon intensive renewable fuels. Stakeholder told us that the decisions CARB makes with respect to the LCFS may affect California refiners’ ability to stay in business and compete with refiners in other states and countries. Forecasts and data from EIA and IEA suggest that future domestic refinery production levels may depend on exports of petroleum. The industry’s future competitiveness is uncertain and that foreign markets present both challenges and opportunities for U.S. refiners. LCFS disincentivizes the use of carbon intensive heavy crude oils. Industry study estimated that the LCFS could cost the refining industry an average of $0.70 per gallon by 2020. Study also projected that 5 to 7 of 14 California refineries could cease production by 2020, and the LC FS could raise other compliance challenges because of insufficient supplies or consumer uptake of cellulosic, Brazilian sugar- cane ethanol. CARB officials told us that if it proves more difficult than expected to meet LCFS requirements, CARB could introduce cost containment provisions. Current regulations do not require existing facilities to take any steps to control GHG emissions unless they undertake a major modification. Examples of major modifications at a refinery include a significant expansion of crude oil processing units, or installing new secondary processing units. California’s LCFS aims to lower GHG. emissions by reducing the level of carbon in transportation fuels. Established by the California Air. Pollution Control Board, the LCFS was established to reduce carbon in transport fuels. It was created to reduce the carbon in. transportation fuels, such as gasoline and diesel. The 2020 targets would reduce GHG emissions associated with the transportation sector in California by 10 percent in 2020, or 23 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent. Stakeholders identified three major changes that have likely recently affected the domestic petroleum refining industry. Crude oil production in the United States and Canada has increased, which has lowered the cost of purchasing crude oil for some refiners. After many years of generally increasing domestic consumption of petroleum products, consumption has slowed in the U.S. and Canada. the “blend wall.” A refiner we spoke with also attributed the decline in credit prices in the second half of 2013 to EPA’s statements expressing its desire to address the blend wall. The blend wall may remain a concern into the future because statutory renewable fuel blending requirements continue to increase. Several stakeholders told us that the effect of the RFS depends in particular on how EPA addresses the blending wall in the annual standards it issues in the future. Furthermore, EPA”s timeliness in issuing the standards is also a concern. of the U.S. refining industry will also depend on the extent to which some key regulations—RFS, Tier 3, stationary source GHG requirements, and LCFS—increase costs for refiners. The requirements on domestic refiners from the key regulations we reviewed generally are expected to collectively have a greater effect in the future. Such uncertainty can discourage investments in the industry overall. RFS may increase costs for some refiners depending on the percentages of renewable fuels required by EPA and on other factors.  compliance has been most difficult for refiners with less of a retail presence. Some industry participants may be relatively advantaged when the price of RINs rises. EPA officials told us that the RFS program affects all refiners equally because obligations are the same regardless of whether refiners blend their renewable fuels.to deliver those fuels. For example, an ExxonMobil official said that RIN costs did not have a significant impact on the company’s financial performance during the second quarter of 2013. EPA generally agreed with our findings and recommendations and clarified three topics discussed in the report. EPA asserted that refiners experience the same compliance costs regardless of whether they are fully integrated, with blending capabilities, or merchant refiners that purchase credits for compliance. For example, in a 2011 study, DOE identified the degree to which a small refiner can actively blend production with production. Based on our work, we found the views of several stakeholders differed from EPA's. We incorporated these views into our final drafts. Under the RFS regulations, refiners and other obligated parties are required to ensure U.S. transportation fuels include certain amounts of renewable fuels. Refiners can purchase and blend renewable fuels themselves, or they can pay others to blend or use renewable fuels by purchasing credits. These credits can be freely traded, and prices for credits are established based on the market and generally reflect the stringency of requirements and the costs of incorporating additional renewable fuels into the transportation fuel system. If costs increase, credits prices would tend to increase as well. 2006, transportation fuels sold in the U.S. have been required to contain increasing amounts of renewable fuels such as ethanol and biodiesel. Congress established the RFS in light of concerns such as climate change and the nation’s dependence on imported crude oil. As shown in figure 5, the law generally required that transportation fuels contain 9 billion gallons of renewable fuel in 2008, and that volumes increase in 2009. In 2009, EPA required that gasoline and diesel fuels contain at least 10 billion gallons. The extent to which these regulations will reduce future consumption depends on actions by regulators and market and other developments. EPA has proposed to reduce renewable fuel requirements for 2014 due to an inadequate supply in light of the blend wall and other issues. The potential for RFS to reduce petroleum-based fuel consumption will depend on the percentages finalized by EPA. The development of advanced renewable fuel sources and market infrastructure could be affected by legal challenges, as well as any legislative action to modify the RFS. Stakeholders we contacted and information we reviewed generally suggest that the outlook is positive. quality, air quality, soil quality, and biodiversity. Under the RFS’ statutory provisions, the increasing amounts of renewable fuels are to primarily come from renewable fuels other than corn ethanol. The RFS could reduce GHG emissions by 138 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions, the EPA says. According to EPA, achieving the R FS’s statutory blending levels in 2022 could result in total benefits of between $13 and $26 billion, the agency says. The benefits include those related to fuel costs, energy security, health, and GHG effects. The Administrator of EPA is authorized to waive the RFS levels established in the act. The major source of renewable fuels has traditionally been ethanol produced from corn. The increased cultivation of corn for ethanol, its conversion into renewable fuels, and the storage and use of these fuels could affect water supplies, water officials say. The Administrator determines if implementing the requirement would severely harm the economy or environment, that there is an inadequate domestic supply, or in certain other situations, the EPA says. The RFS is set to increase by 2.4-fold through 2022 to 36 billion gallons. RIN is a unique 38-character code that renewable fuel producers and importers assign to each gallon of renewable fuel produced or imported. To demonstrate compliance with the RFS, refiners must provide sufficient RINs for the volume of gasoline and diesel they produce for use in the contiguous U.S. and Hawaii. Rins are valid for the calendar year in which they were generated, and up to 20 percent of a year’s standard can be met with R INs from the previous year. renewable fuels themselves or purchase RINs. In particular, EPA stated that refiners experience the same costs. If a company generates its own Rins, there is a cost associated with doing so, namely the cost for the renewable fuel compared to the petroleum fuel it displaces. GAO-12-732. Oil and Gas: Information on Shale Resources, Development, and Environmental and Public Health Risks. Washington, D.C.: O&G: The Future of Shale Energy in the United States. performance audit from November 2012 to March 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. To demonstrate compliance with the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) annual blending requirements under the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS), refiners use renewable identification numbers (RINs), which we refer to in this report as credits. We plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence. High corn prices, which made ethanol more expensive relative to gasoline, also contributed to higher RIN prices during this period. EPA officials recently said the blend wall would be reached in 2014 when about 13.2 billion gallons of E10 could be consumed. Blending additional renewable fuels can be difficult and costly once the blending wall is reached. The EPA has said it wants to address the "blend wall" by the end of the year, but no date has been set for when this will happen. According to EIA, corn-based ethanol credit prices were low between 2006 and much of 2012. In 2013, prices for these credits increased to over $1.40 per gallon in July before declining to about $0.20 per gallon as of mid- November 2013. Several stakeholders told us this increase in RIN prices was primarily due to RFS requirements exceeding the capability of the transportation fuel infrastructure to distribute and the fleet of vehicles to use renewable fuels, referred to as of renewable fuels compared with the petroleum fuels they displace.

ROUGE-1: 72.18, ROUGE-2: 66.65, ROUGE-L: 24.13
BERTScore: 73.71

==============================================
==================== [63/100] ====================
Summary:
The military services’ ROTC programs each came within a few percentage points of meeting or exceeding the annual officer production goals that they established to meet their respective authorized end strengths. Most states have a unit from each service located within the state and and the all-volunteer force with its potential to provide officers from a variety of backgrounds and experiences available within the student population on a college or university campus. By statute, at least one ROTc unit must be established and maintained in each state if certain conditions are met. All states have at least one unit located within the state. Each unit may support students at more than one school. Students travel from their affiliate school to the host unit for their ROTC activities. The Navy maintains 12 ROTc units in which the command structure and RotC activities are divided between more thanOne host school. This typically happens no later than the junior year, prior to the service’s advanced training. The unit's command staff is assigned to the school that has been designated as the host. year 2012, the Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC) program produced over 9,000 active duty, guard, and reserve officers. Table 6 provides a listing of the number of officers produced in fiscal year 2012 by unit, school location, and service. Table 7 presents the Army’s enrollment information as of November 2012, table 8 presents the Navy’S enrollment information. table 9 presents the ROTC enrollment information for each of the military services’ military services. enrollment data, we identified that the services’ ROTC programs had about 53,000 students enrolled across all years of study in 2012. The Army had over 33,000Students enrolled, the Navy had over 6,000 enrolled, and the Air Force had over 14,000 Students enrolled. The enrollment information is alphabetized by state or U.S. territory and then by unit and thenby school within the unit. In addition to the contact named above, Margaret Best (Assistant Director), Emily Biskup, Rebekah J. Boone, Richard Burkard, Timothy Carr, Susan Ditto, Cynthia Grant, Kimberly Mayo, Michael S. Each service adjusts the number of people they plan to admit into future classes at their respective Officer Candidate School or, in the case of the Air Force, Officer Training School. Neither OSD nor the services have established performance measures that provide a comprehensive understanding of the overall effectiveness and efficiency of ROTC programs. Until the military services establish a formal strategy to communicate with key stakeholders, it will find it difficult to obtain the support that is needed to make the necessary changes, the authors say. The military services will findit difficult to get the support they need to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of RotC programs, they say. ROTC’s relevance extends beyond its quantitative production capability. ROTC supports the concept of a citizen-soldier military coursework. DOD Instruction 1215.08 requires the military services to advise schools whose ROTc units are not producing enough officers to justify investment. The military services do not consistently adhere to this requirement, and thus may be missing important opportunities to build awareness about the RotC program. For example, Army and Navy officials told us that they currently do not. Currently do not communicate with schools. regarding ROTT. ROTC is the largest of the three major officer commissioning programs for DOD. The other two major commissioning officer sources include the military service academies and Officer Candidate Schools/Officer Training School. ROTC programs prepare college and university students to serve as officers in the military services. The program was established by the National Defense Act of 1916 to supplement the military academies in preparing selected students for commissioned military service and officer training. In fiscal year 2012, nearly half of all the newly commissioned active duty officers came from the ROTc program. ROTC units are subject to the same numerical production requirement regardless of the actual cost each service incurs at a particular college or university. Because such cost data are not consistently accounted for, it is not clear how the production requirement can be used to justify DOD’s investment. The absence of clearly defined measures also could lead the services to under- or over-emphasize the relative importance of an ROTC unit to a particular area, the authors say. The authors conclude that DOD's instruction requires officer production from each unit to be adequate to justify its investment. In fiscal years 2008 through 2012, each service came within a few percentage points of meeting or exceeding its overall ROTC officer production goals for newly commissioned officers. The Army met at least 95 percent of its goal. The Navy and Air Force each exceeded their production goals in 3 of the 5 years we studied. Half of all RotC units did not produce the minimum average annual production of officers over a 5-year period required by DOD to justify investment in an ROTc unit. 2008 through 2012 and fiscal year 2012 enrollment data. We chose to assess the officer production from each service’s ROTC program for fiscal years 2008 through 2012 because it is the most recently completed 5-year period at the time of our review. We compared overall officer production with other major commissioning sources. We also analyzed the data provided to determine the degree to which the units are not meeting minimum production requirements and to determine whether the units met minimum production requirement for ROTc officer production. each unit provided to us by the military services and DOD’s fiscal year 2012 composite rates to determine the cost of military personnel per each ROTC unit in fiscal year2012. We reviewed the fiscal year 2014 budget documentation to identify the average operation and maintenance cost (excluding scholarships) per ROTCs in fiscal 2012. We used these data to determine cost of units that met and did not meet DOD minimum production requirements for fiscal years 2008 through 2012. To assess the reliability of the production and cost data, we discussed. routine and systematic and have not yielded closures that service officials believe are needed. The military services’ ROTC programs have, over the past decade, conducted a total of 11 evaluations. These practices indicate that a body of evidence is more valuable to decision makers than a single study. Multiple studies with similar results strengthen confidence in their conclusions, the authors say. The study was conducted by the Defense Department’s Office of the Inspector General, which is based in Washington, D.C. of officers by individual ROTC units. These evaluations provided information about individual RotC unit performance, with a focus on officer production. However, the evaluations did not assess the overall ROTc program against strategic goals and objectives. Leading organizations that have progressed toward results-oriented management use performance information to identify gaps in performance, to improve organizational processes, and to improve their performance by aligning measures with the goals and objective at each level of the organization. The commitment of managers to results- oriented management is critical to the increased use of performance information that could be used to improve performance. be measured against ROTC program goals and objectives to influence policy and program decisions. This commitment could be demonstrated by their willingness and ability to make decisions and manage programs on the basis of results. We reviewed relevant legislation, specifically sections 2101- 2111b of Title 10 of the U.S. Code. We also obtained and analyzed information from each of the services to determine the frequency with which the services evaluated unit unit performance. In addition, we reviewed prior GAO reports on ROTc and officer accessions programs to determine what recommendations and actions have previously been taken in regard to improving the efficiency and effectiveness. The services have conducted a total of 11 evaluations to identify units for consolidation or closure. The evaluations have largely occurred on an ad hoc basis and are narrowly focused on assessing the productivity of individual ROTC units, rather than the overall performance of the program. The variability of the factors used in considering ROTc units for closure hinders the services’ efforts to compare evaluation results over time, even within a single service. Until clearly defined and comprehensive performance measures are established to evaluate overall program performance, the services will have limited information available. The military services have been unsuccessful in completing any of these politically sensitive consolidations or closures in part because and prior the services do not proactively and periodically engage congressional stakeholders on ROTC program performance. DOD instruction gives service Secretaries discretion on which units to close. The services collectively have conducted 11 assessments of unit productivity in the past 10 years. All of which have produced proposals recommending selected RotC units for consolidation or closure. However, no closures have occurred as a result. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/military/top-secretaries-rOTC-closings. DOD Instruction 1215.08 tasks the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness with establishing policy and providing implementing guidance. DOD’s the program. In addition, communication with key stakeholders, such as Congress and school administrators, about ROTC performance is important to raising awareness about the program and ensuring that program-related decisions can be implemented effectively. To help improve the oversight and accountability of the military services’ ROTc programs, we recommend that the Secretary of defense direct the Under secretary of Defense to take the following three actions. programs risk having more units than needed or units that are not most effectively located. OSD and the military services are generally assigned responsibility for conducting oversight of ROTC programs. DOD’s Instruction 1215.08 does not specify department-level review of performance measures. Services do not consistently communicate with key stakeholders, such as members of Congress and schools, about performance of RotC programs, except when closure decisions are being considered. This has contributed to difficulty gaining political support for such closures. that do not provide a comprehensive understanding of the overall cost-effectiveness and efficiency of ROTC programs. The military services have had difficulty gaining buy-in for recommendations to close dozens of underproductive units collectively across the services. Clear lines of responsibility when combined with performance measures provide leadership and decision makers with the transparency and authority required to make difficult decisions, the authors say. It is unclear how OSD and the services will each conduct effective oversight of RotC programs, they say. Stakeholder involvement is an important strategy that we have identified in our past work to facilitate agencies’ use of evaluations in program management and policy making. In written comments on a draft of this report, DOD concurred with our six recommendations to make management, oversight, and accountability improvements to ROTC programs. DOD also described steps that it planned to take in response to our recommendations. DOD’s comments are reprinted in appendix IV. program performance and costs, procedures for the establishment and disestablishment of RotC units, assessments of R OTC unit productivity, and program oversight. to communication with schools. We also interviewed knowledgeable officials from OSD and the military services on the activities and mechanisms used to conduct oversight of, and to communicate with stakeholders on, ROTC programs. We visited or contacted the following organizations during our review: Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Personnel Policy, Directorate of Accession Policy, Arlington, Virginia Army Cadet Command, Fort Knox, Kentucky Deputy Chief of Naval Operations, Manpower Personnel Education and Training, Arlington,. Virginia Naval Service Training Command, Great Lakes, Illinois Department of the Air Force as 1 of 12 factors in its closure considerations, and the Air Force included “strategic partnerships’ as an important consideration. Neither service identified specifically how these factors correlate to the factors in DOD’s instruction, defined how they contribute to a service-specific need, or explained why these factors were added to the 2012 analysis. In comments on a draft of this report, Navy officials pointed out that the U.S. News and World report ranking correlates to the quality of applicants to the Navy Nuclear Propulsion Program, a specific Navy officer accession requirement. DOD’s instruction specifies five factors for the military services to consider before closing a unit. These include the quality of the officers produced by the unit, operations and maintenance cost of maintaining the unit. However, several commissioned officers for DOD, they do so with a structure where half of the units do not meet DOD's production requirements. Service efforts to revise this inefficient structure are hampered by performance measures that are not clearly defined, allow for inconsistent application of factors for closure, and do not provide a comprehensive understanding of programs’ efficiency or cost- effectiveness. DOD’s unit closure consideration factors require the services to subjectively determine how each factor should be defined and applied. These determinations can change over time without explanation. We recognize that the services need some flexibility to prioritize factors on the basis of their individual needs for newly commissioned officers. But inconsistent measurements limit the services’ ability to compare program progress, results, and efficiency over time, the authors say. The authors found no additional guidance on how to define or apply theclosure consideration factors in DOD’S instruction. DOD also provided technical comments on the draft report, which we incorporated as appropriate. DOD concurred with our recommendation to establish performance measures that are clearly defined and include cost components. DOD stated that our report contained a ‘minor discrepancy’ because it did not include the Navy’s explanation of how a particular unit closure consideration factor contributed to a service-specific need. In fiscal year 2012, the Navy included the U.S. News and World Report ranking of the schools affiliated with a Naval ROTC unit. example, in our 1973 and 1977 reports we found that the services’ reporting to DOD and Congress were inadequate to make necessary judgments on ROTC program effectiveness. established at a college or university, school administrators have to agree to various requirements, to include granting the academic rank of professor to the senior commissioned officer assigned to the program at that institution. In 1991 and 1993, DOD and the services had not made any significant progress in improving their ability to report RotC program performance.. on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. To assess the extent to which the military services’ ROTC programs met goals and minimum requirements for producing officers over a 5-year period, we obtained and analyzed ROTc unit production data from each of the military service for fiscal years. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3604 or farrellb@gao,gov. Report: DMDC data on Officers’ Commissioning Programs is Insufficiently Reliable and Needs to be Corrected. Report: Strategic Plan Needed to Address Army’s Emerging Officer Accession and Retention Challenges. Reserve Officers�’ Training Corps: Less Need for Officers Provides Opportunity for Significant Savings. GAO/NSIAD-91-102. Washington, D.C.: February 6, 1996. Officer Commissioning programs: More Oversight and Coordination Needed. We conducted this performance audit from February 2013 to November 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In fiscal year 2013, the Marine Corps Recruiting Command had a budget of $1.2 billion. The budget for fiscal year 2014 was $2.1 billion, with a budget goal of $3.4 billion. In Fiscal Year 2015, the budget was $3 billion, and the budget goal was $4.5 billion. DOD stopped enforcing a requirement for annual reports from the services identifying the cost and budget for their respective ROTC programs. The department’s efficiency initiatives removed reporting requirements related to internally generated oversight reports. To regain some of the information on program visibility that it no longer obtains through the reports, OSD officials told us that they instead use data from service budget submissions to estimate cost data that is less specific than the data that were previously obtained through the services' automatic submission of these reports. of these factors, which officials told us are the measures they currently use to assess the programs, are not clearly defined. DOD’s instruction directs the services to consider the quality of officers produced by a unit that is being evaluated for closure. However, the instruction does not include guidance on how the services should define and assess quality, which could lead to the inconsistent application of the measure by the services. Another example is that DOD's instruction directsThe services to considers the geographic representation of ROTC units. these data with officials from the military services to gain an understanding of the processes and databases used to collect and record data. To assess the extent to which the services have established performance goals and unit level requirements as well as the cost per unit. When we found inconsistencies in the data, we followed up with service officials to attempt to reconcile these differences. We determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for determining the extent of the military's ROTC production goals and units' cost per units. The data were used to determine whether the services are meeting ROTc production goals. as encroaching on the services’ authority to man, train, and equip their respective forces. Given that DOD Instruction 1215.08 requires this approval, which is to occur when a military department proposes closure of a particular unit it is difficult to understand how this methodology approval function could be viewed as an encroachment. DOD officials did not further elaborate on or provide additional support for their position that approving a methodology, as set forth in the DOD instruction, is not an appropriate oversight function to be performed at the department. inconsistent measurements limit the services’ ability to compare program progress, results and efficiencies over time. For our other five recommendations, DOD concurred with each of them and estimated actions would be completed by July 2015. We encourage DOD to begin taking actions now to facilitate implementation of these recommendations as soon as possible. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense, the Under Secretary for Personnel and Readiness, the Secretaries of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, and appropriate congressional committees. 6, 1991. 6.6.6,1991. 6:30 p.m. EST. 6/6/1991. 2:30 a.m.-6:40 a.M. EST 6/7/1991: 2:00 a.k.a. 2.5 a.c. ET. 1:30am-1:30pm ET 6/8/91. 3:30 am-2:30 pm ET 6:00am-3:00pm ET 7:30-4:00 am 7:50am ET.

ROUGE-1: 64.89, ROUGE-2: 60.00, ROUGE-L: 27.98
BERTScore: 67.70

==============================================
==================== [64/100] ====================
Summary:
We reported in 2008 that DB plan investments in hedge funds and private equity have grown, but such investments are generally a small portion of plan assets. This remains the case today. According to a Pensions & Investments survey, the percentage of large plans (as measured by total plan assets) investing in hedge Funds grew from 11 percent in 2001 to 60 percent in 2010. The average allocation to hedge funds among plans with such investments was a little over 5 percent. Among plans with investments in private equity, the average allocation was alittle over 9 percent. survey by Greenwich Associates found that 22 percent of midsize plans were invested in hedge funds. Survey data on plans with less than $200 million in assets are unavailable. One of the major challenges that both hedge fund and private equity investments pose to plan sponsors is uncertainty over the current market. The extent to which these smaller plans invest in hedge Funds and private Equity is unclear. The impact of hedge funds on the U.S. economy is not yet known, but is expected to be significant. value of the sponsors’ investment. With regard to hedge funds, plan officials may lack information on both the nature of the specific underlying holdings of the hedge fund. Because many hedge funds may own thinly traded securities and derivatives whose valuation can be complex and subjective, a plan official may not be able to obtain timely information on the value of assets owned by a Hedge fund. Further, hedge fund managers may decline to disclose information on asset holdings and the net value of individual assets. The plan is expected to be implemented by the end of the year. largely because the release of such information could compromise their trading strategy. In addition, even if hedge fund managers were to provide detailed positions, these managers may seek to profit through complex and simultaneous positions. Although we noted in January 2008 that some hedge funds have improved disclosure and transparency about their operations because of the demands of institutional investors, several hedge funds still refuse to provide such information. It is difficult for plans to independently ascertain the value or fully assess the degree of investment risk, the authors say. Investing through a fund of funds does not relieve plan sponsors of their fiduciary duties. Smaller plans may have only one-or two-person staffs, or may lack the resources to hire outside consulting expertise and may be locked out of top-performing funds. A representative of one pension plan with more than $32 billion in total assets noted that before investing in hedge funds, the plan would have to build up its staff in order to conduct the due diligence necessary during hedge fund investing. Operational risk is the risk of investment loss because of inadequate or failed internal processes, people, and systems. Operational problems can arise from a number of sources, including inexperienced operations personnel. Many hedge funds engage in active, complex, and sometimes heavily leveraged trading, and a failure of operational functions may have particularly grave consequences for the overall position of the hedge fund. Pension plan officials took steps to mitigate the risks and challenges of investing in hedge funds and private equity, the report says. Pension plan officials cited attaining returns superior to those attained in the stock market as a reason for investing in hedge funds. Hedge funds and private equity are also relatively illiquid investments. One plan official noted that as long as hedge funds add value net of fees, they found the higher fees acceptable. The fee structure of hedge funds is often more expensive than that of private equity funds, according to a recent study by the University of California, San Francisco. The study found that hedge funds charge higher fees than private equity fund investments. Plan sponsors and others cited the importance of negotiating key terms of investments in hedge funds and private equity. Such terms can include fee structure and conditions, degree of transparency, valuation procedures, redemption provisions, and degree of leverage employed. For example, pension plans may want to ensure that they will not pay a performance fee unless the value of the hedge fund investment passes a previous peak value, known as a high-water mark. Key contract terms for private equity may also include fee Structure and valuation. pension plans cited limited transparency as a prime reason they had chosen not to invest in hedge funds. As with hedge funds, valuations of private equity investments are uncertain during the investment’s long duration, which often lasts 10 years or more. Unlike investments that are traded and priced in public markets, plan officials have limited information on the value of private Equity investments until the underlying holdings are sold. In some cases, private equity funds estimate the value. of the fund by comparing thevalue of companies in their portfolio with the. value of comparable publicly traded assets. Hedge fund and private equity investments pose investment challenges beyond those posed by traditional investments. Both managers may use leverage to potentially increase an investment’s return without increasing the amount of capital invested. Although registered investment companies are subject to strict leverage limits, a hedge fund or private equity fund can make relatively unrestricted use of leverage. Leverage can magnify the potential returns of an investment, but it can also magnify its risks over time. To learn more about how to invest in hedge funds, visit: www.hedgefunds.com. Investing in a fund of funds provides investors with diversification across multiple funds. A fund of private equity funds can allow plans to invest in a variety of managers, industries, geographies, and year of initial capital investment. Fund of funds can be appropriate if plan sponsors do not have the skills necessary to manage hedge funds, according to a report by FTSE 100 index fund provider FTSe: A Managers' Exchange-Traded Fund (FTSE:FTSe)  investing through a fund of funds may provide a plan better access to hedge funds or private equity funds than a plan would be able to obtain through direct investment. Fund of funds have some drawbacks and limitations, including an additional layer of fees, such as a 1 percent flat fee and a performance fee of 5 to 10 percent of returns. Furthermore, funds of funds also pose the same challenges as direct investment in a portfolio of hedge funds. To invest in hedge funds, go to www.hedgefunds.com. making careful and deliberate fund selection when investing in hedge funds and private equity. Most of the plans we contacted described one or more specific strategies for their hedge fund investments. Some plans participate on the advisory board of a private equity fund, which provides a greater opportunity for oversight of the fund’s operations and new investments. However, this involves a significant time commitment and may not be feasible for every private equity investment. Also, several plan sponsors address some of the risks and challenges of investing in Hedge Funds and Private Equity by investing in them. procedures, though one plan sponsor noted the ability to negotiate favorable contract terms is limited when investing in top-performing funds. Due diligence and ongoing monitoring, beyond those required for traditional investments, are also important. For hedge funds, due diligence can be a wide-ranging process including study of a hedge fund’s investment, valuation, risk management processes, and compliance procedures, as well as a review of back office operations. As with hedge fund investments, plans take additional steps to mitigate the challenges of investing in private equity. assets such as hedge funds and private equity are becoming more commonplace. In light of these trends and ongoing public equity market volatility, it is reasonable to expect that the number of plan sponsors making such investments will increase in the future. Such assets may serve useful purposes in a well-thought- out investment program, offering plan sponsors advantages that may not be as readily available from more traditional investment options. But investments in such assets place demands on plan sponsors that are significantly beyond the demands of more traditional asset. The Department of Labor (Labor) can play a role in helping to ensure that plans fulfill their Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) fiduciary duties. In 2008, we recommended that Labor provide guidance for qualified plans under ERISA on the unique challenges of investing in hedge funds and private equity. For example, we stated that Labor’s Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) could outline the implications of a hedge funds’ limited transparency on the fiduciaries’ duty of prudent oversight. actions consistent with the best practices, and thus would be at risk of making imprudent investments in hedge funds. While EBSA is not tasked with offering guidance to public sector plans, such plans may nonetheless benefit from such guidance. Labor generally agreed with our recommendation, but said the lack of uniformity among these investments could complicate the development of comprehensive guidance for plan fiduciaries. To date, Labor has not acted on this recommendation. As plan sponsors seek to better ensure adequate return on assets under management, recent trends suggest that investments in alternative funds could be a good idea. The Secretary of Labor should provide guidance on investing in hedge funds and private equity for qualified plans under ERISA. We believe that a discussion of the challenges that such investments pose to small plan sponsors would be beneficial. I would be happy to answer any questions that the council may have. For further questions on this statement, please contact me at (202) 512- 7215. Individuals making key contributions to this statement can be contacted at: http://www.classes.org/classes/ERISA/ErISA. of ERISA fiduciaries in selecting, valuing, and accounting for hard-to-value assets, of which many hedge funds and private equity funds are composed. The Investor’s Committee published a report in January 2009 on the best practices for hedge fund investors. The report acknowledged that hedge fund investments are not necessarily suitable for some investors and provided many recommendations for investors selecting and monitoring their Hedge Fund investments. It also recommended obtaining a written statement of the fund's valuation policies and procedures. statement include Michael Hartnett, Sharon Hermes, David Lehrer, and Amber Yancey Carroll. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.

ROUGE-1: 74.85, ROUGE-2: 68.00, ROUGE-L: 46.13
BERTScore: 73.86

==============================================
==================== [65/100] ====================
Summary:
the first plan that will become even more problematic in the future as the magnitude and complexity of the system acquisition increases. responsibility for implementing U.S. VISIT now resides in the Border and Transportation Security directorate. We are currently reviewing the fiscal year 2003 expenditure plan and will ascertain whether these problems were addressed. We designated implementation and transformation of the new Department of Homeland Security as high risk based on three factors. First, the implementation and transformed of DHS is an enormous undertaking that will take years to complete. the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, DOD, and the Department of Health and Human Services. Creating and maintaining a structure that can leverage partners and stakeholders will be necessary to effectively implement the national homeland security strategy. The new department is also being formed from components with a wide array of existing major management challenges and program risks. For instance, one DHS directorate’s responsibility includes the protection of critical information systems that we already consider a high risk. In fact, many of the major components merging into the new department include the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), FEMA, and DOD. will take time to achieve in an effective and efficient manner. Failure to effectively carry out its mission would expose the nation to potentially very serious consequences. DHS, with an anticipated budget of almost $40 billion and an estimated 170,000 employees, will be the third largest government agency; not the first. In the aftermath of September 11, invigorating the nation’s homeland security missions has become one of the federal government’S most significant challenges, the report says. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security is the nation's second-largest government agency. DOD was formed almost entirely from agencies whose principal mission was national defense. Effectively implementing and transforming DHS may be an even more daunting challenge. DHS will combine 22 agencies specializing in various disciplines: law enforcement, border security, biological research, among others. It will take many years to achieve, and even today, the department continues to face enduring management challenges and high- risk areas that are, in part, legacies of its unfinished integration. The Department of Defense was created more than 50 years ago. of this magnitude in the public and private sector carry significant risks, including lost productivity and inefficiencies. Successful transformations of large organizations, even those undertaking less strenuous reorganizations, can take from 5 to 7 years to achieve. Necessary management capacity and oversight mechanisms must be established. Critical aspects of DHS’s success will depend on well-functioning relationships with third parties that will take time to establish and maintain, says John Defterios, former director of the Department of Homeland Security. disaster mitigation, and computer security, for instance. DHS will oversee a number of non-homeland-security activities, such as the Coast Guard’s marine safety responsibilities. The magnitude of the responsibilities, combined with the challenge and complexity of the transformation, underscores the perseverance and dedication that will be required of all DHS’S leaders, employees, and stakeholders to achieve success. Further, it is well recognized that mergers are necessary to achieve the synergy that can help provide better security against terrorism. and programs risks could have serious consequences on our intergovernmental system, our citizens’ health and safety, and our economy. Overall, our designation of the implementation and transformation of DHS as a high-risk area stems from the importance of its mission and the nation’s reliance on its effectiveness. I would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other Members of the Subcommittee may have. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Richard M. Stana at (202) 512-8777. DHS is merging intelligence positions from the former Customs and INS. One of the most significant challenges facing DHS at ports of entry is the implementation of the U.S. VISIT system. This significant undertaking is intended to capture both entry and exit data on travelers. It will also have many implications for operations at U.K. ports and in the Middle East, according to a report by the Center for Security Policy and the RAND Corporation. The report was published by the RAND Corp. and is based on a joint report by RAND and the Government Accountability Office. TSA and the U.S. Coast Guard, face at least one major problem. TSA has had considerable challenges in meeting deadlines for screening baggage. The Coast Guard faces the challenges inherent in a massive fleet modernization. DHS’s national security mission is of such importance that the failure to address its management challenges is a failure to meet its mission, says the report. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. It was co-authored by David Frum and Peter Bergen. single interface between the trade community and the federal government for trade data. In April 2001, Customs awarded a 5-year contract, with options to extend the contract to not more than 15 years, to a system integrator. Successfully managing a project as large and complex as ACE is a challenging undertaking. To its credit, Customs has taken action to implement our recommendations, as follows: We recommended Customs incrementally justify the ACE investment. Customs defined and committed to implement process controls for justifying and making ACE investment decisions. The Automated Commercial Environment (ACE) is expected to cost about $1.7 billion and is to replace Customs’ antiquated system. Expected benefits from ACE include speeding the flow of legitimate commerce into and out of the United States, identifying and targeting high-risk commerce requiring greater scrutiny, and providing a greater level of scrutiny. To learn more about the ACE and other initiatives, visit the U.S. Department of Homeland Security's website at: http://www.dhs.gov/. We recommended Customs develop rigorous and analytically verifiable cost estimating. We recommended Customs employ effective software acquisition processes. Customs developed and plans to implement a human capital management strategy for the Customs modernization office, which is responsible for managing the ACE acquisition. Customs continues to make progress and has plans to establisheffective software acquisition process controls, as embodied primarily in the second level of SEI’s Software Acquisition Capability Maturity. We recommend Customs develop and implement a cost- estimating program that employs the tenets of effective cost estimating as defined by the Software Engineering Institute. of entry, including expenditures, staffing, inspection procedures, and infrastructure. We reviewed INS’s fiscal year 2002 expenditure plan and associated system acquisition documentation and system plans. We found that the initial plan did not provide sufficient information about INS commitments for the system. We concluded that this lack of detail is a material limitation in our ability to evaluate the system and its value to the U.S. government. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. In August 2001, the Border Patrol estimated it would need between 11,700 and 14,000 agents, additional support personnel, and hundreds of millions of dollars in additional technology and infrastructure to fully implement the Southwest border strategy. We reported that it would take at least 5 more years (until 2006) to reach the minimum number of agents. The Border Patrol has 567 agents deployed along the northern border. It has taken longer to implement the strategy than originally planned because of difficulties hiring agents and delays in obtaining approvals needed to deploy technology. The Border Patrol currently has about 9,500 agents deployed along the southwest border. That is nearly a 3-fold increase from the 3,400 agents the Border Patrol had along the Southwest border in 1994. It is still about 2,200 agents short of the minimum number needed to deter illegal entry along the northern border. The Border Patrol continues to face hiring challenges to meet its estimated needs, the agency said in a statement. The agency said it will continue to hire agents until the needs are met. efforts to communities because its initial failure to warn some communities about anticipated increases in illegal alien traffic caught community officials by surprise. Concerns have been raised over the environmental impact of current plans to build additional fencing along the border in Arizona. When apprehensions surged in communities into which the illegal alien Traffic was reportedly pushed, officials and residents in one community reported experiencing loss of business, destruction of private property, and environmental degradation. A recent news article described how some local residents were angered by the increased traffic. The Border Patrol has realized its goal of shifting illegal alien traffic away from urban areas into more remote areas. Many aliens have instead risked injury and death by trying to cross mountains, deserts, and rivers. This prompted the Border Patrol to implement a Border Safety Initiative consisting of, among other things, a media campaign to warn aliens about the dangers of crossing illegally, as well as establishing a hotline for reporting illegal crossings. The hotline can be reached at 1-800-273-8255 or by clicking here. search-and-rescue units. Since then apprehensions along the southwest border have declined to less than 1 million in fiscal year 2002. While there may be many reasons for the decline in apprehensions, in response to our recommendation, the Border Patrol has developed a plan designed to evaluate the impacts of its southwest border strategy. The Border Patrol will release a report on the impact of the southwest strategy on apprehensions in the coming months. The report will be published in a special edition of The New York Times, on sale now. activities, additional challenges remain, particularly in view of the new and heightened emphasis on terrorism. These challenges include (1) continuing to improve its evolving trade compliance program and (2) acquiring a new trade processing system. The volume of trade is expected to surpass $2 trillion in the year 2006. To speed the processing of imports and improve compliance with trade laws, specifically, the Customs Modernization and Informed Compliance program is being implemented. The program is intended to speed the Processing of Imports and improve Compliance with U.S. trade laws. Act of 1993 (also known as the ‘Mod Act’), BCBP’s predecessor, Customs, developed an “informed compliance strategy’ In 1999, we recommended that the Customs Service develop and implement an evaluation of the effectiveness of its informed compliance strategy. Customs agreed with our recommendation and completed its Trade Compliance Strategy Study on May 24, 2001. The study indicated that the strategy improves compliance, but the impact on overall compliance rates is small. For example, one initiative, the Company Enforced Compliance Process (CECP), was to address large importers’ noncompliance. to the study, Customs was to punish noncomplying companies by imposing “confirmed risk” designations, increasing examinations, removing privileges, and referring for penalties. However, the confirmed risk status was only used six times, and loss of privileges and referral for penalties were never used. The study concluded that CECP was not much of an enforced compliance process, and it was discontinued. On the other hand, the study found that the companies’ compliance rates increased after they participated in the other initiatives. BCBP's priority mission is to prevent terrorists and terrorist weapons from entering the United States. BCBP has a number of initiatives underway aimed at improving security, including: Container Security Initiative, which stations BCBP personnel in key international ports. Non-Intrusive Inspection technology, which increases the ability to detect conventional explosives, nuclear weapons, radioactive components, and other weapons of mass destruction. Automated Targeting System, which is used by the National Targeting Center and field targeting units in the U.S. and overseas. For example, we reviewed Customs’ acquisition and deployment of radiation detection equipment. Experts we contacted did not view pagers as search instruments but rather as personal safety devices. In trying to achieve the commercial-security balance, BCBP is challenged to ensure that antiterrorism efforts do not slow the flow of legitimate international commerce and travel. According to BCBP, it says it is working on a plan to reduce the number of radiation pagers being used by the Customs service to a maximum of 1,000.  Customs has recognized that it needed to identify what is high risk and target its limited resources. We have work underway to review most of these initiatives and will make our results available to the Subcommittee as soon as the work is completed. Separating high-risk cargo from low- or no- risk cargo is extremely important to BCBP because searching each and every cargo and traveler that enters the U.S. would cripple the flow of legitimate trade and travel and would require a huge resource commitment. has worked with importers on concerns such as where their goods originated, the physical security and integrity of their overseas plants and those of their foreign suppliers. BCBP has reaffirmed to importers the importance of knowing their customers and has examined the security practices of their freight forwarders and the routes their shipments travel. AlthoughBCBP has made some progress in implementing initiatives that are designed to improve the efficiency of its regulation of commercial trade, there is still a long way to go, the agency says. BCBP has undertaken efforts to focus its enforcement on selecting and inspecting the highest-risk incoming cargo. It has a number of initiatives underway aimed at improving its ability to identify potentially risky cargo for inspection. BCBP relies on the use of threat assessments and actionable intelligence, the ability of inspectors to quickly discover or sense an unlawful cargo, and the capability of nonintrusive inspection technology to detect potentially harmful contraband. Information is key to identifying high-risk cargo. Accurate information can help BCBP make reliable risk determinations. inspectors are challenged by the tight timeframes and pressures they work under to move legitimate cargo through the ports. relying on inspectors alone can increase the risk that contraband enters the country. The inspection of incoming foreign mail remains largely a manual process that relies primarily on physical examination. We found several challenges relating to this process, but BCBP’s determination that our results were law enforcement sensitive precludes our discussing them here. However, at the time our work was completed, one courier was working with the former Customs Service. to pilot test an advance manifest system. The database is intended to allow Customs to analyze incoming package information and make more informed decisions about what packages to inspect. Large-scale x-ray and gamma–ray imaging systems, portal radiation monitors, and portable and hand-held radiation detection devices can reduce the need for costly, intensive inspections and save inspection time and resources. As important as the use of technology is, there are certain limitations and challenges that need to be considered, according to the U.S. Customs Service. along the northern border, mitigating the negatives affects the strategy may have on communities that experience an increase in illegal alien traffic, and responding to continuing concerns over the safety of aliens who cross in remote and desolate areas. At our nation’s ports, BCBP faces an array of challenges, including improving inspectors’ ability to verify the identity of travelers and whether they can be admitted into the country, unifying and enhancing inspector training, and complying with the congressional mandate to implement a system to track the entry and exit of all aliens. Model. Customs has made progress in implementing some, but not all, of our recommendations. Customs is in the early stages of acquiring ACE, many challenging tasks remain before Customs will have implemented full ACE capability. To prevent illegal entry of individuals into the United States between the ports of entry, BCBP has deployed significant resources but estimates significantly more are needed. Continued implementation of the southwest border strategy faces a range of challenges, including meeting hiring goals and obtaining needed approvals to deploy fencing and technology to implement its strategy. entry will continue to be a challenge for BCBP. In previous work, we reported that the Border Patrol had estimated that significantly more resources would be needed to fully implement its border control strategy. The strategy postulated that as resources were applied in one area, the flow of illegal alien traffic would shift. The Border Patrol has been implementing a phased strategy to increase deterrence to illegal entry beginning, first, with the areas that had the largest influx of illegal aliens. In 1994, the strategy was put into effect. land, air, and sea ports of entry using fictitious names, and counterfeit driver’s licenses and birth certificates made using readily available software. INS and Customs Service inspectors never questioned the authenticity of the counterfeit documents, and our investigators encountered no difficulty in entering the country using them. BCBP will also face an array of challenges in ensuring that its border inspectors are adequately trained, including ensuring appropriate training is provided in the detection of fraudulent documents. For example, formerINS and Customs inspectors are still being trained at separate basic training academies using two different curricula. work at 15 land border ports, suggest that one training challenge for BCBP will be to ensure that both new and experienced border inspectors are capable of readily detecting fraudulent documents. The Bureau will also face challenges regarding the collection, analysis, and use of intelligence information in the field. In 1997, an INS-contracted study reported the lack of an intelligence capability at all INS locations, including districts and ports. More recent studies suggest needs in this area persist. The former INS recognized the need for more intelligence support in theField. sensitive, we are precluded from discussing specific aspects of this matter in this unclassified statement. However, our work to date shows that BCBP’s targeting efforts face a range of challenges relating to threat assessments, actionable intelligence, and nonintrusive inspection technology. Having sufficient numbers of well-trained and motivated staff is also key to identifying high-risk cargo. Inspectors and canine officers are trained to detect unusual or abnormal behaviors or circumstances that suggest a potential threat or unlawful activity. U.S. and certain Canadian citizens are exempt from having to present any document upon entry. According to immigration data, inspectors at land ports intercepted nearly 60,000 fraudulent documents in fiscal year 2002. More than 8,000 state and local offices issue birth certificates, driver’s licenses, and other documents, any of which could potentially be counterfeit. Clearly, others have successfully gained access to this country using counterfeit documents, we testified earlier this year on how our investigators entered the country from Canada, Mexico, and Jamaica. Inspectors must quickly make decisions about whether to admit a traveler into the United States. Two of the factors that challenge inspectors’ ability to verify the travelers’ identity and admissibility are that some travelers may enter the U.S. without having to present a travel document. Some travelers can present a variety of documents to gain entry into the US. Some of these documents can be easily counterfeited, according to the US VISIT system, which provides information on how to apply for entry. contributions to this testimony included Seto J. Bagdoyan, Michael P. Dino, Darryl W. Dutton, Barbara Guffy, E. Anne Laffoon, and Lori Weiss. This is a work of the U.S. government and not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately.

ROUGE-1: 80.64, ROUGE-2: 72.82, ROUGE-L: 27.45
BERTScore: 54.13

==============================================
==================== [66/100] ====================
Summary:
In February 2002, the Navy had only 91 EA-6Bs available for operations instead of the 104 required. As a result, while the Navy has been able to meet operational commitments, it has been unable to meet some of its training and exercise requirements. The Navy plans to replace a total of 67 wing center sections.that has been delayed until March 2004. But wing fatigue has continued to grow, and the Navy may have to ground additional aircraft. It is currently taking action to remedy wing fatigue and engine failures. The Navy will spend $4.4 million each for such replacements for 17 aircraft in the fiscal year 2002 budget. In 2001, the Navy also began experiencing problems with the EA-6B’s engines. Premature failure of certain engine bearings caused some engines to fail, and it may have caused the crash of two aircraft in 2001. The Navy grounded over 50 engines until they could be overhauled, and the Navy is programming funds for 10 more wing replacements for each year in the Future Years Defense Plan. EA-6Bs are included in all aircraft carrier deployments and support the Air Force’s Aerospace Expeditionary Forces. DOD designated the EA-6B as a “low density, high demand” asset to support worldwide joint military operations. To meet a requirement to field 104 aircraft out of a total inventory of 124 (with an average age of 19 years), the Navy refurbished 20 retired EA-4Bs. In 2001, 2 EA-5Bs crashed, reducing the total inventory to 122 aircraft. The Navy says it needs a replacement aircraft to begin entering the force by 2009 if requirements are to be met. The Navy has been upgrading its EA-6B electronic warfare equipment over the years, and it is currently in need of a new fleet of the aircraft. All of the current aircraft will be out of the Navy's fleet by 2015, and the Navy needs to have a replacement ready by 2009 to meet force structure requirements in 2009. The new aircraft will have a range of up to 2,000 miles. The constant deployment of this “low density” EA-6B fleet for contingency operations has contributed to its deterioration and to other maintenance- related problems. The constant deployments also added to personnel problems in terms of quality of life. The Navy expects to have them back in service by late this year. But it expects to be back to full service by the end of the year. The U.S. Navy has not commented on the report. The report was compiled by CNN's John Defterios and published by the Center for Military Analysis. EA-6Bs and EC-130s saw combat in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. Air defenses in Afghanistan were relatively weak compared to those faced by U.S. aircraft in Yugoslavia. This gave the EA-6B an opportunity to jam air defense systems in Europe to their limits. The aircraft can also be used to keep low-flying aircraft such as the Army’s Apache attack helicopters out of combat to reduce risk from infrared missile threats. The EA- 6B is now primarily used for radar jamming and for communications jamming. to exploit new techniques to jam ground communications by working with the EC-130 and other electronic intelligence gathering aircraft. Since our January 2001 report, the services have had some success in improving their suppression capabilities, but they have not reached a level needed to counter future threats. When the Air Force retired the EF-111 without a replacement, the Navy’s EA-6B became DOD's primary airborne radar jammer. High demand for the aircraft has exacerbated current wing and engine problems, and the Navy has been unable to meet its overall requirements.  suppression aircraft such as EA-6B and the now-retired EF-111 and F-4G played a vital role in protecting other U.S. aircraft from radar-guided missile systems. Strike aircraft were normally not permitted to conduct air operations unless protected by these suppression aircraft. The F/A-18 used antiradiation missiles that homed in on enemy radar systems to destroy them. The Air Force replaced the F- 4G with a less capable aircraft, the F/16CG. did not upgrade or replace the EF-111. According to DOD, countries have sought to make their air defenses more resistant to suppression. These efforts include increasing the mobility of their surface-to-air missiles and radar equipment, connecting radars together into integrated air defense systems, and adding sophisticated capabilities so that the radar can detect aircraft while turned on for a shorter period of time. These defenses use various means to track and target aircraft, including modern telecommunications equipment and computers to create networks of early warning radar and missile system radar. The United States experienced heavy aircraft and aircrew losses to enemy air defenses during the Vietnam War. Since then, the services have recognized air defense suppression as a necessary component of air operations. U.S. suppression aircraft focus on trying to neutralize, degrade, or destroy the enemy’s air defense radar equipment. When a crisis arises, suppression aircraft are among the first to be called in and the last to leave. Radar is the primary means used by enemy forces to detect, track, and target U.s. aircraft with missiles and guns. suppressing enemy air defenses after they begin emitting radio-frequency signals. Also, in some cases, aircraft launch antiradiation missiles that can search for and destroy enemy radars if they are turned on. At some risk to the aircraft and aircrews, suppression aircraft must be in the vicinity of the enemy air defense to complete their mission. Enemy radars in the past were usually fixed in position, operated independent of each other, and turned on for lengthy periods of time. All of which made them relatively easy to find and suppress. U.S. suppression aircraft have been continuously deployed to protect fighter aircraft maintaining the no-fly zones over Iraq. These aircraft have also been deployed to Yugoslavia and Afghanistan. In 1999, during Operation Allied Force in Yugoslavia and Kosovo, these aircraft were extremely important for protecting strike aircraft from enemy radar-guided missiles. However, according to the Defense Intelligence Agency,these aircraft were unable to protect strike aircraft.from aircraft engines. The U.S.-led coalition forces in Iraq are still using these suppression aircraft. destroy their integrated air defense system because Yugoslav forces often engaged in elaborate efforts to protect their air defense assets. In two separate incidents, Yugoslav forces managed to shoot down an F-117 stealth fighter and a F-16CG. In addition to the two losses, the inability of the United States to counter Yugoslav air defenses that included radar and infrared guided missiles made it necessary for U.S. forces to (1) fly thousands of dedicated suppression missions, and (2) push back with air strikes. modifying its radar signal receiver and related equipment. The modification program, known as the Improved Capability Program (ICAP) III, provides improved radar locating and jamming capabilities. The Navy expects ICAP III to reach initial operational capability in 2005 and to be installed on all EA-6Bs by 2010, about the time when the aircraft begins to reach the end of its service life. As of January 2002, ICap III engineering and manufacturing development was about 94 percent complete, and the modification began testing on the first aircraft in November 2001. complete its inventory objective because of competing priorities. Also, the Navy is upgrading the HARM missile used to attack shipborne and ground-based radars. The first phase of the upgrade improves missile accuracy by incorporating global positioning and inertial navigation systems into the missile. A second upgrade, the Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile, will add millimeter wave capability to allow the missile to target radars that have stopped emitting. While the Air Force employs the H ARM missile as well, it is not involved in the Harm upgrade program. The F-16C/Ds will be modified to carry the HARM Targeting System. The Advanced Target Pod will enable them to deliver precision-guided munitions. The upgrade (known as R-6) provides better and faster targeting information to the missile, but even with this pod the F- 16CJ still lacks some of the capabilities of the retired F-4G. Once 31 additional systems are delivered in 2002, the Air Force will have a total inventory of 202 systems, short of the original goal of 1.1 systems per aircraft. Navy is considering using a modified version of the ICAP III equipment on whatever follow-on suppression aircraft are developed and fielded. The Air Force is procuring 30 additional F-16CJ suppression aircraft to meet force structure requirements for the Air Force’s Aerospace Expeditionary Forces. To fully implement its concept of operations for the Expeditionary forces, the Air Air Force also plans to increase the capability of the latest model F- 16C/Ds (block 40) and the F-15CJs (block 25) The Air Force is also upgrading the capabilities of the EC-130 Compass Call Aircraft, which perform primarily communications jamming missions. The upgrades are intended to improve the aircraft’s jamming capabilities, reliability, and maintainability. Officials also stated that they are considering funding for additional R-7 HARM Targeting Systems for F-16CJs and F- 16C/Ds in the 2004 budget submission. The Air Force has a total of only 13 operational aircraft, of which 11 are being funded for upgrade. The Miniature Air Launched Decoy (MALD) could make a significant contribution to aircraft survivability. MALD is supposed to mimic an aircraft and draw enemy air defenses away from the real aircraft. A recently completed Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration, it had been funded by the Air Force. The services expect to field both systems in 2004, but they face technology challenges and/or a lack of funding priority for many of these programs. The Air Force analysis has shown that MALD could make an important contribution to the survivability of aircraft. Force for an initial small procurement of 300 decoys, with potential for further procurement. According to the Air Force, after experiencing technical problems, MALD did not meet user needs. The Navy has been developing its own decoy, the Improved Tactical Air Launched Decoy (ITALD), but it has procured only part of its inventory objective. Despite recurring congressional increases for the past several fiscal years, the Navy has not submitted budget requests for ITALDs or procured units to Air Force. The Navy projects that the declining EA-6B inventory will be insufficient to meet DOD's needs beyond 2009. The Air Force’s F-16CJ fleet has grown, but it still lacks some of the capabilities of the F-4G, the aircraft it replaced. Also, the Air Force and the Navy have improvements underway for other systems such as the EC-130 and antiradiation missiles. To the extent there are gaps in suppression capabilities, U.S. fighter aircraft and helicopters must rely on self-protection equipment. The Navy does not have enough EA-6Bs to meet DOD’s suppression needs due to wing fatigue and engine problems that have grounded aircraft. The services have some programs underway to improve this self-protection equipment, such as developing new towed decoys, but, as discussed below, these programs have been hampered by technical and funding issues. Because of its limited numbers and high rate of failure, the Navy has been forced to rely on the U.S. Air Force to suppress enemy air defenses. aircraft make it essential that other aircraft have the ability to protect themselves from enemy defenses. The services have already identified serious reliability problems with current self-protection systems on U.S. combat aircraft. Most of the current systems use older technology and have logistics support problems due to obsolescence. In reviewing test results using the new Joint Service Electronic Combat System Tester, we found that aircraft the services believed to be mission worthy had problems with self- protection systems. Also, as we reported last year, the self- Protection systems on strike aircraft may have more problems than the services estimate. capable were not because of faults in their electronic combat systems that were undetected by older test equipment. For example, 41 of 44 F-15C aircraft and 10 of 10 F-18C aircraft previously believed to be fully mission capable were subsequently found to have one or more faults. The faults ranged from the identification of parts needing to be replaced inside the electronic combat system, to the wiring, antennas, and control units that connect the systems to the aircraft. Coupled with the problems in the suppression aircraft, these shortcomings could be fatal. create survivability problems for the aircraft should they encounter significant enemy air defense capabilities in some future conflict. The services have some programs underway to improve self-protection capabilities such as the joint Navy and Air Force Integrated Defensive Electronic Countermeasures (IDECM) system and the Precision Location and Identification (PLAID) system. The IDECM system will provide the F-15, F/A-18E/F, and B-1B aircraft with improved self- protection through jammers and towed decoys. only intended to address the airborne electronic attack aspect of the suppression mission. The analysis, completed in December 2001, concluded that the services needed a standoff system or a combination of systems to operate at a distance from enemy targets. The Navy took the lead on the joint analysis with participation by all the services. A stand-in system that would act as a backup for aircraft self-protection systems was also needed, the analysis said. The Air Force's MALD program, and the Air Force’s EC-130 modifications, were also needed. issues with various DOD contractors, including RAND Corporation, Northrup-Grumman Corporation, General Atomics Aeronautical Systems, Incorporated, and Raytheon Systems Company. We reviewed pertinent DOD, service, and contractor documents addressing the status of suppression capabilities, plans for maintaining them, and potential solutions for closing the gap in capabilities. Specific locations we visited are listed in appendix I. We performed our review from October 2001 through August 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. The head of a federal agency is required under 31 U.S.C. 720 to submit a written statement of actions taken on our recommendations to The report was compiled by the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Defense Intelligence Agency. If you or your staff have any questions, please contact me on (202)512-4841. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.gov. the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs not later than 60 days after the date of the report and to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations with the agency’s first request for appropriations. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of the Army, Air Force, and Navy; the Commandant of the Marine Corps; and interested congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the Congressional Research Service. Coordination and Oversight Group to coordinate operational requirements for airborne electronic attack. A key activity of the group is to coordinate Navy and Air Force proposals for replacing the EA-6B. In June 2002, the services presented their proposals for follow-on capabilities to the Office of the Secretary of Defense. According to the services, the Navy proposed to use the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet to attack U.S. targets in Europe and the Middle East. The Air Force proposed to replace the F-16 with a F-18C/F/A/F Hornet. The development of systems to replace the EA-6B will help close the gap between DOD’s suppression capabilities and needs. However, the service proposals that are currently being considered by DOD do not provide an integrated, comprehensive solution to the overall suppression needs. The Joint Requirements Coordination and Oversight Group provides a mechanism to coordinate the services’ efforts, but it has not been directed to develop a comprehensive strategy. Other assessments have also pointed to the lack of a coordinated approach to addressing the gap in air suppression capabilities. Congress expressed concerns that DOD did not have a serious plan for a successor to the EA-6B aircraft. Congress directed DOD to conduct the Airborne Electronic Attack Analysis of Alternatives. DOD indicated in its response to our January 2001 report that the analysis would lead to a DOD-wide strategy and balanced set of acquisition programs to address the overall gaps between suppression needs and capabilities. However, it was limited to assessing options for replacing the EA/6B rather than assessing the needs of the overall suppression mission. replace the EA-6B with an electronic attack version of its new F/A-18E/F fighter and attack aircraft. Air Force proposed adapting the B-52H bomber for standoff suppression by adding jamming pods to it. Stand-in suppression capability provided by a MALD-type decoy with jamming capabilities or an unmanned aerial vehicle equipped with jammers. DOD is currently conducting an additional analysis of the proposals, and the Secretary will decide later this year what proposals to include in the fiscal year. The analysis established the capabilities of the EA-6B upgraded with ICAP III as the foundation for any future system. It presented the Navy and the Air Force with detailed models of estimated costs and capabilities of 27 mixes of new and/or upgraded aircraft to consider for follow-on electronic attack capabilities. These options ranged in estimated 20-year life cycle costs from $20 billion to $80 billion. In conjunction with the analysis, the services formed a Joint Requirements committee to consider the options. help correct some of the problems DOD faces in electronic warfare acquisition programs. While DOD has not established a coordinating entity to provide leadership for the suppression mission, it has recognized the need for such entities in other cross-service initiatives areas such as the development and fielding of unmanned aerial vehicles. The strategy should provide the means to identify and prioritize promising technologies, determine the funding, time frames, and responsibilities needed to develop and acquire systems. It should also establish evaluation mechanisms to track progress in achieving objectives. The Institute for Defense Analyses studied problems in acquiring electronic warfare systems. The Institute found several causes for the problems, including uncertainties in characterizing rapidly changing threats and systems requirements. Among other things, the Institute recommended that DOD establish central offices for electronic warfare matters in the Joint Chiefs of Staff and in each service, create a senior oversight panel, and prepare an annual electronic warfare roadmap to be used by the military. The report was published in the Journal of Defense Studies and Analyses, a publication of the Institute for Defence Analyses. air defense suppression mission continues to be essential for maintaining air superiority. Over the past several years, the quantity and quality of the services’ suppression equipment have declined while enemy air defense tactics and equipment have improved. DOD has recognized a gap exists in suppression capabilities but has made little progress in closing it, the authors say. They say progress in improving capabilities has been hampered by the lack of a comprehensive strategy, cross-service coordination, and funding commitments that address the overall suppression needs. The authors say DOD relies on individual service programs to fill the void but these programs have not historically received of Systems Integration for Electronic Warfare. a high priority, resulting in the now existing capability gap. We continue to believe that a formal coordinating entity needs to be established to bring the services together to develop an integrated, cost-effective strategy for addressing overall joint air defense suppression needs. A strategy is needed to identify mission objectives and guide efforts to develop effective and integrated solutions for improving suppression capabilities. We believe that creation of a comprehensive strategy and effective coordinating entity would strengthen DOD’s ability to compete for funding and address the gap.

ROUGE-1: 82.82, ROUGE-2: 75.97, ROUGE-L: 35.02
BERTScore: 55.02

==============================================
==================== [67/100] ====================
Summary:
regulatory agency (e.g., an approved state permit program). That is, owner/operators of regulated disposal units were required to comply with applicable criteria by the applicable deadlines. States were not precluded from adopting regulations more stringent than the federal criteria. It would appear that each state could determine key elements related to program implementation and facility compliance, at least to the degree that such state determinations did not undercut a viable state program, the authors say. They say the goal was to achieve a consistent level of protection from threats specific to improper management of MSW. State solid waste management agencies commonly require owners and operators of certain waste disposal facilities to obtain a permit. A state permit "program" is the body of authorities, activities, and procedures that the permitting authority uses to implement and enforce regulations applicable to a solid waste disposal facility. Since the bills were designed to result in a state-based regulatory program, discussion of CCR Permit Programs focuses on the programs that may be created by states, as opposed to a program to regulate CCRs that could potentially be implemented by EPA. EPA subsequently promulgated " requirements for State Permit Program Determination of Adequacy," in 40 C.F.R. Part 239. The requirements list the detailed information that states were required to provide to EPA, as well as the authorities, activities, and procedures a state would have to demonstrate that they had in place. An adequate program was one that EPA determined could ensure regulated facility compliance with the MSW landfill criteria. The State Implementation Rule (SIR) includes the following four subparts: General, State Program Application, Requirements for Adequate Permit Programs, and Enforcement. would need to demonstrate to EPA before the program could be deemed adequate by EPA; and requires state programs to provide for citizen action in the state civil enforcement process. Adequacy Determination Procedures —includes criteria EPA would use to make its adequacy determination or to partially approve state programs, procedures states must follow if they needed to modify their programs, and criteria and procedures EPA may use to withdraw its determination of adequacy. (Individual criteria included in the SIR and provisions in Section 4011 are listed in Table B-1 .) Under the Constitution, Congress has no power to compel states to exercise their sovereign authority. Congress may not require states to adopt federal regulations or implement certain requirements using a permit program. But Congress has authorized EPA to promulgate and enforce certain regulations, while providing for conditions under which a state may be authorized or approved to adopt and enforce those regulations. Given the options of allowing EPA to enforce a federal standard at facilities in the state or adopting and enforcing the regulations themselves, states generally choose the latter. Under current law, the term "backstop authority" is not formally defined in statute or regulation. Whether EPA is said to have backstop authority or not has no legal consequence. The term has been widely used to refer to explicit authority provided to EPA to enforce standards at individual facilities in a state authorized by EPA to implement and enforce federal standards. For example, under RCRA, the Clean Air Act, and the Clean Water Act, the bills would provide EPA with authority to backstop state programs. Subtitle C (42 U.S.C. §6928(a), EPA is authorized to enforce standards of performance at individual facilities in a state. Section 111(c) of the Clean Air Act provides EPA with comparable enforcement authority. In this sense of the term, the bills would not provide EPA with authority to backstop state programs to regulate CCR facilities. Despite its recent decline in demand, coal remains the dominant fuel for electricity generation in the United States, and is expected to continue to be well into the future. The bills' requirement that EPA identify certain state program elements that may be "deficient" involves the use of a term not found in the RCRA statute. As a result, it is difficult to anticipate how EPA would respond to such a mandate. In the bills, EPA could identify as a deficiency program elements described in the Permit Program Specifications or provide no formal role for EPA in this regulatory development process.. Once a state is implementing a permit program, EPA would have a role in states that fail to remedy program deficiencies. be required to provide notice to a state regarding "deficiencies" in its program, with regard to certain program elements. At any time after a state is implementing a CCR Permit Program, EPA would be required to identify and notify a state of any deficiencies. If a state fails to remedy program deficiencies identified by EPA within the time frame negotiated between the state and EPA, the agency would berequired to implement a permit program for a state. The time frame for that could vary depending on the compliance deadlines established by the state. would be obligated to provide information necessary for EPA to make its deficiency determination within 90 days of EPA making the request. If EPA identifies a program deficiency, the agency would be directed to collaborate with the state to establish a reasonable deadline to address it. What constitutes a "reasonable deadline" is not explicitly defined, except that it could not be "earlier than 180 days" after the date on which the state receives the notice. The requirement that EPA identify a deficiency at any time a state is not implementing a program — as opposed to when a states is. other basic program elements typically specified in regulations. For example, not later than one year after the state certifies it has a program in place, that state shall require the owner or operator of each regulated structure to comply with applicable groundwater monitoring requirements. As noted above, however, the applicability of those groundwater monitoring requirement would depend on the state's definition of a "gauge system" The program would not provide explicit deadlines for many program requirements, though EPA or the courts might read reasonable deadlines into the section. Bills would establish framework that states could use to create programs to regulate CCRs. Proposed Section 4011(e) prescribes conditions under which EPA would be required to implement a CCR program for a state. EPA would not be explicitly required to assess other program elements. Supporters of this approach have suggested that such programs could be at least as effective as federal requirements that may be established by EPA under either regulatory option proposed in June 2010. The bills did not explicitly require EPA to set uniform national standards of protection or promulgate regulations applicable to CCR structures. Some stakeholders debate the appropriateness of EPA's definitions. The bills leave that issue unresolved, opening the door to a diversity of state solutions. Until states promulgate regulations that include a more detailed definition of a CCR "structure," program applicability will not be determined with specificity. The regulated universe of "owners and operators" will notbe known until a state defines a structure. Section 4011 also omits that EPA's definition of "owner and operator" is not inclusive enough. How much would EPA's guidance influence states? When would owners and operators of CCR structures be subject to any new regulations? How would EPA interpret its obligation to identify program deficiencies? Would EPA identify a program as having a deficiency if EPA determined it was not adequate to ensure facility program requirements that would otherwise be left to states to interpret? Some in Congress who have expressed concern that EPA has "overreached" its existing legislative mandates have supported legislation that would limit EPA's role in regulating CCR disposal. Would EPA identify as a deficiency a state's definition of a "CCR landfill" that EPA determined was insufficient to ensure that uses of CCRs that constitute disposal on land are regulated? When and how often would EPA identify program deficiencies? Would EPA review a program for adequacy immediately after a state certified that it had a program in place, or would it wait until years after. Would EPA establish requirements (similar to 40 C.F.R. Part 239) or issue guidance to allow compliance with requirements? Proposed Section 4011 would not create a permit program, per se. Instead, it would provide the framework that states may be expected to use. There is no explicit directive in the bills that the requirements applied via the permit program be those necessary to protect human health (i.e., meet a federal standard of protection). Requirements adopted by the state would likely and enforce regulations. The proposed bills discussed below are those likely to have implemented using a permitProgram. The regulations were required to be those needed to "protect human health and the environment" certification include selected elements from Section 239.3, Components of Program Application and Section. 4011(c) Permit Program Specifications. Included under the "Minimum Requirements" in this section are five provisions (pertaining to Permits, State Notification, Agency Requirements, Agency Authority, and State Authority) that are drawn, in part, from selected individual criteria included among the Requirements for Adequate Permit Programs in Subpart C of Part 239. Both sections include provisions drawn from selected elements in 40 C.F.R. §239.13, Criteria and procedures for implementation by Administrator. The proposed amendments to RCRA would not create a "permit program," per se. Instead, selected provisions in the bills would form a framework that states could use to create programs to regulate CCR management. Legislation addressing CCRs may be considered in the 113 th Congress. Analysis of selected elements of the legislation considered during the 112 th Congress is provided in this report as background for future legislation that may take a similar approach. The program Minimum Requirements also include five provisions that appear to be drawn, in part, from selected " requirements" included in 40 C.F.R. Part 239, Subpart C. This report looks primarily at how state programs to regulate CCRs may be developed and implemented. It does not attempt to identify detailed requirements that may be applied by a state regulatory program. Since the most recent bill passed by the House adopted provisions in the Senate bill, unless otherwise noted, any reference to "the bills," "the proposed amendment to RCRA," or "Section 4011" refers to S. 3512/Title IV of H.R. 3409 , proposed in the 112 th Congress. As proposed, state CCR Permit Programs would likely be created with no involvement from EPA. In contrast to other RCRA permit programs, EPA would have a substantially different role in program implementation and enforcement. Existing state programs to regulate the most impact on the development and implementation of individual state C CR Permit programs. EPA would be required to implement state program certification requirements, comparable to "State Program Application" requirements in 40 C.F.R. Part 239, Subpart B. EPA could issue guidance before the states implement their programs. EPA has already done much of the work of writing such regulations or guidance. CCR bills in the 112 th Congress did not explicitly state that state-implemented CCR Permit Programs would be intended to emulate federal-state programs. The need to interpret statutory provisions, coupled with the authorities already given to EPA in RCRA, might inadvertently create something like the agency's traditional regulatory role, rather than limiting it, says John Defterios. would draw from authorities in existing sections of RCRA. It is difficult to determine in advance how EPA may interpret directives regarding its role or how the proposed authorities may affect state adoption and implementation of a permit program. EPA would be given a more limited role in development of the regulatory program for CCR facilities, compared to the existing program to regulate MSW landfills. Compared to that program, the most significant differences in EPA's role are with regard to promulgating regulations applicable to the entity required to obtain a permit. The purpose of the proposed amendment to RCRA was the creation of state permit programs to implement regulations applicable to CCR disposal. Regulations that would ultimately apply to owners and operators of CCR structures would depend on each state's interpretation of the criteria listed among the proposed Permit Program Specifications. Such a program would be comparable to existing state programs to enforce standards necessary to ensure facility compliance with RCRA's open dumping prohibition, the report says. It is assumed that all states in which CCRs are managed (i.e., primarily states with coal-fired power plants) would opt to implement their program. Proposed amendment to RCRA would create programs to regulate MSW landfills. The approach used in the 112 th Congress bills would not have provided an explicit mandate that EPA or the states promulgate regulations. Under Section 4011 in the proposed bills, states would create CCR Permit Programs using statutory criteria drawn from regulatory criteria previously created pursuant to RC RA. The available legislative history accompanying the bills indicates that CCR permit Programs are intended to be similar to existing state programs to Regulate MSW Landfills, but there are several differences. Under this structure, statutory provisions listed in the proposed Permit Program Specifications would serve as both the framework states may use to create regulations. Proposed Section 4011(d) would require EPA to identify and notify a state of "deficiencies" in specific elements of its program. The analytical process and technical basis for determining how and why certain requirements were selected or excluded are not clear. Questions regarding the potential standard of protection intended to be achieved by state programs to regulate CCRs are also raised. approach, proposed in the 112 th Congress, was to create state programs to regulate a particular type of waste (CCRs) This report provides information regarding those existing programs as they have been implemented. The degree to which state regulations implemented by a CCR Permit Program to regulate MSW landfills will be enforceable depends on various factors. The similarities between the proposed program to regulate CCRs and the existing program to regulating MSW Landfills can be identified. The differences can be found primarily in the requirement that a C CR Permit program apply the selected MSW landfill criteria to owners and operators. existing facilities would be required to meet would be particularly relevant in determining the degree to which a state program may protect human health from risks specific to CCR disposal. The bills did not explicitly require a CCR Permit Program to apply criteria that would be intended to achieve a specific standard of protection. If promulgated in accordance with existing state solid waste management laws, regulations may meet standards of protection determined by each state. However, by drawing from selected standards proposed by EPA, but not others, it is unclear whether individual state C CR Permit Programs would address the same range of risks identified by EPA.  proposed bills include no explicit directive to states or to EPA to promulgate standards. Instead, minimum program requirements specify that the CCR Permit Program "shall apply" selected MSW landfill criteria to owners and operators of structures. In federal pollution control laws, ambiguities are subject to EPA (and potentially court) interpretation. Any ambiguisms or requirements not specified in the proposed CCR bills would be subject to state (and possibly court)interpretation. It cannot be predicted whether state programs to regulate CCRs, developed and implemented pursuant to provisions in Section 4011, would result in the management of C CRs comparable to the existing programs. The MSW landfill criteria are intended to apply to facilities that dispose of largely "dry" waste. They do not address issues specific to liquid waste accumulation in surface impoundment ponds. New MSW landfills were required to ensure and operators of such facilities during the interim period between promulgation of the final hazardous waste regulations and the implementation of permit programs used to ensure facility compliance with those regulations. EPA asserted that selected requirements applicable to TSDFs were particularly relevant in developing the proposed standards. compliance with the standards before they began operation. Owner/operators of existing facilities that did not comply with applicable criteria by deadlines specified by EPA would be in violation of RCRA's prohibition on open dumping. EPA tailored and supplemented the MSW landfill criteria to address threats to human health specific to CCR management. In its June 2010 proposal to regulate CCRs, standards included in EPA's Subtitle D option were designed to meet the standard of protection established by Congress for sanitary landfills. criteria—primarily the technical criteria such as operational and design criteria and groundwater monitoring requirements. However, program specifications do not include criteria comparable to "general" standards in the MSW landfill criteria. Since those standards are necessary to implement a program, states would likely include them in their own CCR Permit Program. State inclusion of those criteria would likely vary from state to state. Decisions regarding the applicability of state regulations and compliance deadlines that detailed compliance deadlines and specific regulatory criteria applicable to existing facilities. combustion residuals. [Emphasis added.] "[P]aragraph (2)" states the "Revised Criteria" proposed in Section 4011(c)(2" Under that paragraph, specific subparts of the MSW landfill criteria and selected individual criteria are cited. For example, the paragraph entitled Revised Criteria begins "The revised criteria described in this paragraph are ... ," followed by provisions such as "the revised criteria for design, groundwater monitoring, corrective action, closure, and post-closure" apply to facilities that may receive hazardous household wastes. EPA subsequently defined these facilities in regulation as municipal solid waste, or MSW, landfills. EPA approval of a state permit program to implement the MSW landfill criteria was dependent on whether EPA determined that the state's program was "adequate" EPA is not authorized to regulate any other type of nonhazardous solid waste (such as CCRs). Instead, EPA may only expand upon the landfill criteria relevant to the state-enforced prohibition of open dumping. EPA's role regarding the open dumping prohibition was to promulgate regulations that contained criteria to distinguish between facilities that would be classified as "sanitary landfills" or "open dumps" At a minimum, a facility would be deemed a sanitary landfill if solid waste disposal at such a facility posed no reasonable probability of adverse effects on health or the environment. Disposal facilities that did not meet the criteria for sanitary landFills would be considered open dumps, EPA said in a statement. EPA revised existing regulatory criteria applicable to sanitary landfills. States either adopted the federal criteria exactly or used them as a model to create their own requirements. EPA determined whether state programs were adequate to ensure facility compliance with federal criteria. States "implement" those regulations by issuing permits to owners and operators of regulated landFills.. Currently, EPA has no authority to directly enforce the MSW landfill criteria at any MSW. facility in a state without an EPA-approved program. EPA could have directly enforced the MSW landfill criteria at any point after April 1993 in any state that did not yet have an EPA-approved program in place. EPA never stepped in to directly enforce the federal criteria, however. Some have argued that by requiring EPA to implement a CCR Permit Program for a state under specific still developing its program—suggests that such a review may be anticipated at some point in the future, when EPA could determine if a program was being implemented as described in the state's program certification. directly enforce the criteria may not currently be invoked by the agency since that authority is limited to states found by EPA to have an inadequate program to implement the MSW program. Under Subtitle C, EPA has primary authority to implement and enforce the federal requirements applicable to hazardous waste treatment, storage, and disposal facilities (TSDFs) In lieu of the federal program, states can be authorized to implement regulations applicable to those facilities, including permitting those facilities. Most states have requested and received such authorization.  HSWA added a paragraph applicable to "Control of Hazardous Disposal" in Section 4005. That paragraph includes provisions that directed states to adopt a permit program to implement the MSW landfill criteria. EPA's determination of state program adequacy was also relevant to the agency's potential to directly enforce the MSw landfill criteria, the agency says. The 1984 amendments to Section 4004 required each state, within 18 federal performance standards, to protect human health and the environment. The SIR allowed states to adopted regulations that may not have been identical to the MSS criteria. MSW landfill criteria were finalized to the point at which a state adopted a program approved by EPA as adequate to enforce the federal criteria. For this purpose, EPA was explicitly authorized to use its inspection and federal enforcement authorities under Subtitle C, Sections 3006 and 3007. In any state that EPA determined did not adopt a program adequate to assure facility compliance, EPA could use authorities available in Sections 3007 and 3008 in Sub Title C to directly enforce the open dumping prohibition at MSW landfills in that state. Proposed Section 4011(k) would likely affect the applicability of state regulations implemented by a CCR Permit Program. The key definition is that of a "structure" A structure would be defined as "a landfill, surface impoundment, or other land-based unit" Proposed definitions comparable to those in 40 C.F.R. Part 239 are those for "coal combustion residuals permit program" and "permit" The proposed definitions do withdrawal of determination of adequacy. to varying interpretations. One such provision is the definition of "structures" that may receive CCRs. It would appear that the applicability of any regulations a state would promulgate and implement using its permit program would depend on that state's definition of a structure. In defining the term as a "landfill, surface impoundment, or other land-based unit" without further definition, the bills would afford states broad latitude in construing these terms. By contrast, existing RCRA defines a structure as "a building, structure, or structure-like structure" States would determine when owner/operators would be required to comply with the requirements implemented via the permit program. Participating states would certify that they have a program in place within three years of enactment of proposed Section 4011. States would presumably promulgate regulations applicable to CCR structures. Deadlines for compliance and details regarding program applicability would not be known until states description of its program, required to be provided to EPA under the State Actions provisions, states would berequired to describe their program. The proposed amendment would not explicitly require the agency implementing the program to promulgate regulations. However, program preconditions arguably imply that states would promulgate such regulations. The proposed bills would define a "coal combustion residuals permit program" as "all of the authorities, activities, and procedures that comprise the system of prior approval and conditions implemented by or for a state to regulate the CCR program" The proposal would not include details regarding what may constitute a "CCR landfill" or a " CCR surface impoundment" not apply to structures that are surface impoundments; "for all structures that receive coal combustion residuals after the date of enactment of this section"; and "for. all structures" The Minimum Requirements include five provisions drawn from EPA's June 2010 proposed Subtitle D standards for CCR landfills and surfaceimpoundments. Those proposed provisions would apply to those structures as well as other CCR sites. The minimum requirements are based on EPA's 40 C.F.R. Part 258, Subpart G. The bills considered in the 112 th Congress were proposed in the wake of a June 2010 proposal by EPA to regulate CCRs. This report provides background and selected information regarding that EPA proposal. The report also describes selected elements of RCRA Subtitles C and D, relevant to both EPA's proposal and legislative proposals to create state programs to regulate the coal-fired power plants. It does not provide a comprehensive discussion of EPA's authority to regulate. CCR legislation is likely to be considered by the 113 th Congress. The proposed amendment would also have provided no explicit authority for EPA to directly enforce regulatory criteria applicable to CCR disposal units. Such authority provided to EPA in other parts of RCRA has generally served as an incentive to states to adopt and implement federal regulatory criteria. The absence of such authority makes it difficult to anticipate the degree to which EPA may encourage states to implement a program to regulate CCRs that would comply with the Permit Program. It is not necessarily a question of a state's ability. It may be a difference in interpretation between states and EPA regarding standards. proposed two options to regulate CCRs pursuant to its current authorities under RCRA Subtitles C and D. EPA has identified a number of the potential impacts of implementing either EPA regulatory option. According to industry estimates, almost 80% of C CRs generated in 2011 was managed in a way that involved land application of the material. Such management practices included CCR disposal in landfills, surface impoundments, or mines (as minefill); and use as structural and embankment fill and as a soil amendment. Each bill would have added to Subtitle D of RCRA a new Section 4011, Management and Disposal of Coal Combustion Residuals. In states that did not create a program that met program specifications included in the proposed amendment, or in other specified circumstances, the EPA would have been required to implement a program. The bills would encourage states to create permit programs according to statutory standards in the amendment. The aim of the amendment is to "facilitate recovery and beneficial use, and provide for the proper management and disposal" of CCRs. a minimum standard of protection from permit programs used to implement and enforce those regulations. Creation of a state program to regulate a particular type of waste, according to statutory provisions in federal law, without detailed federal regulations or guidance, would be a novel approach in RCRA. That a RCRA program has never been authorized or established by Congress using such an approach does not mean that this new approach would not meet a particular objective. The proposed bills did not include a specific statement of the objective of a CCR Permit Program—with the exception of the broad statement to achieve a certain level of protection. required to be implemented under RCRA in the past, it has been with the specific intent of assuring that waste disposal facilities will operate in compliance with baseline federal regulatory criteria that meet an explicit standard of protection. In its June 2010 proposal, EPA's primary objective was to address gaps in state programs to regulate CCRs by establishing national standards that would achieve a minimum level of protection from risks specific to CCR. EPA and state authorities to promulgate, implement, and/or enforce requirements broadly applicable to the management of nonhazardous solid waste. The Solid Waste Disposal Act Amendments of 1980 (P.L. 96-482) included provisions commonly referred to as the "Bevill Amendment" Under those provisions Congress specifically excluded CCRs from regulation under RCRA Subtitle C. Pursuant to that directive, EPA was required to conduct a comprehensive study and submit to Congress a report on the adverse effects on human health and the environment related to the disposal and utilization of wastes and other byproduct materials generated primarily from coal or other fossil fuels. RCRA reauthorization. In February 1980, Representative Tom Bevill introduced an amendment to the pending legislation that would require EPA to defer the imposition of hazardous waste regulatory requirements for fossil fuel combustion waste. Representative Bevill stated that EPA's intent to regulate such waste as hazardous would discourage the use of coal and constitute an unnecessary burden on the utility industry. In anticipation of the enactment of this legislation, according to EPA, the agency excluded the regulation of fossilfuel combustion waste from its final hazardous waste list. On October 14, 2011, the House passed the Coal Residuals Reuse and Management Act. On August 2, 2012, the Coal Ash Recycling and Oversight Act of 2012 (S. 3512) was introduced in the Senate. The House subsequently incorporated the provisions of the Senate bill in Title IV of H.R. 3409, the Stop the War on Coal Act, passed in the House on September 12, 2012. The bills would have amended the Solid Waste Disposal Act. EPA would provide its analysis of risk assessment data, studies, reports, and various other data used to determine regulatory criteria. In its proposal to regulate CCRs, various stakeholders have disagreed with EPA's assessment of what criteria should be applied. The administrative process, however, provides some transparency regarding how EPA arrived at its determination. It also provides a way for the public to see how EPA made its determination and how it will implement the rules. The process is called the Administrative Procedure Act, or APA. EPA was required to review studies and other actions of other federal and state agencies regarding the material. EPA also invited participation by other concerned parties, including industry, with a view toward avoiding duplication of effort. Both legislative and administrative actions regarding the potential regulation of CCRs, particularly EPA action taken in response to the Bevill directive and more recent action taken after the Kingston release, are summarized in Table C-1. In March 2000, EPA submitted its "Regulatory Determination on Wastes from Fossil Fuel Combustion" to the White House Office of Management and Budget, for to improper disposal practices, and concern over potential gaps in state regulatory programs. EPA determined that national standards were needed to protect human health from risks specific to CCR management. EPA options to regulate CCRs are limited under its current authorities in Subtitles C and D. EPA's June 2010 proposals reflect EPA's effort to determine those risks and protective measure to address them.. As discussed, EPA proposed two alternative regulations based on its existing statutory authorities in RCRA under Subt subtitles C andD. EPA's determination that CCRs warranted regulation as hazardous waste was based, in part, on data from damage cases. EPA cited new data that identified significant risks for the waste to leach arsenic. Risk to human health associated with agricultural uses of coal ash a substitute for lime. In May 2000, after review by EPA, the EPA approved the use of C CRs for agricultural uses. The decision was a departure from previous opinions regarding the management of CCR's. It was a decision that was made in part based on data that showed the potential threat to health and the environment. OMB, EPA issued a revised regulatory determination that stated its intent to leave the Bevill exclusion in place. However, EPA stated that it was convinced that national regulations under Subtitle D were warranted for CCR disposal in landfills and surface impoundments. The composition of the waste had the potential to present danger to human health and the environment in certain circumstances, EPA said. EPA said there was sufficient evidence the wastes were being managed in a way that was safe for human health. The proposed Subtitle D design standards would require that new landfills and all surface impoundments that have not completed closure prior to the effective date of the rule. Units would be required to be retrofitted with a liner or closed within five years of the final rule. EPA also proposed to require the same liner and leachate collection and removal systems as those being proposed under its Subtitle C option. The technical justification for the requirements is equally applicable to the wastes and surfaceimpoundment, irrespective of the statutory authority under which the requirement is proposed. Opposition to the Subtitle D option stemmed from various concerns, many of which were centered on EPA's lack of authority to directly enforce the standards. Given the argument by many states that the material is being managed sufficiently under current state regulatory programs, environmental and citizen groups have expressed doubts over the degree to which states would adopt new standards. This report provides information regarding EPA's proposals to regulate hazardous wastes. It is intended to provide information about EPA's proposed regulations to regulatehazardous wastes. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. HSWA amended Subtitle D to add Section 4010, in which Congress directed EPA to study the extent to which the guidelines and criteria applicable to solid waste management and disposal facilities were adequate to protect human health and the environment. Within three years, EPA was required to report the results of its study to Congress, as well as any recommendations. That approach resulted in more detailed regulations than those applicable to sanitary landfills, and included a stronger enforcement mechanism to ensure consistent state conformance with the national standards. the following statement: The Committee believes that it is not necessary for EPA to promulgate new regulations. EPA acknowledged in [its June 2010 Subtitle D] Proposed Rule that the "part 258 criteria represent a reasonable balance between ensuring the protection of human health and the environment" The Committee expects that permit programs using the minimum Federal baseline established by this legislation will meet the standard of protecting human health. The House report further notes the "revised criteria" that would be included in the proposed rule. Under Subtitle C of RCRA, EPA has primary authority to regulate hazardous wastes. Under Subtitle D, however, states have primary authority. EPA's role has largely been to promulgate criteria applicable to sanitary landfills. The Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984 (HSWA; P.L. 98-616) amended RCRA Sub Title D to address an issue almost identical to the one currently applicable to CCRs. In developing time frames that it considers adequate for compliance, EPA might be adapted to guide the process of identifying deficiencies. proposed standards are structured similarly to regulatory requirements applicable to MSW landfills, supplemented to reflect requirements specific to the management of CCRs. Adoption and enforcement of the Subtitle C "cradle to grave" regulations would involve stricter waste management standards implemented at a higher cost to both industry and state waste management. According to EPA, if implemented as proposed, each regulatory option would result in a similar level of protection. However, each option wouldresult in regulatory programs with a substantially different scope and potential for enforcement. Household waste is exempt from Subtitle C requirements. But that doesn't mean it doesn't pose potential risks to human health and the environment. Congress recognized that disposal facilities that accept such waste may need to comply with standards that were more detailed than the broad criteria applicable to sanitary landfills. Rather than subject household waste to the full gamut of "cradle to grave" Sub Title C regulations, Congress took an approach that could be implemented under the RCRA's "Clean Air Act" EPA has two options to regulate CCRs pursuant to RCRA Subtitle C and D authorities. Under the Sub Title C option, EPA would reverse a previous regulatory determination to exempt C CRs from the hazardous waste requirements. Opponents of the SubTitle C option were largely due to concerns that it would be costly to implement to both states and industry; be too restrictive; stigmatize the material by labeling it "hazardous," adversely affecting its potential for reuse. EPA's second regulatory option would be to promulgate national standards applicable to landfills and surface impoundments. Subtitle D would establish standards applicable only to owners and operators of CCR landfills and surface impoundments. EPA could promulgate the Subtitle D standards, but would have limited authority to enforce them. States have the primary authority to implement and enforce standards applicable to the management of nonhazardous solid waste. If finalized, EPA could encourage states to adopt and enforce the Sub Title D standards. But it would have no authority to enforcement the standards directly. It would create a regulatory program only for the CCR "grave," not every stage of management. factors include data regarding the nature and concentration of toxic constituents present in the waste. EPA determined that the material is generated in large volumes annually (e.g., approximately 130 million tons in 2011) The material contains more than 40 toxic constituents, according to EPA. The potential for toxic constituents to degrade and migrate from the point of deposition under plausible management conditions was also considered. The material was found to be of a high quality and to be safe to handle and dispose of. It was also of a low quality and could be hazardous to human health. that may receive a particular type of waste. Regulatory criteria that meet that directive have been identified in the more than 30 years that EPA has gone through the public rulemaking process. With regard to waste management, necessary protections involve the identification of various factors, including, but not limited to common methods of managing the waste. Analysis of toxic constituents, such as heavy metals, is a step in the process. Potential pathways of human exposure are another step. The presence of toxic constituent alone is not enough to protect against human exposure. risks to human health from waste management activities pertain to the potential for hazardous contaminants to be released from the site of deposition and to migrate off-site. In 1991, the agency promulgated the following requirements applicable to MSW landfills: General standards; regulations established by EPA explicitly define terms necessary to determine the applicability of those regulations. Final regulations represent the "minimum national standard" applicable to waste disposal facilities that, when implemented, would be expected to would achieve the standard of protection set in statute. waste management regulations in 1978. In these proposed regulations, EPA identified six categories of wastes it deemed "special wastes" that would be deferred from hazardous waste management requirements. These special wastes were identified because they typically were generated in large volumes and, at the time, were believed to pose less risk to human health and the environment than the wastes being identified for regulation as hazardous waste. In the months before the hazardous waste regulations were finalized in 1980, Congress was debating the issue of special wastes. the agency made based on the study findings. Further, EPA was required to revise the sanitary landfill criteria to apply to facilities that may receive hazardous household wastes. At a minimum such revisions for facilities potentially receiving such wastes should require ground water monitoring as necessary to detect contamination, establish criteria for the acceptable location of new or existing facilities, and provide for corrective action as appropriate. Congress explicitly required EPA to revision the existing sanitary. landfill criteria. to be those necessary to protect human health and the environment and may take into account the practicable capability of such facilities. Risk to human health was highest from contaminant leaching and migration to surface and groundwater. EPA found that risk was largely eliminated through the use of a composite liner. Potential protective measures include a requirement that composite liners be used at the site of deposition. In gathering this information, EPA looked at waste management practices identified as those that may minimize human exposure to toxins below a standard specified according to federal law; such practices have included a requirement to use composite liner at the disposal site. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. A stressor is any physical, chemical, or biological entity that can induce an adverse response. Stressors may adversely affect specific natural resources or entire ecosystems, including plants and animals. EPA uses risk assessments to characterize the nature and magnitude of health risks to humans, birds, fish, wildlife. The federal government is responsible for cleaning up and disposing of hazardous waste. The EPA has a responsibility to protect the environment from chemical contaminants and other stressors that may be present in the environment. The agency also has a duty to ensure that waste is disposed of in a manner that meets federal standards. In 2011, electricity generating units in the United States burned more than 900 million tons of coal. CCRs are the inorganic material remaining after pulverized coal is burned at electric utilities and independent power producers. According to industry estimates, in 2011, as much as 130 million tons were generated. Disposal of C CRs on site at individual power plants may involve decades-long accumulation of waste.. Hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of tons of dry ash or wet ash slurry (in a surface impoundment) deposited at power plants. Landfills also include piles, sand and gravel pits, quarries, and/or large-scale fill operations. Sites that are excavated so that more coal ash can be used as fill are also considered CCR landfills. CCR surface impoundment —facility or part of a facility that is a natural topographic depression, man-made excavation, or diked area formed primarily of earthen materials. A CCR is designed to hold an accumulation of CCRs containing coal ash. the combustion of coal or other fossil fuels, including an analysis of the source and volumes of such material generated per year. present disposal and utilization practices; potential danger, if any, to human health and the environment from the disposal and reuse of such materials. alternatives to current disposal methods; the costs of such alternatives; the impact of those alternatives on the use of coal and other natural resources; and the current and potential utilization of suchmaterials. Further, as it has been proved that surface runoff or leachate can pose a danger to health or the environment. On December 22, 2008, national attention was turned to risks associated with managing such large volumes of CCRs. A breach in a surface impoundment pond at the Tennessee Valley Authority's (TVA's) Kingston, TN, plant released 1.1 billion gallons of coal fly ash slurry, covering more than 300 acres. TVA estimates that cleanup will continue into at least 2014 and will cost $1.2 billion. The incident at Kingston drew attention to the potential for a sudden, catastrophic release related to the structural failure of a surfaceimpoundment.  units could not be located in an unstable area (e.g., a location susceptible to natural or human-induced events or forces capable of impairing the integrity of the unit) New disposal units would be required to be constructed with a composite liner. Within five years, existing surface impoundments would be needed to have solids removed and be retrofitted with a composites liner. All units would have to comply with the groundwater monitoring requirements within one year of the effective date of a final rule. units must have groundwater monitoring systems installed before CCRs could be disposed of in the units. All units would be required to control fugitive dust emissions. Owners and operators of all existing surface impoundments would be. required to maintain certain information about their properties. The state would also require the owner/ operator to notify the state that the design has been placed in the operating record and on the owner's or operator's publicly accessible Internet site. The regulations would take effect on January 1, 2015. 40 C.F.R. §257.60, "Placement above the natural water table," included among the Location Restrictions criteria. 4011(c)(1)(D) Wind D ispersal —similar to EPA's proposed 40 C.f.r.§257.80, "Air Criteria," intended to address issues associated with fugitive emissions of coal ash dust. State Notification and Groundwater Monitoring: Groundwater monitoring —within one year of submitting its program certification to EPA, a state would require the owner or operator to submit a report to EPA. Proposed criteria at Section 257.71 would require facility owners and operators to implement standards necessary to prevent contaminant spread. The proposed provision that would be applied via the permit program would prescribe actions a state would be required to take after it was determined that contaminants had migrated from the deposition site. In the narrative, EPA's proposed criteria atSection 257. 71 would require Facility owners and Operators to. implement standards needed to prevent contamination spread. In this narrative, the proposed criteria is related to certain risks associated with contaminant migration from unlined surfaces. EPA found that the majority of states appeared to regulate CCR landfills adequately. However, there appeared to be gaps in state regulatory oversight of surface impoundments. More than 60% of states required neither liners nor groundwater monitoring for CCRs. EPA further noted that it lacks details regarding the manner and degree to which states are regulating the disposal and use of C CRs. To address potential gaps (i.e., to establish regulations applicable to CCR disposal, use and use in the U.S. significant number of landfills and surface impoundments without proper controls in place, particularly in the area of groundwater monitoring. While there had been substantive improvements in state regulatory programs, EPA identified significant gaps either in states' regulatory authorities or in their exercise of existing authorities. Further, citing its concern regarding the potential mismanagement and inconsistent state regulation of CCRs, EPA stated that it would revise its determination if it found that a need for regulation under Subtitle C was warranted. EPA's June 2010 proposal reflects the agency's revised determination. free liquids, and which is not an injection well. Examples of CCR surface impoundments are holding, storage, settling, and aeration pits, ponds, and lagoons. New disposal units would be required to be placed above the natural water table, and could not be located in wetlands, within 200 feet of a fault zone, or in a seismic impact zone. The following standards are among those intended to address concerns associated specifically with CCR disposal. The standards include criteria EPA deemed necessary to control contaminant leaching and migration. The potential for structural failure could be minimized by various means, including ensuring that the units meet certain design standards and are inspected regularly. Surface impoundments also pose a risk of structural failure. CCR disposal facilities are currently subject to limited federal regulation. Instead, they are regulated by individual states. In a continuing effort to determine whether CCRs should be subject to federal regulation, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is conducting a review of the CCR industry. The agency is working with states to determine the best way to regulate the industry. EPA found that many state solid waste management programs adequately regulate CCR landfills. EPA determined that national standards applicable to the management of CCRs destined for disposal are needed. EPA also identified certain protective measures that may be implemented that would minimize or largely eliminate risks from CCR disposal. As a result of potential risks tied to CCR management, documented cases of damages attributed to the risks EPA identified as associated with CCR use and use. The Kingston release also brought attention to the fact that the Management of C CRs is essentially unregulated at the federal level. constituents, including antimony, arsenic, barium, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury, and selenium; and that those constituents can degrade and migrate from the point of deposition under certain conditions. EPA identified common methods of disposal and use, potentially regulated under RCRA, that resulted in documented cases of damages that could cause human health concerns. Those management methods include disposal in landfills, accumulation in surface impoundment ponds, and use in land applications equivalent to landfill disposal. EPA identified various pathways in which humans may be exposed to toxic constituents in CCRs at levels high enough to cause health concerns. The pathways under which exposure would most likely occur include the following: contaminant leaching and migration off-site. Direct, uncontrolled discharge or release of liquid waste to surface water, as in the structural failure of a surface impoundment (e.g., the Kingston), or direct, uncontrolled release of waste from a landfill, sand pit, quarry, construction site. EPA's June 2010 proposal was intended to create a national standard to regulate CCRs destined for disposal. In its Subtitle D option, EPA would add to 40 C.F.R. Part 257, "Standards for the Receipt of Coal Combustion Residuals in Landfills and Surface Impoundments" Details in EPA's proposed definitions of potentially regulated units reflect risk assessment data and documented cases of threats to human health from CCR disposal in surface impoundments and landfills. requirements provided evidence that similar requirements, applied to CCR surface impoundments, will prevent a catastrophic release of CCRs. EPA's Subtitle D regulatory option reflects the framework of MSW landfill criteria, but includes selected criteria drawn from MSHA standards and standards applicable to hazardous waste TSDFs. The most significant differences pertain to the potential regulation of surfaceImpoundments. For example, requirements that would provide protections specific to the disposal of liquids are not included in Part 258 because bulk disposal of liquid is prohibited in MSW landfills. the units (e.g., a description of the physical and engineering properties of the foundation materials on which the CCR surface impoundment is constructed), and a certification by an independent registered professional engineer that the design is in accordance with current, prudent engineering practices for the maximum volume of CCR slurry and CCR wastewater that can be impounded therein. Differences between the MSW landfill criteria and EPA's proposed standards for CCR landfills and surfaceimpoundments can be found at the EPA's website. EPA intended those risks to be addressed, at least in part, in its "Design criteria for existing CCR surface impoundments and lateral expansions" (proposed 40 C.F.R. §257.71, included among the Design Criteria) Compared to the bills' structural integrity provisions, EPA's proposed criteria included more detailed requirements comparable to the MSHA standards (discussed above in " Proposed EPA Standards to Address Risks Specific to CCR Management " and detailed in Table A-3 in Appendix A ). the accumulation of coal ash slurry (risks from a catastrophic release of liquid waste) To address such risks, selected proposed standards for CCR surface impoundments were modeled on the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) regulations in 30 C.F.R. Part 77. EPA's decision to draw from the MSHA standards was based on its belief that records compiled by MSHA for its rulemaking and the agency's 40 years of experience in implementing those standards were accurate.

ROUGE-1: 53.15, ROUGE-2: 50.07, ROUGE-L: 18.30
BERTScore: 61.22

==============================================
==================== [68/100] ====================
Summary:
4-year intervals, commencing in fiscal year 2008. Navy originally planned to procure the first CVN-21 class aircraft carrier in 2006. Since then, the Navy has delayed procurement to 2008, which has delayed fielding this vital capability. Committee urges Navy and shipbuilder to identify opportunities to improve affordability of future aircraft carriers. In view of the potential for significant program savings, the committee recommends an increase of $50.0 million in SCN for CVN -21 class advance procurement. procuring CVN-78 and future aircraft carriers, rather than split funding (i.e., two-year incremental funding) as proposed by the Navy. Section 121 would also authorize the Navy to contract in FY2007 for the procurement long-lead items for CVN -79 and -80, aircraft carriers that the Navy plans to procure in FY2012 and FY2016, respectively. This authority resembles an economic order quantity (EOQ) arrangement, except the Navy would review economic order quantities and long lead time material procurement. for advance construction of the ship. This budget request reflects the second one-year slip in the program in recent years. This slip would cause a delay in the delivery of the CVN-78 until fiscal year 2015, with the ship it is scheduled to replace, the USS Enterprise (CVN-65), scheduled to be decommissioned in fiscal year 2013. Additionally, this slip translates into a cost growth of approximately $400.0 million, according to the Navy. The committee is concerned about this. The committee remains concerned that the use of incremental funding is not a solution to the Navy's problem in funding shipbuilding. The low rate of shipbuilding was driving higher costs, which in turn further reduced shipbuilding rates, creating a downward spiral. The committee believes that stable ship requirements, increased funding in the shipbuilding budget, and increased flexibility for funding large capital ships are critical elements of any strategy to reverse this trend. The Secretary of the. Navy's fiscal year 2007 report to Congress on the long-range plan for the construction of naval. vessels identifies a requirement to procure the CVN-21 class aircraft carriers at. Committee recommended approval of the Navy's proposed use of split funding FY2007 and FY2008 for procuring LHA-6 and the two lead DDG-1000s. The committee directs the Navy to provide an updated funding profile, fully funding the remaining costs of the ship from fiscal years 2007 through 2010, with delivery of the fiscal year 2007 budget request. Under the proposed funding plan, the ship is to be funded over a total of nine years, with about 35.2% of its procurement cost provided in advance procurement funding between FY2001 and FY2007. delay. The committee has been told there is no technical reason for the delay, but that the delay was driven by budget considerations. Both the Secretary of the Navy and the Chief of Naval operations testified that large capital assets such as aircraft carriers are difficult to fund under the traditional full-funding policy. The program of record for CVN-78 has the detail design and construction funding split between two years. This provision would authorize that same funding to be split over four years, thereby allowing needed funding flexibility. In 1993, as part of its Bottom-Up Review (BUR) of U.S. defense policy and programs, the Clinton Administration decided to reinstate procurement of SSN-23 in FY1995 or FY1996. By this point, $382.4 million had already been obligated and expended on SSn-23. Congress's action on the 1992 rescission proposal also made an additional $540.2 million in funding available for obligation to SSN23. As a consequence, completing the approximate $2.4 billion cost ofSSN- 23 would require about $1.5 billion in additional funding. FY1998 to complete the cost of SSN-23 (as adjusted); Congress approved this amount. LHD-6 Amphibious Assault Ship. The House had recommended fully funding procurement of the Wasp (LHD-1) class amphibious assault ship Bonhomme Richard (L HD-6) The Administration had not requested this ship. The ship would have cost $2.4 billion as then estimated, about one-third of the total estimated cost of the ship. A total of $802.5 million was appropriated by Congress in the two years (FY1997 and FY1998) following the year (FY1996) in which SSN 23 was procured. The third and final Seawolf (SSN-21) class attack submarine, was originally procured in the FY1992 defense budget, which Congress passed in 1991. In early 1992, the George H. W. Bush Administration terminated procurement of further SeAWolf-class submarines and proposed rescinding funds for both the second and third boats. In acting on this proposal, Congress rejected the request to rescind funding for SSN-22, effectively suspended the procurement of SSN23, and gave the Secretary of the Navy the choice of whether to reinstate procurement. DOD sealift ships were procured through the National Defense Sealift Fund (NDSF), a DOD revolving and management fund. The NDSF is outside the procurement title of the DOD appropriations act and therefore not subject to the full funding policy. LHD-8 was incrementally funded by explicit funding. DOD's Large, Medium-Speed, Roll-on/Roll-off (LMSR) ships (as well as Navy Lewis) have been procured since FY1993. portions of 16 LMSRs whose construction contracts were awarded between FY1993 and FY1997. In explaining its use of funds in the LMSR program, DOD stated: The National Defense Sealift Fund (NDSF) is not a procurement appropriation but a revolving fund. Dollars appropriated by Congress for the fund are not appropriated to purchase specific hulls as in the case of, for example the Navy's DDG-51 program. Rather, dollars made available to the NDSF are executed on an oldest money first basis. and Clark (TAKE-1) dry cargo ships procured since FY2003 ) have not been subject to the full funding policy as traditionally applied to DOD procurement programs. As discussed in a 1996 CRS report, although individual LMSRs were ostensibly fully funded each year by Congress, in some cases DOD applied LMSR funding provided in a given year to partially finance the construction of L MSRs authorized in various years. For example, although Congress ostensibly approved $546.4 million in FY1995 for the procurement of two L MSR, the FY1995 funds were actually applied to help finance the procurement. LHD-6 was approved for procurement in FY 1993 but only $305 million in FY1993 funding was provided. The $893.8 million needed to complete the funding of the ship (as adjusted) was requested by the Administration in FY1994 and approved by Congress. The Navy in its FY2007 budget proposed procuring the amphibious assault ship LHA-6 in FY 2007 using split funding in FY2007 and FY2008. The ship in question is LHD-8, which was funded on an incremental basis, with the final increment provided in FY2006. aircraft carriers and large deck amphibious ships, and the Navy's fiscal year 2007 shipbuilding plan already assumes such authority for the second LHA class amphibious assault ship. The committee has approved the use of split funding for certain ships in certain cases. However, the committee does not believe that a blanket policy supporting incremental funding for any class of ship is appropriate. The provision states: H.R. 2863 / P.L. 109-148 (FY2006 Defense Appropriations Bill) The Senate Armed Services Committee approved the Navy's FY2008 request for the second of two increments of procurement funding for the amphibious assault ship LHA-6. The House did not recommend approval of carrier CVN-21. The Navy's proposed use of split funding FY2007 and FY2008 for procuring LHA(R) was approved by the House in its report ( H.R. 5122 / P.L. 109-364) on H.Rept. 110-146 of May 11, 2007. Section 121 of the conference report on H.R. 5122 ( H.Rept. 109-702 of September 29, 2006) authorizes four-year incremental funding for the CVN-21 class aircraft carriers. Section 124 authorizes the procurement of the first two DDG-1000 destroyers in FY 2007 using split funding in FY2007 and FY2008. The section states in part: "It is the sense of Congress that there is sufficient benefit to authorizing the one-time exception provided in this section" be used as a precedent for incrementally funding any future DDG—1000 or any other shipbuilding program. The report recommends funding the procurement of one Littoral Combat Ship, or LCS (rather than the requested two) in FY2007, and rescinding funding (in Section 8043) for one of the three LCSs procured in FY2006. The Committee is troubled by this revelation and recommends rescinding the insufficient fiscal year 2006 funds currently allocated to the fourth LCS flight 0 vessel. insufficient to procure two ships and recommends $300,670,000 to fully fund procurement of one LCS seaframe. The Committee notes that this recommendation puts the Navy on its previously established path of procuring four LCS flight 0 ships by the end of fiscal year 2007. (Pages 115-116) Conference Report on H.R. 5631 ( H.Rept. 109-676 of September 25, 2006) approves the Navy's request for the initial (FY2007) increment of procurement funding for the LHA(R) amphibious assault ship. In the case of the F-22, incremental funding is requested in the middle of the production run. The use of incremental funding mortgages the future of the procurement budget of the Defense Department. In addition, the precedent for incremental funding for these programs could be applied to a variety of other procurements, leading to a loss of budget transparency and reducing the ability to perform oversight. Therefore, the recommendations in this bill include full funding for one DD(X) destroyer and theF-22 fighter program. complete full funding of one DD(X) vessel. This is the same level as the funding request for this item, but under the President's budget these funds would have been allocated on an incremental basis against two ships. The Committee cannot support such a far-reaching policy change which has implications beyond the Navy's shipbuilding program. The Navy's proposal requires special legislative authority, according to the report. The report also states: The Committee recommends $2,568,111,000 for the procurement of 1 DD( X) destroyer. Department of Defense to consider whether using advance appropriations in future budgets will improve the shipbuilding program. The committee also stated: The fiscal year 2006 President's budget requests $225,427,000 for [the]DDG-51 [destroyer program] for what the Navy describes as "program completion requirements and shutdown costs" These funds are requested for a mix of Class and ship specific plan, basic construction, ordnance, certification, and inspection costs. Such costs are traditionally included in the budget request for each ship. The Navy sought and was granted the authority to use incremental funding for the next of the follow-on ships of the DDG-1000 Next-Generation Destroyer program. The committee for FY2007 instead recommended full funding for one DDg-1000, and design funding for a second. Congress, in acting on the proposed FY2007 budget, approved the Navy's requested first increment of funding. The Navy's proposed FY2008 budget requests the second increment of funds for the two ships. The effect of the conference agreement would allow the Navy to split fund twin lead ships.  split funding is a two-year form of incremental funding. Under split funding, a weapon's procurement cost is divided into two portions, one of which is funded in the item's year of procurement, the other the following year. The Navy in its FY2007 and FY2008 budget submissions proposed to procure LHA-6 and the first two DDG-1000s using split funding in FY 2007 and FY 2008, and to procure CVN-78 using split Funding in FY2008-FY2009. As part of its proposed FY2005 budget and FY2005-2009 Future sufficient explanation is provided, the Committee recommends only providing funds for plans and those costs directly attributable to ships scheduled to deliver in the near-term. The Committee recommends reducing the budget request by $195,654,000. (Page 127) Conference Report The conference report ( H.Rept. 109-359 of December 18, 2005) on H.R. 2863 states: The conferees do not agree with House direction urging the Navy to reconsider split funding for the LHA(R) Program. The conference agrees to consider either split funding or full funding if proposed by the Administration. Full funding increases the opportunity to use performance-based fixed price contracts, allows for more efficient work planning and management of the capital project (or investment) Full funding in the budget year with regular appropriations alone is preferred because it leads to tradeoffs with spending for other capital assets. Advance appropriations have the same benefits as regular appropriations for improved planning, management, and accountability of the project (investment) The latter helps ensure that agencies develop appropriate plans and budgets and that all costs and benefits are identified prior to providing resources.  Regulations governing the full funding policy are found in Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-11 and DOD Directive 7000.14-R. Good budgeting requires that appropriations for the full costs of asset acquisition be enacted in advance to help ensure that all costs and benefits are fully taken into account at the time decisions are made to provide resources. Full funding with regular appropriations in the budget year also leads to tradeoffs within the budget. of 1870, as amended, and the Adequacy of Appropriations Act of 1861. action to cancel or modify an annual funding increment in a future-year budget. In this sense, advance appropriations can be thought of as a legislatively locked in form of incremental funding. OMB Circular A-11 allows for the use of advance appropriations to help finance capital assets under certain circumstances. Regular appropriations for the full funding of a capital project or a useful segment (or investment) in the budget year are preferred. If this results in spikes that, in the judgment of OMB, cannot be stopped, the advance appropriations are used. times—if needed to ensure that these items will be ready for installation into the end item. AP funding may also be used to pay for economic order quantity (EOQ) procurement of a set of long-lead items. Long- lead items are often manufactured not at the enditem's final assembly facility (such as a shipyard) but at separate supplier firms. In Navy shipbuilding, AP funding has most commonly been used to finance long- lead components for all of the end items to be procured under MYP arrangement. Congress has granted MYP authority for a relatively small number of procurement programs. The law governing MYP arrangements is set forth in 10 U.S.C. § 2306b. This provision permits the Navy to use a single contract for a total of 198 to 224 F/A-18E/Fs procured during the five-year period FY2000-FY2004. It is unclear whether the Navy will use MYP to procure a set of end items that are scheduled to be procured across a series of up to five fiscal years. EOQs normally take place within the context of a multiyear procurement (MYP) These ships have not been approved for MYP, and under past practice would not qualify for it under the requirements set forth in the law. MYP arrangements are permitted to cover items to be procured over a period of up to five years, while the authority granted under Section 121 would cover three ships that the Navy wants to procure over aperiod of nine years (FY2008-FY2016). In its report ( S.Rept. 109-254 of May 9, 2006) on S. 2766 , the Senate Armed Services said the authority would be used for the procurement of three ships. the item is procured. Congress imposed the full funding policy on DOD in the 1950s to make the total procurement costs of DOD weapons and equipment more visible. Congress's intent in imposing the policy was to strengthen discipline in DOD budgeting and improve Congress's ability to control DOD spending. Understanding total costs and how previously appropriated funds are used are key components of Congress's oversight capability. The fullfunding policy is consistent with two basic laws regarding government expenditures—the Antideficiency Act and the Budget Control Act. In spite of its potential advantages, Congress replaced incremental funding with the full funding policy in the 1950s. Congress has periodically reaffirmed the fullfunding policy since then. The U.S. government has spent more than $1.2 trillion on weapons since 2001, according to a report by the Center for American Progress. The report says that the cost of weapons and equipment should be transparent and transparent to Congress. It says that incremental funding makes the total procurement costs of weapons less visible to Congress and more difficult to understand and track. SSN-23, LHD-6, LHA-6 and CVN-78 amount to cases of de facto incremental funding. These ships constitute recent exceptions to the use of full funding in the procurement of Navy ships. Under incremental funding, a weapon's cost is divided into two or more annual portions, or increments, that reflect the need to make annual progress payments to the contractor as the weapon is built. Congress then approves each year's increment as part of its action on that year's budget. full funding policy means that DOD cannot contract for the construction of a new weapon or piece of equipment until funding for the entire cost of that item has been approved by Congress. Sufficient funding must be available for a complete, usable end item before a contract can be let. Support for the full funding policy has been periodically reaffirmed over the years by Congress, the Government Accountability Office (GAO), and DOD. AP funding may be used to pay for long-lead items—components of a usable end items that have long manufacturing lead. Most Navy ships procured since the late 1950s have been funded in accordance with the full funding policy. Before then, many Navy ships were procured with incremental funding. Most DOD procurement items are funded through a single decision by Congress to provide the entire cost of the item in the item's year of procurement. In spite of the existence of the fullfunding policy, a few Navy and DOD ships have been procured in recent years, such as the F/A-18 Hornet. Under advance appropriations, as under traditional full funding, Congress makes a one-time decision to fund the entire procurement cost of an end item. That cost, however, can then be divided into two or more annual increments. Supporters of advance appropriations could argue that it offers many of the potential advantages of incremental funding, such as avoiding or mitigating budget spikes. They could also avoid some of its potential disadvantages, including the risk of increasing weapon procurement costs created by uneconomic start-up and stop costs. a future year, which can enhance job security for construction workers at the yard that would build the ship. reducing the total construction cost of a ship through improved sequencing or year-to-year balancing of shipyard construction work. Most DOD procurement programs use annual contracting, under which DOD lets one or more contracts for each year's worth of procurement of a given item. Multiyear procurement is a special contracting authority, approved by Congress on a program-by-program basis, that permits DOD to use a single contract. as to achieve better production economies of that item than would have been possible under full funding. recognize that certain DOD procurement programs, particularly those incorporating significant amounts of advanced technology, bear some resemblance to research and development activities (which can be funded in increments), even though they are intended to produce usable end items. reduce the amount of unobligated balances associated with DOD procurement Programs. implicitly recognize potential limits on DOD's ability to accurately predict the total procurement cost of items, such as ships, that take several years to build. preserve flexibility for future Congresses to stop "throwing money at things" one Congress to "tie the hands" of one or more future Congresses by providing initial procurement funding for a weapon. DOD could start procurement of an item without necessarily understanding its total cost, the so-called "camel's-nose-under-the-tent" issue. It could also increase weapon procurement costs by exposing weapons under construction to potential uneconomic start-up and stop costs that can occur when they are under construction. It would also create a potential for DOD to start procurement without necessarily knowing the item's total cost. which can increase the costs of the displaced programs due to uneconomic program-disruption start-up and start costs. Avoid a potential bias against the procurement of very expensive items that might result from use of full funding due to the item's large up-front procurement cost. permit construction to start on a larger number of items in a given year within that year's amount of funding, so. so that the project can be completed on time and within the budget. so. the project could be completed by the end of the year. with poor production economies of sale, but is expected to rise in future years to levels that would be more than adequate to support higher, economic rates of ship procurement. Using incremental funding or advance appropriations could permit construction to begin on additional ships in the near term. This second scenario is dependent on realizing the expected increase in ship-procurement funding in the later years. If this increase is not realized, then using incremental funding could simply trade poor productioneconomies of scale in theNear term for poor production Economies of Scale in future Years. marginally reduce the total cost to procure a given number of ships. By avoiding instances in which budget spikes caused ships to be moved from one year to another in ship-procurement plans, using incremental funding or advance appropriations can avoid perturbations in the production schedules for these ships. Using incremental funding can increase the procurement cost of a ship if one of more of the ship's funding increments is reduced or deferred. In some circumstances, incremental funding could increase rather than reduce ship- Procurement costs. Using incremental funding or advance appropriations could marginally increase the number of ships that could be built for a given total amount of ship-procurement funding. Opponents could argue that compared to full funding, advance appropriations under certain circumstances could increase ship-construction costs by causing work on a ship to stop. Such movements of planned ship procurements can be a source of instability in Navy ship- Procurement planning.or other unexpected developments cause planned increments to be reduced or deferred. The Navy could move the carrier or amphibious assault ship from a preferred year of procurement to a less-preferred year that has fewer other Navy ships in it. Advance appropriations could help reduce instability in Navy ship-procurement plans. Navy can avoid or mitigate budget spikes that can occur when traditional full funding is used. The ships that best fit this description are aircraft carriers and "large-deck" amphibious assault ships. Accommodating budget spikes for such ships can require the Navy to move to other fiscal years other ships that the Navy would have preferred to procure in the spike year, says John Defterios, a former Navy official. of this option could argue that current practices weaken adherence to the full funding policy. Such practices, they could argue, increase the chance that supporters of other kinds of procurement items, such as aircraft and satellites, could seek to have them funded using incremental funding. This option would involve reducing or eliminating the use of incremental funding in Navy ship procurement and reduce or eliminate the use, in ships being fully funded, of AP funding for purposes other than funding the procurement of long-lead items requested by DOD. Congress's decision on ship funding approaches could also affect future Navy capabilities, annual Navy funding requirements, and the shipbuilding industrial base. Opponents of this policy could argue that it would deprive Congress of the flexibility it has under current funding practices. Could using incremental funding or advance appropriations reduce instability in Navy ship-procurement plans? Using incremental funding for aircraft carriers could help Navy and DOD to better define their thinking regarding Navy requirements, the authors say. The issue can be alternately expressed as how to procure Navy ships economically while maintaining key congressional prerogatives. Some observers have proposed procuring Navy ships using funding approaches. These alternative funding approaches include incremental funding and advance appropriations. Supporters of these approaches believe they could increase stability in Navy shipbuilding plans. The issue for Congress is whether to use these approaches or return to a more exclusive reliance on full funding. of the lead ships of each new class of Navy ships in the Navy's research and development account rather than the ship-procurement account, as the Navy has proposed in previous years. branch budget regulations on the full funding policy, at least not in the same way as these regulations recognize the use of AP funding for long-lead components. Supporters of this option could argue that current funding practices give DOD and the Congress the flexibility to use incremental funding on a limited basis for certain ships. Opponents the cost of shipbuilding and sustaining the shipbuilding industrial base. The committee remains convinced that the fullfunding policy is the correct policy for funding shipbuilding. The Committee understands that the Department of Defense this year considered submission of a legislative proposal that would permanently authorize use of "split funding" for ships. nuclear-propulsion components of nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and submarines. Congress in recent years has occasionally approved AP funding for conventionally powered Navy ships, such as destroyers and amphibious ships. Congress has also occasionally approvedAP funding for "advance construction" work on certain ships. This apparently refers to early shipyard activities for building the basic structure of a ship, as opposed to manufacturing long-lead components to be installed into the ship. It is not recognized in executive orders. The Navy did not request any AP funds for long- lead items. If a given increment of construction work on the ship is completed before the end of a fiscal year and that year's funding increment is entirely expended, the Navy might have to halt work. Under full funding, in contrast, the navy would have access to funding for the ship's entire construction cost and consequently would not have to resume work until the start of the next fiscal year, avoiding the additional work.be restarted. The Navy could argue that under full funding the ship would be able to be completed within the next two years. The Navy has identified the total cost to procure the twin lead ships of the DDG—1000 class as $6,582,200,000. The conferees insist that the Navy manage this program within that total cost, and will be unlikely to increase funding through a reprogramming or an additional budget request except in the case of emergency. This action is being taken based upon the expectation that the total Cost of these two ships is well understood and low risk. The unusual procurement of twin lead. ships raises the risk that future design changes or production problems will impact two. ships under construction simultaneously. This could raise costs significantly compared to other lead ship programs. In 2004, the Navy proposed funding the procurement of the lead DDG-1000 destroyer and the lead Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) program in the Navy's research and development (R&D) account. Funding the procurement through the R&D account would permit them to be incrementally funded without violating the full funding policy. Congress, in acting on the Navy’s proposed FY2005 and FY2006 defense budgets, rejected the proposal. The Navy's proposed FY 2005 and FY 2006 defense budgets were rejected. development account, directed the Navy to fully fund the lead DDG-1000 in the Navy's ship-procurement account, and fully funded the two lead LCSs. Advance appropriations have not been used in Navy ship procurement, but have been used by other executive branch agencies to fund various programs. As a funding approach, it can be viewed as lying somewhere between traditional full funding and incremental funding. It is not to be confused with advance procurement (AP) funding, which is permitted under executive branch budget regulations. the lead ship in the class. Including DD/NRE costs in the procurement cost of the lead unit is a practice that is not followed by other DOD procurement programs. Shifting these costs to the R&D account would make Navy ship-procurement programs look more like DOD programs for things such as aircraft, ground vehicles, and missiles. Opponents could argue that NN/Nre work is more closely related to production than to research. The House Armed Services Committee, in its report, said the current practice makes these costs more visible to Congress. The Navy has proposed to fund lead ships through the Navy's research and development (R&D) account. This approach would permit both DD/NRE costs and the hands-on construction costs of lead ships to be funded incrementally while not violating the full funding policy. This option can be viewed as an intermediate approach that is between the current practice of fully fundingDD/Nre costs and incrementally funding both these costs in the R&D account. Supporters of this option could argue that DD/ NRE work is best viewed as the final stage of research and Development and should be funded as such. current ship-procurement funding practices. strengthen adherence to the full funding policy in ship procurement. increase the use of incremental funding. shift lead-ship detailed design/nonrecurring engineering (DD/NRE) costs to the Navy's research and development (R&D) account. Each of these is discussed below. The Navy could argue that using advance appropriations for aircraft carriers or large-deck amphibious assault ships, they could argue, creates a risk of increasing the procurement cost of other ships. in 2001 did not adopt advance appropriations as a mechanism for funding Navy ships. The House Appropriations Committee, in its report ( H.Rept. 107-298 of November 19, 2001) on the FY2002 defense appropriations bill, stated that it was dismayed that the Navy continues to advocate the use of alternative financing mechanisms to artificially increase shipbuilding rates. The report notes that Section 401 [of H.Con.Res. 95 ] reflects an overall limit on advance appropriations of $23.158 billion in fiscal year 2007. in FY2007 and FY2008 by $14 billion, to $37.393 billion. The amendment would also insert a new provision (Section 409) that would include the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account on a list of accounts identified for advance appropriations. The Senate passed S.Con.Res. 18 on March 17, 2005, and the amendment was ordered to lie on the table. This appendix discusses Navy and DOD ships that have been procured in recent years or are currently being procured using incremental funding. S.Amdt. 146 to S.Con.Res. 18 is the earlier Senate version of the budget resolution. The report includes the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account in the list of accounts identified for advance appropriations in the Senate.has been included in all previous limitations on advance Appropriations in past budget resolutions. It would amend Section 401 of S. Con. Res. 18 —the section that restricts use of advance appropriations — to increase the amount of advance Appropriations. In 2001, some Navy officials advocated the use of advance appropriations for Navy ship procurement. This funding approach is used by several federal agencies other than DOD. The Navy in 2001 apparently did not receive approval from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to use the approach for ship procurement, and did not officially propose its use as part of its FY2002 budget submission to Congress. Congress did not approve of the approach in 2001, and the Navy did not propose it in its FY 2002 budget submission. its policy and budget for these costs after the last ship was appropriated. The Committee finds this decision troubling. First, budgeting for such costs after procurement of the last vessel obscures the actual cost to procure each ship. The Congress approved the Navy's request for multiyear procurement authority in fiscal year 2002 assuming a level of savings to the taxpayer that are now not being realized. Most disconcerting about this change in policy and resultant budget request is the Navy’s assertion that if these costs were not incurred, the Navy would not need to spend the money. The Committee recommends providing the Navy financial management authorities that have previously been denied. This authority allows the Navy, through above threshold reprogramming procedures, to increase funding for programs experiencing unforeseen shortfalls. The Committee understands that in fiscal year 2006, the Navy expects to spend more than $1 billion on shipbuilding. The Navy is considering several options for controlling long-term costs. It is aware that the new Chief of Naval Operations [CNO] is actively reviewing shipbuilding programs and is consideringSeveral options. 2005 after exhausting the $100,000,000 of the transfer authority the Congress provided, the Navy sought to use dollars specifically appropriated for outfitting and post delivery to address funding shortfalls. The Committee is concerned about this change in Navy policy as it will only further obscure actual program costs. The new reprogramming authority is provided only with the understanding that this change will not be implemented in the future. The additional repprogramming authority essentially provides the Navy a reactive mechanism or approach to cost management. stabilize the production path, and in our view, reduce the per unit cost of ships and increase our shipbuilding rate. The committee does not agree that creative financing methodologies that delay recognizing the true cost of shipbuilding are responsible actions. Incremental funding, advanced procurement, multiyear procurement, and various creative shipyard work allocation arrangements have failed to control the cost growth of vessel classes such as the Virginia class submarine, the replacement amphibious assault ship (LHA(R) and the future major surface combatant ship (DD(X) Senate Appropriations Committee remains gravely concerned about the overall health and stability of Navy shipbuilding. Committee finds unanticipated cost overruns to be the root cause of much of the instability in the program. Until budget estimates become more realistic, requirements stabilize and penalties for non-compliance will be imposed.this ship class, to ensure an adequate budget is in hand before contract award." (Page 146) Senate In its report ( S.Rept. 109-141 of September 29, 2005) on H.R. 2863 , the Senate Appropriations Committee stated: The Committee is alarmed that the Navy would knowingly sign a multibillion dollar contract for ships that would be both non-operational and undeliverable unless additional dollars, outside the contract, were provided. The Committee directs the Secretary of the Navy to provide a detailed report of all the costs required to complete each of the remaining 11 ships and a rationale for such a contractual arrangement by December 1, 2005. Until the ships are funded, the Navy will not be able to meet its contractual obligations. natural disaster, or other impact arising from outside the Navy's shipbuilding program. (Page 180) Appendix B. Legislative Activity for FY2006 H.R. 1815 / P.L. 109-163 (FY2006 Defense Authorization Bill) House In its report ( H.Rept.109-89 of May 20, 2005) on H.r. 18 1515 , the House Armed Services Committee states: [Chief of Naval Operations] Admiral [Vernon] Clark, in his posture statement before the House Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Defense stated, "We need to partner with Congress and industry to regain our buying power"

ROUGE-1: 64.33, ROUGE-2: 60.47, ROUGE-L: 21.94
BERTScore: 58.17

==============================================
==================== [69/100] ====================
Summary:
QMU was that several steps in a nuclear weapon must all work for the weapon to function. Each step, or "gate" in QMU terminology, can be quantified. For example, a certain amount of energy must be transmitted to the secondary for it to detonate. Another QMU concept is margin. If the minimum amount of. energy needed to. detonate the secondary is X, and the amount needed to detonated the secondary. is Y, then the margin is X. of energy predicted to be transmitted to the secondary is 3X, then there is a margin of 2X, i.e., margin is the amount by which the predicted quantity exceeds the minimum required quantity. Did the calculation incorporate all relevant variables? Were there biases in experiments on which the calculations were based? Were the most relevant nuclear tests used as a data source? The uncertainty can be quantified through calculations (such as computer models); further, the amount of uncertainty is bounded because each gate has an upper and a lower. QMU provides three key concepts relevant to decisionmaking on pit manufacturing. Margin is the amount by which (1) space available for pit manufacturing exceeds (2) space required to manufacture 80 ppy. The degree of confidence at each gate is expressed as margin divided by uncertainty; the higher the number, the greater the confidence.limit. If margin exceeds uncertainty for a particular gate, then there can be confidence that the weapon will "pass through" that gate satisfactorily, and if margin exceeds. uncertainty for all gates, there is confidence that it will work.  uncertainty in QMU cannot be predicted or bounded, let alone quantified. Another means of maintaining margin, not shown in Figure 1 , is for Congress or NNSA to bar from PF-4 new missions that would consume MAR and space. It would not be acceptable to let uncertainties that materialize into actual events reduce margin below zero, as Figure 1 shows. The effects of these uncertainties on pit manufacturing can be calculated once they materialize, but the likelihood that they will come into being is uncertain. weapons complex has ample space and MAR for AC for 80 ppy. Uncertainty : Margins can change over time. The longer the timeframe, the more uncertainties can be expected to increase. Figure 1 shows hypothetical examples of uncertainties. Those in red could reduce margin, and those in green could increase it. The higher the uncertainty, the greater the risk of margin being reduced or increased in a given time period. The more uncertainties there are, the less margin margin can be calculated in advance. provide a positive margin. Non-feasible options would not merit further consideration. The next step would be to estimate the cost of the feasible options and decide which are affordable. These data are needed to eliminate unaffordable options. High cost has caused the demise of several nuclear weapons complex projects. Not shown in the figure is that MAR and space margins may change over time, as Figure 1. The final choice would be made by comparing those options against other possible criteria in order to make a final choice. would be difficult at best. The answer is also related to cost and equipment. Using two shifts per day, it might be possible to reach 80 ppy with equipment that would support 50 ppy on a single shift. A more costly option would be to increase the amount of equipment (and thus floor space used) to enable production of 80 with asingle shift. Would the capacity be held in standby mode most of the time, available for use as needed; operated for months or years at 80 p py for certain pit campaigns and held in low-rate production mode for. of space by allowing fewer pieces of equipment to produce a given amount of product, thereby reducing space requirements. Rocky Flats Plant, for example, generally operated using three shifts per day. On the other hand, a higher tempo for an extended period could increase operating cost, require more maintenance, reduce time available for maintenance, and increase the likelihood of equipment failure. Such options would almost surely be faster and less costly than major construction, but without data on space required for 80 ppy, it is not possible to know if they would. would provide an added measure of confidence in the study. What capacity is being sought? Is it 80 ppy, or 50 with a surge capacity to 80, or something else? What operating tempo is planned? Would manufacturing use 1 shift per day/5 days a week, 2 shifts per day, or operate 24/7? The answer is related to capacity. If the capacity sought is80 ppy using 3 shifts each day, a higher surge capacity would be needed. If it is 80 pPy using 3 hours a day, it would need to be at least 125 ppy. and to demonstrate for at least 90 days during 2027 the ability to manufacture WR pits at a rate of 80 per year. Some favor a capacity of greater than 80 ppy, while others argue that a lower number would suffice. The debate over that capacity would take on added salience to the extent that it moves within the realm of the military's range. The report focuses on how to achieve the high end of DOD's range because that is the high-end of its range. It is beyond the scope of this report. out of the Chemistry and Metallurgy Research building (described below), which became operational in 1952. While DOD has a requirement for up to 80 ppy, some key questions about how to manufacture at that rate remain not only unanswered but also unasked. Without answers to these questions, Congress cannot know whether existing buildings, without modifications, could manufacture 80 pPy; or if modest upgrades would suffice. If major construction would be needed to augment capacity, this report provides a framework for such construction. that could force a halt to pit manufacturing. One way to maintain enough margin to support a specified pit manufacturing capacity is to develop multiple means to counterbalance uncertainties that would reduce margin. Some means could be implemented promptly; others could be developed, held in reserve, and implemented only as needed. Having these means available for future deployment would add confidence that sufficient margin could be maintained. Determining how much MAR and space would be needed to manufacture 80 ppy would require an industrial process analysis. It appears that it would take over a decade to reach 80 ppy, and the path to that capacity is obscure. If the path becomes clearer, it would become more important to determine if 80 is the right number, or if it should be higher or lower. This report starts with a static approach to pit manufacturing, examining the history of pit manufacturing in the U.S. and around the world. It ends with a more dynamic approach, examining how pit manufacturing has changed over the years. that some lessons learned would lead to increased costs. What is the first module estimated to cost? The second? How sensitive is the cost of pit manufacturing to capacity, and what tradeoffs might a sensitivity analysis reveal? As a hypothetical example, if it cost an additional several billion dollars to move from 70 to 80 ppy, would it be worth spending the added money? Would it be less costly to move Pu-238 to INL, SRS, or a newly-built module? not, how much AC should be done there and how much at another site. Without data on such matters as building condition and cost for any required upgrades and equipment, it is not possible to determine the relative merits of the options. Figure 8 shows a notional decision sequence for downselecting pit manufacturing options. After defining options meriting consideration, the first question is, Which options are feasible? It would be simple to compare data on the required MAR and space, once they become available, against the amount ofMAR and space released by each option. staffing the new facility, and so on—of the move. A fourth option to release space would be to build one or more modules for lower-MAR activities now housed in PF-4. While these activities have a lower MAR level, they would still require Hazard Category 3-level facilities. Moving out these two activities would release about 6,800 square feet of lab space, 11% of the total. Some waste processing activities inPF-4 are also lower- MAR, but they would not be moved. drum storage, freeing space to house such laboratory-floor operations as nondestructive analysis, and some waste management operations. Move some equipment out of PF-4. For example, a gas gun, which propels a metal slug into a plutonium target to study how plutonium behaves under impact. The gas gun uses 1,200 sf of laboratory space inPF-4 and some basement space. Moving it to RLUOB (if that building's MAR were to be increased substantially) or to another site would release space. PF-4 to manufacture up to 30 ppy instead of 10; increased efficiencies of this type would reduce space requirements for 80 ppy, increasing margin. Develop equipment and processes for faster work flow so fewer pieces of equipment to manufacture a specified number of pits, reducing floor space. Repurpose unused space or space used for lower-priority programs, as discussed. Make more efficient use of PF-4's basement, which houses the nuclear materials vault and most utilities, and provides space for shipping and receiving and for staging waste drums. The space limit is absolute: 60,000 sf of laboratory space. The MAR limit is somewhat flexible, as various measures can increase it. If manufacturing 80 ppy requires more space than is available in PF-4, NNSA would need to find alternatives, whether building modules, moving some tasks to other sites, or reducing capacity to whatever level is needed. LANL is undertaking such projects, e.g., decontaminating some rooms that are no longer in use and "repurposing" them to make them available for pit manufacture. Figure 2 shows the 2012 allocation of space in PF-4 by program. The gray area, 4,700 square feet (sf), is available for immediate repurposing. It consists of laboratory rooms not currently in use. White areas represent non-laboratory areas. This analysis also applies to " MAR Options for PF- 4 ," below, and is not repeated there.promptly or held in reserve. For each, a decision would be needed on whether to proceed and, if so, when. rather than trying to build a "big box" plutonium building that would attempt to accommodate all foreseeable future needs. Others respond that modules could be costly and, if existing buildings can be used, may not be needed. Another option (not shown) would be to build one module for Pu-238 work or pit casting. This option would release some 5,000 sf in PF-4 in addition to the 4,700 sf available for repurposing. A third option would move Pu- 238 work from LANL to Savannah River Site (SRS) and Idaho National Laboratory (INL), have worked with Pu-238 and have stated that they have, or could modify, buildings to do this work. This option would result in 26,300 sf for pit work in PF-4. In determining the feasibility of this option, NNSA would need to evaluate space and MAR at other sites, as well as the costs—the move itself, repurposing PF- 4 space, refurbishing, reequipping, and. The cost of this project would be in the tens of millions of dollars. Pit fabrication occupies 12,000 sf. One option involves building one or more " modules," reinforced-concrete structures that would be buried near PF-4. modules would be designed for high-MAR tasks, such as casting plutonium into hemishells or working with Pu-238. LANL maintains that a key advantage of modules is that they would permit expansion of capacity on an as-needed basis. (Space for some other tasks, like Plutonium Recycle and Purification, would also support pit manufacturing.) much space would plutonium disposition require? While major construction could make more space available, increasing efficient use of existing space could increase the space margin. LANL is currently redesigning the existing pit fabrication space in PF-4. The process line was intended as a pilot plant to develop, quickly, techniques for resuming production. It was not intended as the nation's pit production site; other proposed facilities, such as the Modern Pit Facility, were to fill that role. It could be done in several ways, including: Designing work flow to minimize space utilization. work on plutonium and can manufacture pits. Unused space therefore represents opportunity for plutonium work forgone. Would moving the entire Pu-238 line, 9,600 sf, to another site have the same result? Or would the released space be needed to accommodate added equipment needed to manufacture 80 ppy? At present, RLUOB is permitted to have 26 grams of WGPu MAR for AC, which is not nearly enough to perform the AC for 80 p py. If this limit remains in amount of MAR to the same scale as Table 1 and assumes that programs other than pit manufacturing use the MAR they used on February 27, 2013, for the foreseeable future. It shows that if the newly-available 800 kg PE of MAR and the unallocated MAR are both allocated to pit manufacturing and combined with the pit fabrication MAR, then 57.0% of the MAR in PF-4 would be available for pit work. (While the amount of MAR used by other tasks remains the same, the percentage of MAR they use is lower than in Table 1 because each task accounts for different amounts of MAR) 2 would have 6.5% as much. MAR available in PF-4 for pit manufacturing would increase to 62.5%. Option 2 would move the Pu-238 MAR contained in 5,000 sf ofPF-4 to one module. This option requires half as many modules as the first option. Under Option 2, pit fabrication would be allocated 72.4% of the 2,600 kg PE of MAR inPF-3. Under this option, the MAR available for repurposing would also be allocated to pit fabrication. Pu-238 is only a small fraction of PF-4's radioactive material by weight. It is so radioactive that it is allocated 40% of the MAR allowance, though it did not use that much on February 27, 2013. If adding 800 kg of MAR is not sufficient to support 80 ppy, at least three other options would release more MAR. For example, 91% of Pu-238 MAR was at one point concentrated in 5,000 sf of the 9,600 sf that Pu- 238 Programs occupy inPF-4. " Increasing MAR Margin Without Major Construction ." They proceed on an open-ended basis guided by results of continuing analyses. Once some additional upgrades are completed, PF-4's MAR allowance may revert to 2,600 kg or perhaps some other number. This analysis assumes a MAR allowance of 2, 600 kg PE and, as noted in the sidebar, uses space data from 2012. LANL points out thatPF-4, as the only U.S. building that is currently able to make pits, is essential to the entire nuclear weapons enterprise. and releases twice the MAR as Option 1. Option 3 (not shown) would move all Pu-238 work to INL or SRS. This would free up all the MAR, vs. 91% for Option 2. As with space, it may be possible to increase MAR margin without major construction. One approach is to strengthen PF-4 seismically to reduce the risk of building collapse through such steps as wrapping supporting columns in carbon fiber bonded with epoxy to strengthen them, anchoring them. As of 2012, 4,700 sf was available for immediate repurposing in PF-4. How much space is available now? Is that space, plus the 12,000 sf for pit fabrication, plus space for other pit-related tasks, enough to manufacture 80 ppy? Would one module release enough MAR and space inPF-4 for pit manufacture? If yes, would that be the case if pit casting were moved to the module, or if Pu-238 were move to the modules? be needed to manufacture 80 ppy; lay out production lines in PF-4 to accommodate that equipment while retaining space needed for other tasks; and calculate what MAR would result from this production line configuration. An extrapolation provides an upper bound: If a given amount of space and equipment can make 30 ppy, then three times those amounts could make 90 ppy. However, such a study is likely to find that less space and less space is needed. Adding complexity to the calculation, constraints imposed by room layout, facility layout, and process flows must be considered. other periods; operated at a steady rate, less than 80 ppy, to level out the workload; or operated at full capacity at all times. What programs could be moved out of PF-4 if necessary to create enough space or MAR, where would they go, what would the move cost, and who would pay? What is a reasonable tradeoff between cost and capacity? As a notional example, if LANL could manufacture 70 ppy using existing buildings and an operating cost of $500 million per year, but it would cost $1 billion per year. layout to manufacture 30 ppy would fully consume the space, and most of the MAR allowance, currently available in PF-4. Manufacturing 80 ppy will require more space and MAR than are currently available for that task. Further, updated seismic modeling results raised concerns that an earthquake might collapse or otherwise compromise the building, forcing a reduction in MAR from 2,600 kg PE to 1,800 kg PE. Various projects to increase seismic robustness have been underway for years; see the section for details. for 80 ppy, would it be less costly to perform the remaining AC at LLNL or at SRS? LANL is conducting projects to bolster the seismic robustness of PF-4. If 2,600 kg PE is not enough MAR, could additional projects raise the MAR allowance enough to accommodate manufacture of 80 p py? LANl maintains that each successive module should cost less than the one before it. On the other hand, it is possible to increase the MAR from 1,800 to 2, 600 kg PE (or more or less) Current 12,000 sf in PF-4 available for pit fabrication is enough to fabricate 30 ppy once certain upgrades have been completed. Space needed for 80 ppy would not increase linearly with capacity. Even calculating the amount of space for equipment is not linear. If one piece can support 40 ppy, then 80 p py would require two such pieces, but if one piece suffices to support 30 p py, then80 ppy will require three pieces.expects these modules would be comparable in cost to Hazard Category-2 modules. space and MAR in PF-4? If not, what can be done to provide it? Decision 2: Once enough margin for space and margin for MAR are provided for pit manufacturing, what steps can be taken to maintain these margins over decades in the face of uncertainties? Decision 3: For AC, space and MAR available across the nuclear weapons complex exceed space andMAR required by a considerable amount, so margin is not an issue. Instead, the issue is how much AC should be done at LANL and how much, if any, AC should been done at other sites. and MAR required to manufacture 80 ppy. Available space and MAR figures would probably need to be updated. LANL (and perhaps other sites) has computer models and other resources needed to perform these calculations. AC also has space andMAR requirements but, as discussed in " Options for Analytical Chemistry ," margins are not at issue because the nuclear plant is so large.. Congress would be in a better position to determine which options would free enough space and. MAR in PF-4 to manufacture. space and MAR suitable for AC. This capacity resides at several buildings in the complex, including Building 332 at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) and Building 773-A at SRS. Each of these facilities would apparently have enough floor space and MAR allowance to conduct the AC needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy. PF-4 might perform some additional AC for higher-MAR work, such as sample preparation (which takes several-gram samples from larger pieces of plutonium) and certain analyses. Space and MAR requirements for manufacturing 80 ppy have never been calculated rigorously, though they could be. Comparing space and MAR required vs. available would show whether there is enough space andMAR at the moment. Over time, various factors will affect availability and requirements. While few of these factors can be predicted, this report discusses ways to offset any adverse effects from them. In addition, decisions will be needed the available space could accommodate. This section considers options that might make the needed space and Mar available. A study would need to take into account that there are many ways to make more space or MAR available. A piece of equipment that could support manufacture of 300 ppy would suffice for any number less than 300, whether 10, 30, or 80. This detailed analysis would be needed to determine whether enough MAR allowance and space could be made available. The study would also need to consider ways to reduce space orMAR requirements, thereby increasing margin, as discussed under " Space Options for PF-4 " and " MAR Options forPF-4 ."  LANL has provided data from which this report calculated how much MAR and space various options would make available. The data, however, cannot indicate which options, if any, would provide enough margin because data on space and MAR requirements are also needed to calculate margin. Congress would need data on MAR margin, space margin, and cost for various pit manufacturing options in order to best determine which options are feasible and affordable. The following questions highlight how these data could support decisionmaking. Once certain seismic upgrades are completed, is there expected to be enough MAR margin for PF-4 to accommodate the added MAR needed to manufacture 80 ppy? LNL has examined space and MAR needed to fabricate 80 ppy in a preliminary fashion. LANL has not performed a detailed analysis of the full pit manufacturing process, including plutonium supply, waste management, AC, external support activities, and fabrication. To enable calculation of margin, Congress would need to obtain two numbers. Congress may choose to direct NNSA to provide these twoNumbers. Once these numbers become available, Congress could face three decisions: For pit manufacturing, is there currently enough margin for space andMAR in PF-4? If not, what would Congress do? the space and MAR margins for 80 ppy once current projects in PF-4 that will increase permitted MAR and make more space available are completed. This static approach provides a baseline and metrics to indicate whether margin is ample, minimal, or insufficient. Next, the report takes a dynamic approach, noting that uncertainties could affect margin and how they might be offset. Finally, it considers analytical chemistry requirements. This approach leads to three decisions Congress may choose to consider: Decision 1: For pit manufacturing, is there currently enough margin for pit manufacturing? Congress remains deeply involved in efforts to increase pit production capacity. Section 3114 of H.R. 4435 would require NNSA to produce 30 WR pits per year during 2023, at least 50 during 2026. In its report on S. 2410 , the FY2015 defense authorization bill, the Senate Armed Services Committee directed N NSA to include construction of modules, which would support an exit from a 1950s-era era of plutonium production. In 2014, an NNSA document changed the date for achieving a 30-ppy capacity to "by 2026," and a 2014 Department of Energy document stated, "Current plans call for pit production capability of 50-80 pits peryear by FY 2030" NNSA anticipates manufacturing a few pits a year in the near future to prepare to manufacture WR pits. The schedule for ramping up pit production is uncertain. A Department of Defense (DOD) official stated in 2013 that there is no daylight between the Department of Energy and the Defense on the need for a near-term pit manufacturing capacity of 10 to 20 and then 30 by 2021, and then in the longer term for a capacity of 50 to 80 per year.previous WR build of W88 pits was completed in FY2011. The U.S. has no plans to build a pit facility. PF-4, which opened for operations in 1978, is the last plutonium processing building to come online. As of June 2014, NNSA had the capacity to produce up to 450 ppy of plutonium. NNSA has no immediate plans to increase production of plutonium to that level, however. The agency has no current plans to produce more than 125 ppy at any one time, though it has the capability to produce as much as 500 ppy. The House Appropriations Committee recommended a substantial increase in funding. Use of retired pits in life extension programs would reduce the number of new pits that would have to be manufactured. The committee also recommended $35.7 million for moving certain activities at LANL by 2019. It would be a separate line item in the FY2016 budget "to add additional visibility into the process," the committee said in a report. The report was published by the Center for American Progress, a nonprofit that promotes free and open dialogue. U.S. policy is not to build new-design nuclear weapons for new missions. Some argue that the capacity to manufacture new pits may be needed to extend the service life of certain existing weapons. Increasing manufacturing capacity would require more equipment, more space, and more MAR. Finding enough space and MAR for AC should be simpler than for pit manufacture. More options are readily available to meet requirements for AC than for Pit manufacture.. The Department of Energy's Rocky Flats Plant produced between 1,000 and 2,000 pits per year at the height of the Cold War. Rocky Flats manufactured as many as 2,000 pits per year (ppy) In 1989, armed agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Environmental Protection Agency raided Rocky Flats to investigate suspected environmental crimes. DOE first suspended pit production later that year, subsequently halted it permanently, and eventually dismantled the plant and remediated the site. Congress and the Administration searched for many years for a way to make pits. NNSA proposed a two-track strategy. In one track, Plutonium Facility 4 (PF-4), the main plutonium building at Los Alamos National. Laboratory (LANL) (NM), would house a pilot plant to develop pit production processes and manufacture a small number of pits. It took until 2007 for LANL to make its first "war reserve" pits, i.e., those certified for use in the stockpile. In that year, LANL made 11 such pits, the highest number since 1989. The second track involved a facility with the capacity to make pits on an industrial scale, on the order of 100 or more ppy. manufacture about 10 non-war reserve pits per year in PF-4. War reserve (WR) pits are those judged acceptable for use in the nuclear stockpile. Other pits are manufactured for such purposes as development or process qualification. With most work atPF-4 halted in June 2013, the actual manufacturing rate in June 2014 was zero for pits of any type; work is resuming at the end of June 2014. Since there was no requirement to manufacture WR pits, some processes needed to certify pits as WR had been suspended after the halt. In 1992, the United States began a moratorium on nuclear testing that continues to the present. An issue became how to demonstrate confidence in the safety and reliability of these weapons. One approach, developed by LANL and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), was Quantification of Margins and Uncertainties, or QMU. This section describes that approach, then modifies it to make it applicable to pits. The idea underlying QMU is that nuclear weapons can be maintained without testing. Pit fabrication casts "hemishells" (half-pits) of plutonium, machines them to remove excess material, and welds two together to form a pit. Pit manufacturing also involves such supporting tasks as purifying plutonium for use in pits, certification to ensure that finished pits meet required standards, material control and accountability; waste management; and analytical chemistry. For background, see CRS Report R43406, U.S. Nuclear Weapon "Pit" Production Options for Congress. On the other hand, AC to analyze process problems requires fast turnaround to minimize the time the process is shut down. Increasing the amount of plutonium would require adding electrorefining furnaces, increasing space requirements. Since the United States no longer produces plutonium, all U.S. plutonium is "old," such as from retired pits. As plutonium decays, it produces other elements, such as uranium and americium. These must be removed by chemical processes to purify plutonium for use in new pits. Pit fabrication requires extensive AC for every pit. AC supports other pit manufacturing tasks, and non-pit tasks as well. The building at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) that currently performs AC to support pit manufacture and many other plutonium tasks is in poor shape and not seismically robust. DOE wants to halt work there by 2019, so one or more other facilities will be needed. Laboratory floor space , or "space," is needed for pit fabrication. Laboratory buildings have space for corridors, offices, etc., but not floor space. AC involves little MAR because it uses tiny samples, such as a few milligrams of plutonium dissolved in a small amount of acid. AC involves much more space per unit MAR than does pit fabrication because each laboratory instrument is housed in a glovebox or hood that might occupy a lot of space. Anchoring gloveboxes more strongly to the floor to reduce the likelihood that an earthquake would knock them over, exposing plutonium to the air, in which case a fire could generate plutonium oxide particles and release them into the atmosphere. Analytical Chemistry (AC) analyzes plutonium samples taken from each pit at various stages in its manufacture. AC measures the isotopic composition of the plutonium and the amount of alloying materials and impurities a sample contains. AC typically uses samples on the order of milligrams. Before a pit type can be accepted into the stockpile, it must be certified as acceptable for war reserve use. This involves validating weapons codes, among other things. Validation, in turn, draws on experimental data. PF-4 prepares test items for experiments at the Nevada National Security Site that do not produce a nuclear yield. PF-4 supports some of these experiments, such as by preparing samples for analytical chemistry and materials characterization. MC measures bulk properties of plutonium such as tensile strength, magnetic susceptibility, grain structure, and surface characteristics. MC typically uses samples on the order of a fraction of a gram to measure these bulk properties. For more information, visit www.pf-4.data. Pit Fabrication involves casting "hemishells" (half-pits) of plutonium. ARIES converts excess pits to plutonium oxide (a powder) and places it in special containers for long-term storage. MR&R examines containers of plutonium in PF-4 that are to be sent to WIPP for permanent disposition. If the containers have deteriorated, MR& R repackages the plutonium in new containers.tens of grams of plutonium per kilogram of material. finished pit with x-ray imaging, physical measurements, etc., to ensure it meets specifications. Pits are monitored at Pantex Plant (TX) and PF-4.PF-4 monitoring techniques include taking physical measurements and checking for release of gases that may indicate deterioration of the pit. While Pantex can perform some of these tasks, pits can be disassembled only. The NNSA and its predecessor organizations have monitored the condition of nuclear weapons using a variety of techniques since the beginning of the nuclear weapons program. "Material At Risk" (MAR) is "the amount of radioactive materials … available to be acted on by a given physical stress" It is material that could be released by a disaster, such as an earthquake that collapses a building followed by a fire. Each building that works with plutonium has a building-specific MAR allowance. MAR is expressed in units of plutonium equivalent. Plutonium is the fissile material in pits. Four forms are relevant here: Plutonium-239 (Pu-239) Pu-239 is the fissile isotope in pits. pits contain other plutonium isotopes in addition to Pu-239. That mixture is called weapons-grade plutonium (WGPu) Since some of the other isotopes are more radioactive than Pu- 239, WGPu is about 1.5 times as radioactive as Pu-238. It is relevant to pit manufacturing options because 40% of the MAR allowance in PF-4 is allocated to Pu.238. Moving some or all Pu- 238 work out ofPF-4, the main pit manufacturing tool. Pu-238 is the heat source for radioisotope power systems (RPS) for space probes. It is manufactured by bombarding rods of neptunium-237 with neutrons in a nuclear reactor. It undergoes radioactive decay much more rapidly than does Pu-239, producing uranium and other impurities. PF-4 receives Pu-238, removes the impurities through chemical processes, and makes plutonium oxide, which it presses into capsules. It mates some capsules with other equipment to make RPSs for military applications. capsules to Idaho National Laboratory, which does the same to make RPSs for space probes. Plutonium Recycle and Purification (PR&P): This area recovers plutonium from scrap plutonium (such as from lathe turnings, pits scrapped for not meeting standards, or retired pits) Plutonium is then precipitated out of solution as plutonium oxalate, and is then roasted to produce plutonium oxide. This area also recovers and purifies plutonium using high-temperature chemical processes. PF-4 uses 10,400 sf for plutonium recycle and purification. How much plutonium could that area purify per year? How many ppy would that capacity support? How much more space would be needed to provide plutonium for 80 ppy? Alternatively, could these processes be moved to another site, such as Savannah River Site? Pit fabrication generates some plutonium scraps. Providing for recycle of this plutonium requires space, and producing 80 p py would require more space than 30. How Plutonium Recycle and Purification (PRP) uses aqueous (plutonium dissolved in acid) processes and molten processes to recover pure plutonium from scrap or from retired pits by chemically removing impurities. This option would move about 198 kg of MAR out of PF-4. Module 1 would have 1.5% as much MAR asPF-4 and Module 2 would house molten plutonium from Pit Fabrication and from PRP. (This would eliminate PRP within PF- 4.) support 80 ppy; this would be "RLUOB Equipment Installation 2," or REI-2. The other involves decontaminating some rooms, removing some old gloveboxes, and installing new materials characterization (MC) equipment; this is "Plutonium Equipment Installation," or PEI. PEI would support MC, and relates to plutonium physics. A separate activity, not part of the CMRR project, is removing excess special nuclear materials from the storage vault in PF-4, work that has been underway for some years. plutonium building at LANL, would make MAR and space available for other purposes. In PF-4, MAR is measured in units of plutonium equivalent (PE), which is about 1.38 times as radioactive as Pu-239. This measure is linked to potential dose if plutonium is released, such as by an earthquake and fire. It is the only building in the U.S. with the combination of attributes required to make pits: high security, pit fabrication equipment, and the ability to handle high-MAR processes. needed may be evolving due to changing programmatic requirements for plutonium. The scope of the additional work being requested is consistent with the original mission need to provide analytic chemistry and material characterization space in a different facility than the legacy CMR building. PF-4 reconfiguration activities are also appropriate to be conducted as part of the original CMR Replacement project so long as they are limited to re-equipping lab space. Construction of new modular facilities and installation of equipment withinPF-4 to establish enhanced pit production capabilities are also needed. wall more strongly to the ceiling, installing braces that tie columns to beams, building shear walls, and installing a drag strut on the roof of PF-4 (see Figure 5 ). Other steps could reduce the risk that plutonium would escape even ifPF-4 collapsed. plutonium escaping in an accident causes dose, and dose is the key factor in determining the amount of MAR permitted. Removing tons of combustible material from production areas could also reduce plutonium escape risk in the event of a building collapse. An annual review of margin and potential factors that could affect it. Candidates include LANL, another lab or plant in the nuclear weapons complex, NNSA, DOD, or an independent group like the National Academy of Sciences or the JASON defense advisory group. Since LANL is intimately familiar with PF-4, it could be argued that it should do the report. On the other hand, LANL could be perceived as having a conflict of interest. An annual review might be useful to have an annual review. independent group would not have this potential conflict of interest. LANL and LLNL are both nuclear weapon design laboratories, so LLNL's expertise would be of use in evaluating a LANL study. Since the two labs have often competed for projects and have a reputation as "friendly adversaries," involving LLNL involving LANL could be a good idea. The study could be prepared by LANL or peer-reviewed by LLNL. It could also be done jointly by the two laboratories or by a third party. testing, held that peer review is essential in developing or maintaining weapons. A second site could accommodate a surge in AC needs or provide a backup in case AC operations at LANL were suspended or disrupted. It might cost more to perform AC at two sites rather than one, but it would be better for the U.S. to have two sites instead of just one. The U.N. Secretary-General has called for the creation of a second site for plutonium AC testing, which would be based at a different location. A second site would necessitate shipping many plutonium samples per year from LANL to another site. It might be beneficial to have all plutonium AC technicians at one site so they would have the same training and operate according to the same formal and informal procedures. Concentrating as much plutonium work as possible at LANL would strengthen its position as the nation's plutonium center. While SRS and LLNL could both do this work, their facilities presumably have the facilities to do it.one, though it is impossible to know without the data. For example, LANL is validating an AC system that may require a sample size of 1.5 mg of WGPu instead of 225 mg. Not at issue is that LANL would need the capability to perform all AC tasks even if it did not have the capacity to perform AC for 80 ppy. The case for having a second site perform some of the AC needed for 80ppy while maintaining the full suite is not clear. The issue is whether all AC should be done at LANL and, if not, how much AC should been done there and how much at another site.  LANL would gain little if any technical competence by conducting AC for 80 ppy vs., say, 40. It may be difficult to provide enough MAR and floor space at LANL for the AC. LANL and a second site could cross-check the accuracy of each other's AC measurements and processes from time to time. LNL and LLNL have for decades, since before the end of nuclear. LLLNL and RLUOB have a long history of working together. L LLNL and LLUOB work together regularly.  module might free up enough MAR but not enough space for 80 ppy, or that moving Pu-238 programs to another site would suffice. (Other factors may enter into feasibility as well, such as the condition of a building.) But without data for space and MAR needed to manufacture 80 p py, one cannot know which options are infeasible, which provide excess capacity and thus entail excess cost, and which are "just right" Regarding AC, the discussion shows that there are multiple options to provide AC capacity, and highlights the issue of whether all AC should be done at LANL and, if so, where. this latter number be much reduced if the samples were all analyzed at LANL? What turnaround time would be required for samples moved onsite or shipped offsite? The time required to receive AC results would be needed in order to estimate the number of gloveboxes and temporary storage locations. The analysis would need to take into account that most AC is done on a confirmatory basis, i.e., manufacturing proceeds on the assumption that AC results will confirm that samples are within specifications. Such AC is not time-sensitive. is so small. NNSA calculated that RLUOB, with 400 grams WGPu, could likely be operated as HC-3 without significant facility modifications. Because of modern building features, the dose from the increased material in a worst-case accident would still be below the dose thresholds set by DOE Orders. Operating RLU OB as an HC-2 facility would not require congressional approval. Instead, congressional oversight would come through the normal reviews associated with the normal review process for such facilities. If the MAR limit for RLUOB is increased to 400 grams of WGPu for AC, how much more MAR and space, if any, would be needed for AC at LLNL or SRS? If the 26-gram limit is retained for R LUOB, would it be less costly to perform the remaining AC atLLNL or at SRS. What would it cost to enable RLU OB to hold 400 grams W GPu? How much more space would it take to perform remaining AC? Radiological Facilities do not require stringent safety or security measures because the dose to onsite or offsite personnel in the event of a worst-case accident would be very low. NNSA considered several options for raising the MAR limit in RLUOB. One option was to retrofit the building by adding various safety upgrades to make it HC-3 at the highest level (1760 grams WGPu). That option would have been costly and time-consuming and was not necessary for conducting AC work required. offsite personnel that a worst-case accident could be expected to cause. There are myriad other regulations, all of which come together in a document called a Documented Safety Analysis, or DSA. While each building in the Hazard Category system requires a DSA, a Radiological Facility, such as RLUOB, does not because the amount of radioactive material in the building is not considered a hazard. The DSA is tailored to each building and specifies the amount the building can hold and still remain below the dose thresholds set by DOE Orders. This report presents three key decisions and an approach to help structure them. It focuses on two metrics: the amount of two facility resources (laboratory floor space and Material At Risk (MAR), discussed next) available for pit manufacturing. It shows that it is not known whether available amounts suffice. While NNSA has extrapolated space, it has not determined how much will be needed to meet the needs of the pit industry. It also raises the possibility that Congress may choose to direct NNSA to generate the data needed to answer these questions. Most pit-related AC is performed in the CMR building. NNSA plans to halt programmatic operations there "in approximately 2019" Producing 80 ppy would require additional AC, as AC must be performed for each pit. N NSA plans to achieve a 30-ppy capacity by FY2026, so work currently done in CMR would have to be performed elsewhere.dozen square feet of space. Many analyses must be done for each individual pit. The number of instruments and their housing increase in tandem with manufacturing capacity. The Radiological Laboratory-Utility-Office Building (RLUOB, pronounced "rulob") was completed in FY2010. It is configured for AC. NNSA plans that RLUOB would house AC equipment needed to support pit manufacture, and possibly enough to support manufacture of 80 ppy. The building is "genuinely decrepit" and "structurally unsound," in the words of two studies, and is much more vulnerable to collapse in an earthquake than more recent buildings. a higher plutonium limit, if properly equipped, could likely conduct all the AC needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy. NNSA further found that RLUOB would have sufficient space for the needed equipment. The planning for this approach will be conducted by personnel from NNSA headquarters (including the Office of Defense Programs) and Los Alamos National Laboratory over the summer and fall of 2014 to understand the costs and benefits of this approach. A Radiological Facility like RLU OB would be a good place to start. different capacities and would require different upgrades to support whatever level of AC was required. Data on the MAR and space requirements, and the cost of the LANL, LLNL, and SRS options, would be needed to provide a basis for decision. The option of having LLNL or SRS conduct a substantial fraction of the AC needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy must be evaluated in light of a revised path forward for AC that NNSA developed in June 2014. Based on an initial analysis by Los Alamos National Laboratory, NNSA determined that the combination of PF-4 and RLUOB withPF-4 would be the best solution. Having 9 kg of plutonium in CMR, as at present, poses a much greater risk than having 400 grams in RLUOB. If NNSA is able to implement its path forward, LANL could perform all the AC needed to support manufacture of up to 80 ppy. In that case, the key question for AC would be how much, if any, AC one or more sites other than LANL should perform. The foregoing discussion shows how much additional AC is needed to meet NNSA's needs. the Chemistry and Metallurgy Research Replacement (CMRR) line item construction project. CMRR-Nuclear Facility (NF) was "deferr[ed] … for at least five years" in the FY2013 budget request on cost grounds. NNSA plans to include funds for two subprojects in the C MRR line itemConstruction project beginning with the FY2016 request. One is adding new AC equipment to RLUOB so it can perform AC to the nuclear plant's reactor. RTBF Construction, using the CMRR line item to fund these projects is consistent with the committee's recommendation: 04-D-125, Chemistry and Metallurgy Research (CMR) Replacement Project, LANL. The Committee recommends $35,700,000, instead of providing funds for these activities under Program Readiness as in the budget request. While the capacity and amount of process equipment is the same, the funding levels are different. This approach is consistent. with the Committee's previous direction to the NNSA to carry out all CMR replacement activities in accordance with DOE Order 413.3B, rather than within operations funding. NNSA to perform all the tasks planned for CMRR-NF, the cost of which was projected in the FY2012 budget request to be between $3,710 million and $5,860 million. NNSA requested FY2015 funds for the AC and MC subprojects as part of the Program Readiness component of Readiness in Technical Base and Facilities. While there are no cost estimates for NNSA's path forward, it would cost substantially less than CMRr-NF because it would avoid building a large plutonium facility. not sufficiently related to the original mission need of the existing project, and the Committee does not support the inclusion of these activities as subprojects within the existing CMR replacement project. REI-2 and PEI would also permit NNSA to exit the CMR building, a long-time goal of NNSA. CMR was built to the seismic standards of the late 1940s, so it is much more vulnerable to collapse in an earthquake than is RLUOB. Studies have found it to be "decrepit" and "structurally unsound" Congress has been deeply involved for decades in setting policy, providing funding, and supporting or rejecting programs for the nuclear weapons enterprise. For example, it established the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), a semi-autonomous component of the Department of Energy. It also rejected a major facility to manufacture a key nuclear weapon component. It initiated and later rejected the Reliable Replacement Warhead; and directed NNSA, the Government Accountability Office, and others to conduct studies on nuclear weapon issues. One RTBF is NNSA's program for operating the nuclear weapons complex and maintaining its infrastructure. Within PF-4, RTBF space is used for functions that support multiple programs, such as shipping and receiving, waste management, and material control and accountability. NNSA operates the weapons complex from a base in Virginia, Virginia, which is home to the U.S. Navy's F/A-18 Hornet aircraft carrier. The F/E-18 is based in Virginia and is part of the Navy's P-4 fleet.

ROUGE-1: 83.05, ROUGE-2: 76.53, ROUGE-L: 23.73
BERTScore: 51.61

==============================================
==================== [70/100] ====================
Summary:
The Alternate Access to Station (AAS) study contracts were awarded in July 2002, with 1-year contracts given to four contractors. In summer 2003, these contractors presented architectures that relied on existing domestic or international expendable launch vehicles. In the fall of 2003, the contracts were extended, and the contractors were asked to address larger cargo delivery capabilities and “downmass” requirements. The responses are being evaluated, and NASA plans to seek more detailed information from the commercial launch industry for additional study or development work in June 2005. could be performed by or complemented with commercial launch vehicles later this decade. NASA outlined a number of technical challenges to using an alternate vehicle for space station support, especially for assembly missions where the space shuttle’s crew and remote manipulator arm perform key functions. NASA officials stated they used the AAS study, which concentrated solely on logistics support missions, as the foundation for its 2004 informal assessment. In a summary of that study, NASA reported that the Aas contractors projected the cost to develop. NASA is currently evaluating responses from commercial industry on different ways to provide logistics services to and from the space station. NASA received 26 responses from a September 2004 request for information that asked for, among other things, input from the commercial space industry. NASA officials agreed there is an opportunity to perform a more comprehensive assessment of alternatives, especially for the logistics missions late this decade. The agency is examining configurations of the space. station that meet the needs of the new vision and the international partners with as few space. shuttle flights as necessary. steps to pursue a deliberate alternative cargo transportation system assessment. NASA should not limit documentation of this effort to the acquisition strategy meeting, but should also document the decision paths leading up to that event. This approach should identify the decision makers involved and provide a fully documented rationale of the acquisition processes. NASA analyzes all alternatives to determine the best options for delivering the logistics cargo for space station operations. As agreed, NASA’s comments are reprinted in appendix II. Unless otherwise noted, all comments are from NASA. NASA conducted a detailed assessment of alternatives to the space shuttle for completing assembly and providing logistics support to the International Space Station. We obtained and analyzed pertinent NASA documents and briefing slides related to the ISS, space shuttles, and other launch alternatives, such as Expendable Launch Vehicles. We also analyzed NASA documents, including: European Space Agency Segment Specifications for the Automated Transfer Vehicle; Specification for the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. We looked at space station and space shuttle status, history, and cost briefings; Return to Flight Status Briefings; and, Alternate Access. NASA plans to document its acquisition strategy through a NASA Headquarters Acquisition Strategy Meeting. NASA said it will evaluate the cost and capabilities of the proposed transportation system to meet space station and agency needs, as well as the needs of its partners. We are encouraged that NASA has taken this step in conjunction with its retirement planning for the space shuttle. NASA also said that its acquisition. strategy will be consistent with space station requirements, international partner agreements, and. available funding. The agency will release a request for proposal for commercial space station cargo services later this summer. available not later than 2009 and that these services are a key element in the future of the space station program. In addition to lacking sufficient knowledge with regard to the use of alternatives for logistics missions, NASA did not document the proceedings and decisions reached in its 2004 assessment. The agency did not record the processes it followed and therefore did not capture the basis of the decisions reached. When asked about the details of the assessment, NASA officials indicated that the informal assessment was based primarily on the expertise within the headquarters. A thorough analysis of alternatives is an important aspect in the formulation of a program technical. NASA uses a formal method that compares alternatives by estimating their ability to satisfy mission requirements and their life cycle costs. The results of these two analysis are used together to produce a cost-effectiveness comparison that allows decision-makers to assess cost and effectiveness simultaneously. An analysis ofalternatives broadly examines multiple elements of program alternatives (including technical performance, risk, life cycle cost, and programmatic aspects), and is typically an important part of the formulation studies. an alternate launch capability would be approximately $1 billion, take 3 to 5 years to develop, and require $2 to $3 billion per year for operations. Since a majority of the space station assembly missions are scheduled within the next 3 years, these types of missions could preclude the use of an alternative vehicle. NASA did not have sufficient knowledge to conclude that the shuttle was the best option for logistics missions prior to its retirement under review. Several of the shuttle’s final flights are planned logistics support missions that might be conducted using alternative launch vehicles. launch vehicles would present operational risks, technical challenges, and long program delays. NASA did not perform a comparative cost analysis that considered the schedule impacts or associated costs of the shuttle in 2010. NASA officials stated that the technical challenges for developing an alternative vehicle could be overcome, but probably not before the 28 missions scheduled through 2010. We found no evidence of analyses performed by NASA to compare the cost and schedule impact of using alternate launch systems with the scheduled space shuttle program costs, to include the cost of returning the space shuttle to flight. Food, potable water, as well as propellant resupply for reboosting the space station to higher orbits. Launches of space station assembly elements and large orbital replacement items for maintenance have effectively ceased. NASA performed two studies that focused on the potential use of commercial launch vehicles to provide logistics services. In a 90-day study conducted in 2000, NASA determined that no commercial logistics service for the space space station was possible at that time. No launch vehicles possessed the critical capabilities necessary to providing logistics services, including automated rendezvous capabilities. of service as soon as assembly of the International Space Station is completed, planned for the end of the decade. In essence, NASA’s implementation plan holds aeronautics, science, and other activities at near constant levels and transitions funding currently dedicated to the space station and space shuttle programs to the new exploration strategy. The vision also changed the space stations’ on-board research focus. Originally, the space Station was to be used to conduct research on a variety of subjects. Under the new vision, the research will be focused on determining the effects of long duration space travel on humans and developing countermeasures. The space station research necessary to support human explorers on other worlds would be complete by 2016. According to program officials, NASA’s 2004 informal assessment concluded that alternative alternative plans were not viable. The new vision calls for the space station to be used for life sciences research on how humans adapt to long durations in space, biomedical research, and materials-processing research. had not been fully developed. In fact, NASA officials stated that they did not compare estimated costs for developing alternative launch vehicles against budget estimates for the 28 space shuttle flights currently planned to support the space station. NASA has also requested $1.8 billion for crew and cargo services over the same time frame to purchase commercial services using existing and emerging capabilities, both domestic and foreign. However, we were told these services would not eliminate any of the scheduled space Shuttle flights, but only augment the capabilities of the space shuttle. study ended in January 2004 with the contractors briefing on their study results. NASA concluded that developing a domestic capability to meet most of the space station cargo service needs was possible within 3 to 5 years. In January 2004, the President announced a new Vision for Exploration that called for retiring the shuttle in 2010, requiring NASA to find an alternative to support space station operations through 2016 by the end of the decade. The President called for a shift in NASA’s long-term focus, envisioning that NASA will retire the space shuttle after nearly 30 years. The Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle (HTV) is scheduled to be available in 2008 and will fly within the proximity of the space station to be caught by the station’s robotic arm. The ATV and HTV also carry less cargo than the shuttle. A carrier to go inside the new transfer vehicle to replicate the space shuttle attach points would need to be developed in order to meet volume requirements, according to officials. The HTV is being designed to rendezvous and dock to the space. station via the Russian Service Module. The space shuttle launch environment, with respect to vibration and g-force exerted on the payload, cannot be duplicated on an expendable launch vehicle. A new, unique transfer vehicle would need to be developed in order to rendezvous and dock assembly elements with the space station. Two transfer vehicles are currently being developed for logistics mission to support space station operations, the European Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicles (HTV) These vehicles, much like the Russian Progress vehicle, have a limited cargo capability. NASA plans to return the shuttle to flight in July 2005. While the shuttle has been grounded, space station crew transfers and logistics resupply have depended on Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles. Europe and Japan are also developing logistics cargo vehicles to support space station operations later this decade. These Russian, European, and Japanese vehicles are launched on expendable rockets. The European Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) is scheduled to be launched in 2010. It will be launched on an expendable rocket. NASA and its international partners are building the space station to serve as an orbiting research facility. The space shuttle is the primary vehicle supporting the assembly and resupply of the station. Figure 1 shows the Space Shuttle Endeavour docked to the International Space Station. Following the Columbia accident in February 2003, the NASA Administrator grounded the space shuttle fleet pending an investigation into the cause of the accident. The administrator appointed the Columbia Accident Investigation Board to determine the cause and to make recommendations for improving the safety of the space Shuttle. designed and built to take advantage of the more benign launch environment in the space shuttle’s cargo bay. The following outlines the major challenges NASA identified. There would be a need to develop a new process to assemble the space station. Using another launch vehicle would require the redesign and retesting of space station elements already built due to the weight of the vehicle. The space station would be connected together by the space Shuttle crew during space walk activities. It would be assembled using only the space Station crew and without the benefit of the spaceshuttle remote manipulator arm. To accomplish our work, we visited and interviewed officials at NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C.; Johnson Space Center, Texas; and Kennedy Space Center,. These centers were chosen because they maintain primary responsibility for conducting space shuttle and space station operations on a day-to-day basis. Reviewed previous GAO reports on NASA, the Space Shuttle Program, International Space Station Program, and best practices in many areas and multiple agencies. Also reviewed reports from the Congressional Budget Office, Congressional Research Service, Office of Management and Budget, and the Planetary Society. the launch vehicles. We interviewed contractors at Boeing Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Space Systems. We reviewed pertinent documentation related to expendable launch vehicles for space station assembly and logistics support. We also reviewed NASA’s request for information related to commercial industry interest in providing that capability. We received, reviewed, and analyzed follow-up follow-ups to our original questions and concerns about the space station program. For this, we interviewed NASA officials within the Space Operations Mission Directorate and at Johnson Space Center, Texas. at Kennedy Space Center. We also visited the Boeing Launch Services, Inc., in Huntington Beach, California, and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Boeing Commercial Space Systems in Research Park, Huntsville, Alabama; and Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company in Littleton, Colorado. We conducted our work from August 2004 through April 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. According to NASA officials involved in the 2004 assessment, accommodating a transition to other launch vehicles would create significant challenges that drive risk, schedule, and costs. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV. To determine whether. you publicly announce the contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 15 days from its issue date. At that time, we will send copies to the NASA Administrator; the Director, Office of Management and Budget; and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others on request. Please contact me at (202) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions about this report. the payload fairings would have to be modified from the current 5-meter to a 6-meter version to accommodate the larger diameter payloads to the space station during assembly missions. Staff making key contributions to this report were Jim Morrison, James Beard, Rick Cederholm, Karen Sloan, and T.J Thomson. For more information on the ISS, visit the International Space Station's official website at: http://www.nasa.gov/shuttle/. For more about the ISS in the U.S., visit the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's website at www.nasaspace.gov.

ROUGE-1: 76.62, ROUGE-2: 71.15, ROUGE-L: 29.86
BERTScore: 63.38

==============================================
==================== [71/100] ====================
Summary:
Legislation and VA regulations have expanded benefit entitlement and added to the volume of claims. VA cautions that ongoing hostilities in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the Global War on Terrorism in general, may increase the workload beyond current levels. VA has also noted that claims have increased in part because older veterans are filing disability claims for the first time. For example, some veterans are citing more disabilities in their claims than in the past. Because each disability needs to be evaluated separately, these claims can take longer to process. Fiscal year 2008 request would fund 8,320 full-time equivalent employees working on compensation and pension. VA identified an increase in claims processing staff as essential to reducing the pending claims inventory and improving timeliness. According to VA, with a workforce that is sufficiently large and correctly balanced, it can successfully meet the veterans’ needs while ensuring good stewardship of taxpayer funds. The budget justification would represent an increase of about 6 percent over fiscal year 2006. In addition to the budget justification, the VA would also seek to increase the number of contractors. cites near-term initiatives to increase the number of claims completed, such as using retired VA employees to provide training. VA expects a temporary decline in productivity as new staff are trained and become more experienced, but expects productivity to increase in the longer term. VA’s budget justification provides information on actual and planned productivity, in terms of claims decided per full-time equivalent employee. Also, VA has identified additional initiatives to help improve productivity. For example, the use of overtime is being increased. determinations. Board of Veterans’ Appeals had taken actions to strengthen its system for reviewing the quality of its decisions. VA still lacked a systematic method for ensuring the consistency of decision making within VA as a whole. VA has recently taken several steps to improve service delivery, but their potential to lead to significant improvements may be limited by several factors. These steps include requesting funding for additional staff, initiatives to reduce appeal remands, and initiatives to assess and monitor decision consistency. However, limitations on potential improvements include increases in claims. VA reports that it has improved the productivity of the Board’s judges. The Board attributes this improvement to training and mentoring programs. To improve decision consistency, VA has contracted for a study of the major influences. The board expects productivity to improve to 752 decisions in fiscal year 2008. It expects to reduce the percentage of decisions remanded from about 57 percent in fiscalyear 2004 to about 32 percent in Fiscal Year 2006. It also expects to decrease the number of appeals decided from 604 appeals decided in fiscal 2003 to 698 in fiscal 2006. VA’s inventory of pending claims and their average time pending have increased significantly in the last 3 years. Questions remain about consistency of VA”s decisions across regional offices and at the Board of Veterans’ Appeals. The increase is due in part to increased filing of claims, including those filed by veterans of the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts. Meanwhile, the time required to resolve appeals remains too long. The average time to resolve an appeal rose from 529 days in 2004 to 657 days in fiscal year 2006.  rating-related claims increased steadily from about 579,000 in fiscal year 2000. VA acknowledges that regional office decision accuracy needs further improvement. VA reports that it has improved the accuracy of decisions on rating related compensation claims from 80 percent in 2002 to 88 percent in 2006. The average time pending is due in part to an increase in claims receipts, according to the VA. The VA says it is working to reduce the number of claims that are still pending by 20 percent by the end of the year. VA attributes some of the increase in the number of claims pending and the average days pending to a September 2003 court decision that required over 62,000 claims to be processed. Since 1999, several court decisions and laws related to VA’s responsibilities to assist veterans in developing their benefit claims have significantly affected VA's ability to process claims in a timely manner. The VA is currently working on a plan to reduce the number and complexity of claims that need to be adjudicated. The plan is expected to be completed by the end of the year. GAO: VA can improve its Procedures for Obtaining Military Service Records. VA Benefits: Other Programs May Provide Lessons for Improving Individual Unemployability Assessments. VA Disability Benefits: Board of Veterans’ Appeals Has Made Improvements in Quality Assurance, but Challenges Remain for VA in Assuring Consistency. GAO: Despite Recent Improvements, Meeting Claims Processing Goals Will Be Challenging. GAo: Better Collection and Analysis of Attrition Data Needed to Enhance Workforce Planning. VA notes that they are receiving more disability claims, such as those related to mental health issues including post-traumatic stress disorder. Claims processing timeliness and decisional accuracy can be hampered if VA cannot obtain the evidence it needs in a timely manner. For example, to obtain information needed to fully develop some post- traumatic stress disorder claims, VBA must obtain records from the U.S. Army and Joint Services Records Research Center (JSRRC) This can significantly increase the time it takes to develop a claim. rely on a VBA unit at the National Personnel Records Center to do thorough and reliable searches and analyses of records. Incomplete and inaccurate reports could affect decisional accuracy. VA is taking actions to address its claims processing challenges, but there are opportunities for more fundamental reform that could dramatically improve decision making and processing. These include reexamining program design, as well as the structure and division of labor. For more information, visit the VA's website or go to www.va.gov. the time it takes to decide a claim. In December 2006, we recommended that VBA assess whether it could systematically utilize an electronic library of historical military records. VBA agreed to determine the feasibility of regional offices using an alternative resource prior to sending some requests to the JSRRC. We also reported that while VBA quality reviewers found few decision errors due to failure to obtain military service records, VBA does not know the extent to which the information that is provided to regional offices is reliable and accurate. After more than a decade of research, we have determined that federal disability programs are in urgent need of attention and transformation. Research showed that the disability programs administered by VA and the Social Security Administration lagged behind the scientific advances and economic and social changes that have redefined the relationship between impairments and work. The nature of work has changed in recent decades as the national economy has moved away from manufacturing-based jobs to service- and knowledge-based employment. Yet VA’s and SSA’S disability programs remain mired in concepts from the past. option could have a number of benefits for VA as well as veterans. The lump sum option could reduce the number of claims submitted and allow VA to process claims more quickly. In December 2000, we reported that about one-third of newly compensated veterans could be interested in a lump-sum option. In addition to program design, VA’s regional office claims processing structure may be disadvantageous to efficient operations. VBA and VBA are part of the Government Accountability Office, which publishes The Federalist. Consolidating claims processing into fewer regional offices could help improve claims processing efficiency, save overhead costs, and improve decisional accuracy and consistency. VA consolidated some of its pension income and eligibility verifications at three regional offices. However, VA has not changed its basic field structure for disability compensation claims. It has consolidated decision making on Benefits Delivery at Discharge claims at the Salt Lake City and Winston-Salem regional offices, but not on original claims for disability Compensation. The VA has also made piecemeal changes to its claims processing field structure. processing compensation and pension claims at 57 regional offices, which experience large performance variations and questions about decision consistency. Unless more comprehensive and strategic changes are made to its field structure, VBA is likely to miss opportunities to substantially improve productivity, accuracy, and consistency, especially in the face of future workload increases. We have recommended that the VA undertake a comprehensive review of itsField structure. While reexamining claims processing challenges may be daunting, there are mechanisms for undertaking such an effort, including the congressionally chartered commission studying veterans’ disability benefits. Claims Adjudication Commission noted that most disability compensation claims are repeat claims. About 65 percent of veterans who began receiving disability compensation in fiscal year 2003 had disabilities rated 30 percent or less. The commission asked Congress to consider paying less severely disabled veterans compensation in a lump sum. According to the commission, the lump sum would be less than $1 million per veteran. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. VA also continues to face questions about its ability to ensure that veterans receive consistent decisions across regional offices. We have identified the need for VA to systematically address this issue to achieve acceptable levels of variation. VA’s Inspector General has studied one indicator of possible inconsistency, the wide variations in average payments per veteran from state to state. In May 2005, the Inspector General reported that compensation payments are affected by many factors and that some disabilities are inherently more susceptible to variations in rating. VA remains well short of its strategic goal of 98 percent. on compensation payments, to develop baseline data for monitoring and managing decision variances. VA is in the process of testing templates for compensation and pension medical examinations for specific types of disabilities. Further, VA formed a workgroup to study variances in the rates of benefit grants and denials, and in assigned disability evaluations. Despite these efforts, VA may be limited in its ability to make and sustain significant claims processing performance improvements, according to the report. The report was published by the RAND Corporation. medical examinations, and treatment records from VA medical facilities and private medical service providers. Once a claim has all the necessary evidence, a rating specialist evaluates the claim and determines whether the claimant is eligible for benefits. A veteran who disagrees with the regional office’s decision can appeal to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals and then to U.S. federal courts. If the Board finds that a case needs additional work such as obtaining additional evidence or contains procedural errors, it can appeal the decision. The commission is scheduled to report to the Congress by October 1, 2007. VA continues to experience significant service delivery challenges. While VA made progress in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 reducing the size and age of its pending claims inventory, it has lost ground since then. The commission held its first public hearing in May 2005 and in October 2005, established 31 research questions for study. These questions address such issues as how well disability benefits meet the congressional intent, and the appropriate standard or standards for determining whether a veteran should be compensated. VA pays monthly disability compensation benefits to veterans with service-connected disabilities. VA also pays compensation to some spouses, children, and parents of deceased veterans and service members. VA’s pension program pays monthly benefits based on financial need to certain wartime veterans or their survivors. When a veteran submits a claim to any of the Veterans Benefits Administration's 57 regional offices, a veterans service representative is responsible for obtaining the relevant evidence to evaluate the claim. Such evidence includes veterans’ military service records. process. VA study and report to the Congress on the effects that a comprehensive consideration of medical treatment and assistive technologies would have on its disability programs’ eligibility criteria and benefits package. Study would include estimates of the effects on the size, cost, and management of VA’s disability programs and other relevant VA programs and would identify any legislative actions needed to initiate and fund such changes. Another area of program design that could be examined is the option of providing a lump sum payment in lieu of monthly disability compensation. VA plans to pilot paperless Benefits Delivery at Discharge, where service members’ disability claim applications, service medical records, and other evidence would be captured electronically prior to discharge. VA expects that this new process will reduce the time needed to obtain the evidence needed to decide claims. To resolve appeals faster, VA has been working to reduce the number of appeals sent back by the Board of Veterans’ Appeals for further work such as obtaining additional evidence and correcting procedural errors. VA has established joint training and information sharing between field staff and the Board. because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material. permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army in the region of the country where you live on the continent of Africa.

ROUGE-1: 77.53, ROUGE-2: 69.45, ROUGE-L: 34.03
BERTScore: 60.44

==============================================
==================== [72/100] ====================
Summary:
to impose a new recordkeeping requirement (continued) Names and addresses of persons arrested Information specifically not required unless otherwise provided by law: names of persons reporting, victims, witnesses, or uncharged suspects or other information related to investigation. Information may be withheld upon certification of need to protect the investigation, but in no event after the arrest. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are available for purchase at www.gao.gov/gao-report. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. $2 each. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) the law in 1990, the Department issued various policy guidance documents on campus security to help colleges meet the law’s requirements. Most of the guidance was issued as Department letters. Final implementing regulations took effect in July 1994. The Department supplemented its policy guidance with technical assistance provided upon request by its Customer Support Branch. To help colleges achieve compliance, the Dept. emphasizes providing such assistance, rather than imposing sanctions. Under Department policy, the Secretary imposes sanctions only if a college flagrantly or intentionally violates the regulations. Department has yet to issue guidance for independent auditors who conduct federally required annual audits of all colleges participating in title IV programs. As of August 1996, only six audits had documented noncompliance on security matters since the act took effect. Most auditors participating in training sessions held in regional Inspector General offices were unaware of campus security reporting requirements. Department plans to issue an updated audit guide that will explicitly refer to campus security compliance and instruct auditors to ensure that campus security reports are prepared and distributed according to federal requirements. Most of the nearly 2,800 title IV program reviews conducted between September 1992 and May 1996 found noncompliance. Only 24 of these reviews identified campus security violations. Department officials told us that monitoring had generally been limited to checking whether colleges published a campus security report and had procedures for its distribution. Since no review of campus security was conducted, no guidance was issued on how to monitor campus security in title IV programs. 1996. Department’s program reviewers had not emphasized monitoring campus security reports in their title IV reviews. compliance, including more thoroughly examining the statistics and, if warranted, taking formal administrative action. As of January 1997, the Department had received five complaints of noncompliance. One precipitated an in-depth campus security compliance review; the other four complaints are still being investigated. Reasons for the difficulty include reviewers’ limited experience in dealing with law enforcement matters, uncertainties about how to interpret certain definitions of reportable crimes, and differences among campuses that make evaluation difficult under a single set of program. Eight states require public access to campus police or security department records on reported crimes. In all but Minnesota, the laws in general apply to all institutions of higher education, public and private. Three of the eight states have laws specifically requiring campus safety authorities to maintain daily logs open to public inspection. The remaining five, while not prescribing the log format, require disclosure of information similar to that required to make arrests. The law applies only to public colleges, while Minnesota’s law applies to public universities. state statutes and spoke with representatives of campus safety and other interest groups as well as faculty specializing in criminal justice. Names and addresses of arrested persons and charges against them Exempts from disclosure incidents involving certain types of handicapped persons, which are to be separately maintained. Public and private campuses (under the state’s Campus Security Act, private colleges’ police departments are public agencies for the limited purpose of crime enforcement) Records must be open, if kept; the intent is not. Congress would have required more detailed and current campus security records to be made accessible to the public. Although a hearing was held in the House, no further action was taken before the session’s end. Had the bills been enacted, they would have applied to colleges with police or security departments and required the colleges to maintain open-to-the-public, easily understood daily logs. The bills were modeled after a law that has been in effect in Tennessee since the 1990s, when the state passed a similar law. be kept in the logs. Many prohibit publication of the names of victims or of victims of sex-related crimes. Many also include some type of provision protecting witnesses, informants, or information that might jeopardize an ongoing investigation. California, Pennsylvania, and Oklahoma specifically provide for penalties for failing to keep logs in order to protect victims. The laws also differ in a number of other respects, such as the following: Florida, New Jersey, New York, New Mexico, Oregon, and Texas. All 50 states have open records or "sunshine" laws, most of which require public institutions' records to be open to the public unless they are specifically exempted. For example, Colorado’s open records law declares that it is public policy that all state records be open for inspection, including all writings made, maintained, or kept by the state. These laws generally provide that if records are kept, they must be open; the laws are not intended to impose a new recordkeeping requirement.  Campus law enforcement officials differ as to whether their reported statistics must include crimes reported to them by other campus authorities. For example, according to comments the Department received during rulemaking, students are sometimes more comfortable reporting incidents through academic rather than law enforcement channels. Even incidents reported to campus authorities other thanlaw enforcement officials may be included in the campus crime statistics as long as information identifying the persons involved is not disclosed. But reporting such incidents in the statistics is not required under a Department interpretation of the Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act. According to that interpretation, colleges may exclude from their statistics those incidents that campus law enforcement Officials cannot cannot. For three crime categories, the law requires statistics on the number of arrests. Uniformity of statistics can be affected to some degree by school policies. Three law enforcement officials told us that offenses are less likely to result in arrests on campuses that do not have security departments with security departments. For example, one campus security report we reviewed contained a footnote to the effect that liquor-law violations were frequently adjudicated through campus judicial procedures and, therefore, would not be included in the arrest statistics. In contrast, six reports indicated that incidents reported to local police were included. The Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act requires that crime statistics include on-campus occurrences reported to local police. Of the 25 reports we reviewed, 1 specifically stated that it did not include incidents reported to police. The fact that the incidents need not be reported is reflected by variations in campus security reports. Some reports excluded information from non-law-enforcement sources for which no personally identifiable information was provided. The data may have been incomplete or incompatible because of differences in safety officials’ access to information, insistence on verifiable data, or both. Of the reports we reviewed, 15 incorrectly categorized offenses. Colleges are not required to distinguish between forcible and nonforcible offenses. Seven of the reports labeled incidents resulting in death as homicides, but the law requires the term “murders.” Because homicide is not as specific a term, the use of this broader category could obscure the actual number of murders. The Department’s regulations for the Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act require colleges to report statistics on murders and forcible rapes. had occurred, had been properly classified, or had been counted only once. At some colleges, security officials do not receive even unverifiable statistics from counselors. Officials at five colleges said counselors are not required to or generally do not report incidents to them. Although colleges’ statistical reports included most of the prescribed criminal reporting categories, reporting officials appeared to have difficulty principally with two categories: sex offenses and murder. In 60 percent of the cases, the crimes were not reported to the proper office. noncompliance; the other states do not specify penalties. Only California includes a specific reference to occurrences involving hate; in fact, California’s law requires inclusion of noncriminal hate-related incidents. For more information on the eight laws, see appendix II. We also agreed to determine whether any legal challenges had been raised to state open campus crime log laws and whether the effectiveness of such laws had been studied. We did not find any reported cases challenging these laws or any studies of their positive or negative effects. We interviewed officials at 27 colleges selected from a judgmental sample of colleges from the following four groups. Members of the International Association of Campus Law Enforcement Administrators (IACLEA)—Ten Colleges. Chief law enforcement officials at eight member colleges, one in each of the eight states with open campus. One chief law enforcement official at eight IACLEa member colleges. One law enforcement officer at one member college, one from each state with open campuses. One police officer at the University of Delaware, also a past president of IacLEA. police log laws. We spoke to heads of campus security at eight non-IACLEA colleges. All eight colleges had an enrollment exceeding 1,000 students. We randomly selected colleges, with enrollments exceeding 1,.000 students, that participated in title IV programs from the Department’s Integrated Integrated Programs. We selected six 4-year and two 2-year colleges representing all eight states with open log laws and spoke to their heads of security. We also selected seven colleges in States Without Open Log Laws. technical assistance to implement the Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act. We received statistical reports from 25 colleges and evaluated them to determine the extent to which the reports conformed to crime reporting requirements prescribed in the act. We did not trace the numbers to source documents to check their accuracy or completeness. We also searched the literature and reported case law to determine whether any studies had been done on the effects of or legal challenges to state open log laws. Although a federal open crime log law could offer more timely access result of a crime statistic complaint. to information on campus crime and a means of verifying the accuracy of schools’ statistical reports. Such logs would continue to reflect the inherent differences among colleges apparent in the summary statistics currently required by the act. For example, such logs might not include off-campus incidents or, without an amendment to FERPA, incidents that students report through non-law-enforcement channels. The Department of Education generally agreed with our basic conclusions and provided us a number of technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. 1994. Department implementation of the Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act’s reporting requirements has included issuing regulations and disseminating policy guidance to colleges. Department was late in issuing a required report to the Congress. Under the new monitoring guidance, program reviewers must check a college’S crime report for all required information and should attempt to evaluate the procedures used to collect crime data. The accuracy of crime statistics need not be verified unless it becomes apparent from a complaint or some other source that the security report may be incomplete or inaccurate. Of the 25 reports we reviewed, only 2 provided information in all the prescribed Postsecondary Education Data System, stratified by type of college and geographic region. The chiefs of campus security at these seven colleges composed the third group of officials interviewed. We included two other colleges for information on complaints regarding crime statistics. The Department plans to evaluate whether additional actions are needed at the federal level. We include the first of these because a complaint had been lodged against that college. we included the second college because it was subject to the same state crime reporting system as another college. The consistency and completeness of campus crime reporting envisioned under the act have been difficult to attain for two primary reasons. The differing characteristics of colleges, such as their location in an urban or other setting,affect the colleges’ ability to provide a complete and consistent picture of incidents that occur on their campuses. Some confusion exists about reporting requirements, particularly about how certain categories of crimes are to be classified. The Department originally relied mostly on its regulations, letters to colleges, and other sources. The Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act of 1990 and its implementing regulations require colleges to publish and distribute an annual security report. The law also requires colleges to provide timely warning to the campus community about crimes that are considered to represent a threat to other students and employees. According to a 1996 publication of the Student Press Law Center, 11 states have laws requiring schools to compile and release statistics on campus crime. Two bills—H.R. 2416 and S. 2065—introduced in the 104th Congress. We interviewed officials at the Department’s headquarters and regional offices. We analyzed pertinent regulations, policy guidance, and other documents. To determine the actions the Department of Education has taken to implement and monitor compliance with the Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act, we interviewed officials. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Education, appropriate congressional committees and other interested parties. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please call me at (202) 512-7014 or Joseph J. Eglin, Jr., Assistant Director.

ROUGE-1: 72.99, ROUGE-2: 67.81, ROUGE-L: 32.46
BERTScore: 55.36

==============================================
==================== [73/100] ====================
Summary:
JEMCO and JEMFAC must evaluate FSM and RMI progress in implementing policy reforms needed to improve the business environment and encourage increased investment and tax income. They must also identify problems encountered with policy reform implementation, and recommend ways to improve U.S. assistance for these objectives. We received comments from the Departments of the Interior and HHS, as well as from the F SM and the RMI. We also received technical comments from Interior, State, Treasury, HHS and theRMI. that it be expanded to include JEMCO and JEMFAC requirements for establishing policy reform implementation timelines. As noted in our conclusions and by HHS, the urgency of pursuing policy reform suggests that establishing timelines for such reforms could be a useful method to improve U.S. assistance. We also appreciate that the JEMco and J EMFAC should consider this suggestion. The amended compacts’ U.N. implementing legislation does not include establishing timelines. for policy as a specific required action for the J EMCO andJEMFac. GAO: We believe sufficient information is available for the committees to begin meeting their requirement to evaluate FSM and RMI progress in implementing reforms. HHS agreed with our recommendation and requested the information. GAO’s comment on the Department of Health and Human Services letter dated May 23, 2006, is published in the May 2006 issue of the GAO magazine, “Foreign Policy in the Middle East and North Africa.” It is also available online at: http://www.gao.org/. of increased private sector development, strengthened education and training, and improved public sector management. The amended compacts’ fiscal procedures agreements requires the JEMCO and JEMFAC to monitor FSM and RMI progress toward their long-term development objectives. The oversight committees have not defined what actions they will undertake to meet this requirement. At the fiscal year 2004 and 2005 annual JEMco and J EMFAC meetings, compact management committees focused on approving sector grants and discussing grant administration issues. economic advancement, the amended compacts and their subsidiary agreements, along with the countries’ development plans, target grant assistance to six sectors. In addition to providing grant assistance, the amendments provide for the establishment of trust funds for both countries that can provide income after annual compact grants cease. The U.S. implementing legislation also establishes numerous reporting and accountability requirements. The legislation’s direction to the JEMCO and JEMFAC to specifically address economic policy reforms to specifically focus on education and health. connections with the overseas business community may be one way to pursue such opportunities and should be included in meaningful JEMCO discussions. The coming reductions in U.S. grants, paired with current economic realities, also suggests the need for frank assessments of current limited prospects for economic growth in the FSM and what actions need to be pursued to improve those. As we emphasized earlier, the scheduled coming reductions of U.N. grants creates urgency for implementation of policy reforms and for capitalizing on opportunities to leverage compact assistance. agreements require JEMCO and JEMFAC to monitor FSM and RMI progress toward budgetary self-reliance and long- term economic advancement. Neither organization has discussed these issues at its annual meeting or defined what actions they will undertake to meet this requirement. In the FSM, 2004 and 2005 GDP fell owing to compact delays and a lower level of assistance relative to 2003. For the RMI, the IMF estimates that GDP expanded moderately owing to increased public sector expenditure (see example) meetings, we recognize that the Deputy Assistant Secretary submitted a statement for the record at the opening of the 2005 JEMCO meeting that mentioned the lack of sustainability in the FSM’s economic dependence on government expenditures. The issue of FSM progress toward their long-term development goals was not discussed by the JEMco. We recognize that Interior has contracted with the U.S. Department of Agriculture’S Graduate School to obtain further economic information on the F SM and the RMI. JEMFAC did not discuss the linkage between compact education spending and improving RMI emigrant’s skills to encourage increased remittance income over the long-term. HHS suggested that communication be improved through periodic teleconference and videoconference updates. FSM and RMI officials report that they have implemented a few legislation actions to improve the private sector environment, such as bankruptcy and insolvency. JEMCO and JEMFac members in between meetings need to communicate more, HHS said. The RMI estimates that between 500 to 800 new job entrants will need to find employment each year from 1999 to 2009. To meet this objective, the ready access provided under the compact for Marshallese to live and work in the U.S. must be preserved. Economic experts have emphasized that the RMI’s free education system needs to be improved to help Marshallese succeed both in the R MI and abroad. The JEMFAC may consider when discussing compact grant implementation that Marshallese should have access to free education. The JEMCO and JEMFAC committees have not evaluated the lack of FSM and RMI progress in implementing economic reforms. Both countries have implemented or are pursuing some legislative actions. The RMI has yet to prepare a comprehensive policy for public enterprise reform. Although they plan to privatize some public enterprises, they intend to expand others, the authors say. The legislation implementing the amended compacts specifically directs the JEMco and J EMFAC to address FSM, RMI. business environments are particularly costly in several areas. For example, of 155 countries surveyed, the FSM and the RMI are among the worst 10 to 20 countries in terms of the cost of enforcing contracts and the degree of investor protection. In interviews with private sector representatives, problems were noted with F SM and RMI business environments (see fig. 7). The following are GAO’s comments on the Department of the Interior letter dated May 16, 2006. Regarding our finding that compact management committees have not discussed F SMs and R MI progress toward budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement at their annual meeting. mechanisms to improve communication and information between annual meetings. periodic teleconferences and videoconferences should be pursued. The FSM viewed the report as a potentially constructive contribution to ongoing efforts to pursue budgetary self-reliance and economic advancement. We disagreed with our conclusion that FSM development prospects remain limited. We will provide copies of this report to your offices, as well as the Secretaries of the Interior, State, and Health and Human Services, and the President of the Federated States of Micronesia. HHS’s suggestion to improve communication and information between annual meetings through periodic teleconferences and videoconferences and have added language to the report to reflect this suggestion. The Federated States of Micronesia confirms the accuracy of our description of its recent economic performance, its constraints to growth, and its need for economic policy reforms. We maintain that given these current realities, we maintain that the FSM's development prospects remain limited. We have also added language in the report recognizing HHS's efforts to improve vaccine coverage. of the Republic of the Marshall Islands. We will make copies available to other interested parties upon request. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix VIII. The amended compacts implementing legislation requires that we report on political, social, and economic conditions in the Federated States of Micronesia. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. After more than 40 years under U.S. administration as part of the United Nations Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the FSM and the RMI became sovereign nations in 1978 and 1979. For the last 20 years, the United States’ relationship with the two countries has been defined by the original Compact of Free Association. The compact represents a new phase of the unique relationship between the United states and these island areas. In 1986, theUnited States, theFSM, and theRMI entered into the original compact. for the Compact of Free Association to negotiate amended compact provisions. The compact also gave citizens of both nations the rights to live and work in the United States as “nonimmigrants” and to stay for long periods of time. In 2001, we reported that during the compact, a significant number of FSM and RMI citizens failed to meet U.S. passport, visa, and labor certification requirements when entering the United states. We reported that a number of those citizens died as a result. provided a framework for the United States to work toward achieving its three main goals. The first goal was met; the FSM and the RMI are independent nations. The second goal has also been achieved with the compact’s establishment of several key defense rights for all three countries. The defense relationship continues with, among other things, U.S. access to military equipment and training. The third goal was to assist the F SM and RMI in their efforts to advance economic development and self-sufficiency. The FSM and the RMI are members of the Forum Fisheries Agency and the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission. Despite the two countries’ stable democratic systems, key aspects of the FSM’s and RMI’S political environments hinder effective compact grant implementation. Lack of government consensus. Because each state has its own constitution, FSM's weak federal structure inhibits compact grant Implementation. Because the R MI has a strong constitution, it can be difficult to implement compact grants. Islands (RMI) as well as the use and oversight of U.S. assistance to those nations. This report examines each country’s political and social environment for compact grant implementation. It also examines economic conditions, including overall growth, fiscal balances, and private investment; and status of economic policy reforms. To identify key aspects of the FSM and the RMI political andsocial environment for Compact grant implementation, we reviewed the U.s., FSM, and RMI annual compact reports for 2004. is often nonoperational or censored. The U.S. State Department’s 2004 Report on Human Rights Practices in the FSM. According to the World Bank, Transparency International, and other development experts, lack of information about government activities creates uncertainty for public, private, and community leaders. This uncertainty can inhibit grant performance, which can inhibit funding for development projects in the Marshall Islands. The government has been criticized for not holding public hearings or disseminating sufficient information regarding a proposed dry dock. to be about $2.1 billion. Economic development and self-sufficiency were not achieved under the original compact. Total U.S. assistance accounted for more than 50 percent of government revenues throughout the compact period. FSM and RMI GDP estimates reveal that per capita GDP at the close of the compact had not exceeded, in real terms, early 1990s levels in either country (see fig. 2). Although U.s. direct assistance maintained standards of living that were higher than could be achieved without support, we found previously that compact funds spent on economic development were lower. largely ineffective in promoting economic growth. Many projects experienced problems due to poor planning and management, inadequate construction and maintenance, or misuse of funds. Compact funds were also used to support business ventures, most of which have failed. In 2000, we recommended, among other things, that the Secretary of State direct the Special Negotiator to work with the private sector to reach an agreement on a new compact with the U.S. The U.N. Security Council passed a resolution on the compact in 2000, but it has not yet been implemented. facilities on Kwajalein Atoll in the RMI through 2016. The compact’s third goal was to be accomplished primarily through U.S. direct financial assistance to the FSM and RMI. For the 15-year period covering 1987 to 2001, funding was provided at levels that decreased every 5 years. For 2002 and 2003, during negotiations to renew expiring compact provisions, funding levels increased to equal an average of the funding provided during the previous 15 years plus inflation. Central government that is represented on JEMCO does not control the majority of compact funds. FSM access to the compact infrastructure grant, for example, has been delayed for more than 2 years owing to national and state disagreements over infrastructure priorities. RMI government and landowners on Kwajalein Atoll have been disputing government use of leased land and management of public entities on the atoll. Such tensions have negatively affected the construction of schools funded by the compact. The FSM government has been unable to secure agreement from the state governments regarding compact needs. compact grants and the management of the Kwajalein utility company. Lack of communication and dissemination of information by each government on wide-ranging issues. Private sector representatives in several FSM states reported that the public radio station serves as the government’s primary means of disseminating information but does not have a national radio station of its own. The U.S., FSM and RMI departmental officials, private sector representatives, NGOs, and external economic experts revealed a lack of communication. Political conditions, including a weak federation in the FSM and disputes over public institutions’ and government use of land on Kwajalein Atoll in the RMI, have hindered compact implementation and service delivery. Despite relatively high health and education expenditures, both countries face development challenges in these sectors. For example, although the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC)—which evaluates indicators with a relationship to growth and poverty reduction—ranks the F SM and RMI in the top 20 percent for health expenditures relative to other lower-middle-income countries, it ranks them in the bottom half. We identified key areas of concern in delivery of health and education services. We obtained FSM and RMI socioeconomic statistics on noncommunicable diseases, access to safe water and sanitation, teacher certifications and literacy skills. We also obtained Pacific Island Literacy Level student test scores from the Pacific Islands Forum. We looked at development plans and reports prepared in conjunction with the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the World Bank, or the U.N. Development Program. The report was compiled by Transparency International and the University of Hawaii. The FSM and the RMI are established democracies with free and peaceful elections. Each country also has a vocal civil society evidenced by religious organizations and nongovernmental organizations (NGO) that have been active on some political issues. Both countries also participate in various regional organizations, many of which address trade, energy, and environmental challenges faced by islanders.both countries are in the bottom third for a key health indicator, immunizations. The FSM is ranked No. 1 in the world for immunizations, while The RMI is No. 2. immunization rates are significantly higher. The RMI provides a significantly higher proportion of the population access to improved sanitation. Private sector representatives in the FSM and the RMI characterized the business environment in their nation as obstructive and costly. They attribute this characterization to elements of the political environment (e.g., poor information), lack of progress in economic reforms (both legal and financial), and poor government performance in providing services. World Bank national business environment surveys suggest that a high cost of doing business is a common problem for small island states. MCC provides economic assistance to developing countries. eligibility determined by evaluating a country’s performance on select indicators associated with economic growth and poverty reduction. MCC ranks the FSM in the top 35 percent for expenditures on health and primary education, and it ranks the RMI in theTop 1 percent for both indicators, relative to other lower-middle income countries that qualify for MCC assistance. However, for another health-related indicator— immunizations—MCC ranks both countries in the bottom third. FSM Departments of Health and Education and the RMI Ministries of health and Education. We obtained regional socioeconomic statistics on population trends, teenage fertility, child mortality rates, immunizations, human poverty, and GDP and aid per capita. We reviewed the U.S., FSM, and RMI annual compact reports for 2004; FSM and R MI development plans; recent International Monetary Fund (IMF) Article IV documents for each nation; ADB Country Strategies and Program Updates. socioeconomic conditions in the FSM and the RMI, particularly in relation to regional averages, refer to app. II. Country studies and health and education officials in the R MI and FSM also highlight other challenges. These include the increasing prevalence of lifestyle diseases such as diabetes or hypertension; youth health issues; and poor teaching skills. According to the F SM Department of Health, 80 percent of 35 to 64 year-olds are overweight. The number of cases involving diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, and cancer increased in the late nineties. Both the RMI and the FSM have a relatively large population density at 331 and 181 people per square kilometer, respectively. The RMI also has a very high teenage fertility rate. Except for Palau, both nations have the highest levels of aid per capita. The FSM’s child mortality rates are significantly lower than the R MI’S. The U.S. has a Compact of Free Association with the United States with which the F SM shares a border. RMI has made progress in reducing overseas referrals since 2001. Rising prevalence of lifestyle diseases poses challenges for delivery of health services in both nations. Future health outlays will also be affected by health challenges facing FSM and RMI youths. FSM, RMI health officials indicated concern about growing youth problems such as suicides, sexually transmitted diseases, and teen pregnancy. The care and treatment of such diseases often involves expensive referrals abroad, lowered funding for public health programs that serve impoverished populations, and burdens on household and national budgets. Only 28 percent of FSM citizens have access to improved sanitation, according to WDI. In the RMI, the 1999 census suggests that 85 percent of the population has access to safe water. Recent tests in urban and rural areas indicate that a significant number of potable water sources, such as groundwater wells and water catchments, are contaminated and deemed unsafe for human consumption. (For further information on this issue, visit WDI’s World Health Organization website. For more information on FSM sanitation, visit the World Health Organisation website. to trust funds—meant to provide an ongoing source of revenue after fiscal year 2023—increase annually by a comparable amount. Under certain conditions, the trust fund revenue available in 2024 may be less than even the lower level of grant funding in 2024. If the trust funds consistently earn a higher rate of return, or if additional contributions to the funds are provided, the probability rises that they could provide a sustainable income source at the level of fiscal year 2024 grants. Although the FSM and the RMI are stable democracies, both countries face political and social challenges with regard to improving grant implementation. Total combined compact grant assistance to the two countries is projected at an estimated $3.6 billion over the 20-year assistance period. However, to provide increasing U.S. contributions to the FSM’s and the RMI’'s trust funds, grant funding will decrease annually. Assuming current population growth estimates, this decrease in grant funds will result in falling per capita grant assistance over the funding period and relative to the original compact. While the level of annual grant assistance decreases each year, contributions continue to increase. amended compacts to contribute an initial $30 million to their trust funds. Recent RMI GDP performance may have differed if this funding were used to provide current goods and services rather than for savings. The RMI’s contribution to the trust fund does not alter the extent of RMI economic dependence on external assistance. We have clarified our estimates and figures with regards to funding streams they include and exclude. We will address amended compact implementation issues and trust- fund issues in two separate reports, forthcoming. self-reliance and economic advancement. Expanding FSM and RMI private sector activity and remittance income will require effective compact grant implementation. The scheduled coming reductions in U.S. grants to both countries create urgency for the implementation of policy reforms if they require fiscal resources. We recommend that the Secretary of the Interior direct the Deputy Secretary of Interior to work with the FSMs and the RMIs on policy reforms. We also recommend that they leverage opportunities to leverage compact assistance to improve social and economic conditions through reform. have added language regarding RMI consultations with the private sector and their desire for improved tax enforcement. The effectiveness of U.S. and ADB technical assistance to the RMI is outside the scope of this report. The RMI allocated no compact funding to a public sector capacity building grant in fiscal year 2004 and less than 1 percent of compact sector grant funding to such a grant in 2005. We discuss remittances in our report as one option that the R MI may consider in pursuing the economic goals under the amended compact. Business tax schemes in both nations are considered to be inefficient by the IMF, the ADB, and other economic experts owing to a poor incentive structure and weak tax collection. Since 1994, the IMF and other experts have recommended, among other tax reforms, implementing a value-added tax (VAT), a simplified net profit tax, and a single modernized independent tax authority. However, although the FSM and the RMI governments have made some improvement in tax administration, tax revenues have largely stagnated. Revenue potential from further tax reform will also vary by government (national and foreign investment) mortgage laws, yet progress on key policy reforms required to stimulate investment has been slow. An enabling business environment in either country requires substantial reforms in taxes, land ownership, and foreign investment regulations as well as a reduction in public sector competition with the private sector. Despite several years of policy dialogue on taxes, the FSM has agreed on elements of tax reform but has no plan for implementation. The RMI has not agreed on structural change to its tax system and has no plans to do so. In 2005, the FSM Task Force on Tax Reform developed a tax reform proposal. Such reforms are estimated to require 2 to 3 years for implementation. The FSM government has neither begun to implement the proposal nor specified an implementation plan. The RMI government and economic experts have recognized for several years that the RMI needs to reform its tax system to become more competitive and competitive with the U.S. and other countries in the Asia-Pacific region. For more information, go to: www.rsm.org. tax system is complex and regressive, taxing on a gross rather than net basis and having weak collection and administration capacity. Private sector representatives’ most common complaint on the RMI tax system is the need for better and tighter enforcement. The RMI Office of Tax and Revenue reported that it has focused on improving tax administration and has raised some penalties and tax levels. Legislation for income tax reform has failed and needed changes in government import tax exemptions have not yet been addressed. Inadequate access to land. RMI will need to overcome the “aid curse’—or the distorted incentives for effective public sector management. Despite several years of commitment to, and recommendations for, policy reforms, key reforms have not yet been implemented. Tax, land, foreign investment regulation and public-sector reforms, when implemented, will improve the business environment, in turn facilitating the private sector expansion. However, even with the needed reforms, the FSM and the RMI face notable challenges to achieving budgetary self- reliance and long-term economic advancement. FSM and RMI government involvement in commercial activities continues to hinder private sector development. Interviews with country officials, private sector representatives, and an ADB expert also suggest that local businesses sometimes lobby the foreign investment boards against approval of certain applications. IMF and ADB officials expressed concern that the FSM and the RMI governments are not committed to reducing their participation incommercial activities.in retail, according to its Foreign Investment Board. The share of employment accounted for by these enterprises, as well as estimated direct public enterprise subsidies has declined in recent years. market-oriented enterprises that could be more efficiently operated by the private sector. (3) improve government provision of critical support services. One example of a reform success highlighted by economic experts is the RMI’s restructuring of its Social Security Administration to reduce operating costs and improve service provision. However, despite government endorsement of public sector reform principles, early efforts to reduce public sector employment have generally failed in both the FSM and the R MI. F SM and RMI public sector wages also remain about twice the level. Some governments have also tried to improve foreign investment processes or created small business development centers. To create continued and strengthened demand for reform, the ADB has also recently assisted both countries in holding several “Dialogue for Action’ retreats that enable public and private sector representatives to develop a common vision for sustainable development through economic reform. Our interviews with ADB and country participants suggested that these retreats can be helpful for improving the public sector/private sector dialogue on economic challenges facing each society. the fact that most of the enterprises have drained public finances through poor financial performance, requiring subsidization or entailing debt (see examples in table 4). In conjunction with the ADB, the FSM prepared a comprehensive program for public sector enterprise reform in 1999 that identified two enterprises per state and national government for privatization. Such privatizations later became a condition for receiving ADB loan assistance. This unit has not yet been fully staffed, and theADB loan requirement was reduced to one enterprise per state or national government. provide a technical review of our findings and information on the reliability of data used to support those findings. In conjunction with our own assessment, we determined that trade data, remittance data, and data on the private sector profits contained weaknesses. Exact data for these elements were not presented in the report and related findings were corroborated with other reliable data. Nonetheless, our interviews with U.S., country, and international officials revealed important constraints to the FSM's and the RMI’s capacity to improve their economies. both FSM and Interior officials have expressed concern for that nations’ capacity to produce future statistics. We conducted our review from August 2005 through March 2006 in accordance with generally accepted U.S. government auditing standards. We requested written comments on a draft of this report from the Departments of the Interior, State, Health and Human Services, and Treasury. All comments are discussed in the report and are reprinted in appendixes IV through VII. Further, we considered all comments and made changes to the report, as appropriate. With regard to teacher qualifications, the FSM Department of Education reports that 90 percent of teachers need to upgrade skills to meet new certification standards. In the RMI, a 2004 Ministry of Education assessment reported that more than 50 per cent of teachers had failed basic English literacy tests. The FSM and RMI economies have performed modestly and have been characterized by continued dependence on external assistance, suggests limited prospects for achieving development goals of budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement. Private sector employment has largely stagnated. prepare regular, reliable, and complete data that would allow for a more thorough analysis of social and economic trends. Trend data on a variety of social indicators, such as teacher qualifications and student drop-outs, could assist in evaluation of the effectiveness of compact education assistance. However, much of this data are just now being collected in a systematic way. Also, given that both nations have weak domestic capacity to produce statistics, they rely heavily on external consultants for this purpose. In the FSM, the contract for statistical assistance from external consultants has now expired. RMI Pacific Island Economic Reports (PIER) prepared in conjunction with the ADB; and expert reviews of FSM and RMI fiscal structures and tax systems. We obtained data on gross domestic product (GDP), employment, government finances, migration, and private sector development from the IMF, OECD, and World Bank. To describe the status of economic policy reforms in the F SM and the RMI, we reviewed the documents mentioned in the PIER and ADB reports. We also reviewed the OECD’s international development statistics and the U.S. Department of Census. GAO: Economic reforms in each of the areas discussed are needed to improve the RMI’s prospects for long-term economic growth. We also agree that the annual decrement in compact grant funding is a major challenge to achieving this objective, particularly if implementation of key policy reforms requires fiscal resources. We recognize that the FSM and RMI were required under the Compact of Free Association to make changes to the Marshall Islands’ tax system. We have clarified the report language to reflect these changes. We obtained data on FSM and RMI public sector enterprises from the FSM’s 2005 Statistical Tables and the RMI’S 2004 Annual Yearbook. In addition, we held extensive interviews with officials from the U.S. Department of the Interior (Washington, D.C., Honolulu; the F SMM; and R MI. We also obtained data from the most recent available public enterprise audit reports and ADB progress reports on the R MI Private Sector Development Project and FSM Private sector Development Loan. with FSM (national and state governments) and RMI officials from foreign affairs, finance and budget, economic affairs, health, education, land management, tourism and fisheries. In each location, we also met with numerous representatives from private sector businesses, banks, and community organizations. We asked experts at the ADB, the IMF, the World Bank, the Boston Institute of Development Economics, and the University of Hawaii’s East-West Center with knowledge of the FSM and the RMI economies. We traveled to all four states in the FSM and to the RMI (Majuro) We had detailed discussions with the governor’s and legislature's offices in each of the states. We also interviewed officials from the ADB (Manila, the Philippines), the IMF (Washington, D.C.) and the Pacific Islands Development Program at the East-West Center (Honolulu) The U.S. Department of State, Treasury and Health and Human Services were also interviewed. estimated $60 million. External grants are the largest income component, providing $54 million in 2005. The structure of RMI revenues remained roughly the same over the past 5 years. In 2005, the RMI’s wage bill comprised 34 percent of total expenditures, compared with the 2000 to 2004 wage bill of 31 percent. In addition to receiving compact grant assistance, the FSM and the R MI receive substantial U.S. program assistance from agencies such as the. Agency for International Development. is small and the growing wage bill is high relative to regional standards. In 2005, FSM taxes provided an estimated $29 million in revenue, or 23 percent of total revenue. The largest income source is external grants, which, at $76 million, accounted for 60 percent of revenues in 2005. In terms of expenditure, the largest FSM expenditure component is public sector wages and salaries at an average of $1.2 billion. The FSM government receives fishing access fees from foreign vessels that fish in its exclusive economic zone. Both countries' budgets are characterized by a small local revenue base and recent increases in government payroll. Unless other donors provide additional assistance, expenditure reductions will be required. As compact grants decline through 2023, government fiscal balances and GDP could be supported, at least partially, by increased noncompact assistance. However, such increases in assistance are not guaranteed, may vary from year to year, and may not be flexible enough to meet FSM and RMI budget needs. Tax reform may provide opportunities for increasing annual government revenue. In both the FSM and the RMI, private sector activity has remained relatively stagnant and exists largely to provide services to the public sector. Since 2000, the estimated private sector share of GDP has fallen in both countries. Both countries’ 2005 public sector expenditure—about two-thirds of which is funded by external grants—remained at about 60 percent of GDP. Given the recent performance and structure of F SM and RMI government budgets, both nations are likely to face significant budgetary pressure as compact grants decline through 2023. FSM and the RMI according to economic experts and U.S. and country officials. In interviews, private sector representatives also expressed concern with poor government provision of power, water, and infrastructure services. FSM and RMI emigrants could provide increasing monetary support to their home nations in the future, although evidence suggests that they are less likely to do so now than in the past. The FSM Department of Economic Affairs could provide more information on how to send emigrants back to the United States. In attempts to modernize complex, traditional land tenure systems, land registration offices have been established in both countries. In both countries, inadequate access to land and uncertainties over land ownership and land values continue to create costly disputes, disincentives for investment, and problems regarding the use of land as an asset. Despite amendments to foreign investment regulations, the regulations in both country continue to be confusing and relatively burdensome. Several years of public sector reform efforts have also failed to reduce government involvement in private sector activities. Investment, or public sector reform; factors that contributed to this lack of progress; or the interdependence of policy reform implementation with effective compact grant implementation. Opportunities exist to create linkages between grant administration and economic reforms. For example, sector grants in public sector capacity building could be used to address capacity constraints that have been identified as an obstacle to reform implementation (e.g., the lack of certified land surveyors for land reform). Further, compact management committees could establish linkage between, for example, grants to tourism promotion agencies and progress in reforming foreign investment regulations. Land tenure systems in each nation are complex and based on traditional and customary rights, often for multiple individuals. Most parcels do not have a registered, legal title. Land values are also uncertain owing to the lack of a developed land market or price data on land in the FSM and RMI. Our interviews with F SM and R MI officials and private sector representatives suggested that costly boundary disputes are common. We are happy to clarify these issues with the help of our expert team of land experts. lease transactions, such that banks are unable to effectively conduct mortgage secured lending. Foreigners are prohibited from owning land in both nations and are also unable to secure a valid lease when land values or ownership is uncertain. Land reform issues have been discussed in the FSM and the RMI for several years, and land registration has been discussed as part of the plan to reform the two nations' economies. Using land for foreign investment is even more difficult, according to experts in the two countries. The inability to use it to secure financing for development is problematic, they say. offices have been established. Such offices have lacked a systematic method for registering parcels, instead waiting for landowners to voluntarily initiate the process. Landowners have shown little interest in land registration, partly owing to the cultural issues associated with traditional land ownership structures. The functionality of land registration offices in both the FSM and the RMI has also been limited by a lack of registered surveyors and trained surveyors. Only 5 parcels have been, or are currently being, registered by the land registration office. Despite the amended compacts’ structure of declining grant assistance, the FSM and the RMI public sectors have grown while tax revenues remain relatively small. Unless each nation can secure other donor assistance, maintenance of living standards over the long term will likely require private sector expansion or increased remittances. To date, JEMCO and JEMFAC have not discussed F SM and RMI progress toward budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement or the role for compact grants in attaining these development goals. Prospects for long-term economic growth in the FSM remain limited. If key policy reforms were implemented, the business environment would likely improve and facilitate private sector expansion. The FSM will also likely need to identify and capitalize on niche market opportunities as well as to create conditions to maximize remittance income. The education and health of its citizens should be improved, particularly through improving the education, health and safety of citizens. The country should also focus on the development of its infrastructure and infrastructure. The current level of remittance income provided by these emigrants is unknown. In the RMI, the 2002 household survey suggests that RMI citizens send more money out to RMI emigrants than they receive in remittances. This is owing to the emigrants’ lack of high-paying jobs and inability to afford repatriation of funds. The 2003 U.S. census of FSM and RMI migrants in Hawaii, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas Islands (CNMI) confirms this characterization. access and strong historical links to the U.S. market provide the RMI with relatively good opportunities to expand remittance income. Improved skill provision should benefit both RMI emigrants as well as domestic economic prospects. We have clarified our reference that 2003 data on international visitor arrivals are for other Pacific island nations. Such data are not available for Kiribati and Nauru. The World Bank has estimated that, in 2002, KirIBati had 5,000 international visitors. However, Kiribiti also has a per capita GDP that is less than one-third of the R MI’s. World Bank data show that remittances have become an important source of financial flows to developing countries. For the FSM and the RMI, many citizens have taken advantage of U.S. migration rights established by the original compact and extended by the amended compacts. As of 2005, RMI data suggest that about 15,000 Marshallese have immigrated to the United States. FSM data suggests that almost twice as many Micronesians live in the U.K. than in the Marshall Islands. The FSM and the RMI have amended various aspects of their foreign investment laws to streamline the process. In the FSM, experts report that foreign investment regulations vary between states, creating confusion and additional requirements for investors who want to invest in several states. The overall climate for foreign investment remains complex and nontransparent, according to economic experts and private sector representatives. According to an Interior official, a shipping company with service from the U.S. has been banned from operating in the country. the U.S. West Coast to Guam has for years been seeking permission to provide shipping service to the FSM and the RMI. The climate for foreign investment is also reportedly affected by private and public interests’ protecting local businesses from foreign competition. Some FSM states require a certain percentage of local ownership in foreign investment. Pohnpei state, for instance, requires 30 percent local ownership forforeign investment and prohibits foreign activity. The FSM state of Pohnpei also requires foreign investment to be made through a local company. Fishing and tourism are key potential growth industries. In both nations, fishing enterprises have shown poor performance. The number of tourists has been small relative to other Pacific islands. Economic experts suggest that the FSM and the RMI fishing and tourism industries could grow within specialized niche markets such as high-end tourism or dock services. Such opportunities remain limited in scale, however, and will require factors such as a sound design, adequate resources and capacity for tax enforcement, government commitment for reform and private sector growth. data indicate that the RMI did succeed in reducing public sector employment from about 3,760 jobs in 1997 to 3,530 jobs in 2001. We have modified language in the report to clarify each of these points. The report has added language to include the volatility in tax income from the fisheries and tourism sectors and the fact that RMI offices related to reform efforts, such as land registration offices, have been funded with compact grants. In addition to the persons named above, the report also includes the names of: the ADB and other economic experts suggest that growth in these industries in both countries may be limited by current structural barriers. geographic isolation and small fragmented markets; high airfares and poor flight connections; lack of adequate hotel and airport infrastructure. low freight capacities and poor interisland shipping; inadequate transshipment facilities in some areas. growing threat of overfishing; limited pool of skilled labor; and high production costs in terms of labor, fuel, and other supplies. In addition to facing structural barriers to growth, private industry in general faces a costly business environment in both the United States and China. small island economies suggest common challenges for socioeconomic development. Developing nations in the Pacific have exhibited relatively poor economic performance. Such nations have also exhibited the need for improvements in delivery of health and education services. Environmental challenges from climate change and increasing population density are also common threats to ensuring sustainable livelihoods in thePacific. Table 5 provides estimated socioeconomic data on various Pacific island nations in. The report was published by the International Development Association (IDA) and the World Economic Forum (WEF) on November 14, 2013.

ROUGE-1: 79.64, ROUGE-2: 72.60, ROUGE-L: 26.49
BERTScore: 57.06

==============================================
==================== [74/100] ====================
Summary:
The Marine Corps did not have effective controls in place to support estimated obligations, referred to as “bulk obligations,” to record a payment liability. The Marine Corps estimates obligations in a bulk amount to record payment liabilities where it does not have a mechanism to identify authorizing documentation as a basis for recording the obligations. The auditors found ineffective controls over three major information technology systems used by the Marine Corps. The audit also found problems with the reliability of reported financial information. The investigation is ongoing. The Marine Corps did not develop an overall corrective action or remediation plan that includes key elements of a risk-based plan. Instead, its approach focuses on short-term corrective actions based on manually intensive efforts to produce reliable financial reporting at year-end. System interface controls are critical for ensuring the completeness and accuracy of data transferred between systems. Such efforts may not result in the desired results. The report also noted that the Marine Corps didn't develop a comprehensive corrective action plan for its financial reporting. not identify resources, roles and responsibilities, or include performance indicators to measure performance against action plan objectives. The Marine Corps reported that actions on 88 of the 139 recommendations were fully implemented. The completeness and effectiveness of most Marine Corps’ actions have not yet been tested. An effective remediation plan would help ensure that audit recommendations are fully addressed to deal with the short-term and long-term goals, the authors say. Because of the department’s complexity and magnitude, developing and developing such a plan is difficult. The Marine Corps’ Statement of Budgetary Resources audit effort can provide a roadmap to help other components better stage their audit readiness efforts. DOD components that have not yet received clean audit opinions are beginning to reap the benefits of strengthened controls and processes gained through ongoing efforts to improve their financial management operations and reporting capabilities. In August 2009, DOD’s Comptroller sought to further strengthen the financial management processes of the Marine Corps. The DOD Office of Inspector General, have achieved this goal and are working with other DOD components to strengthen their processes. The Marine Corps’ SBR Remediation Plan focused on individual initiatives to address 70 auditor Notices of Findings and Recommendations that included 139 recommendations. The plan did not assess risks, prioritize actions, or ensure that actions adequately responded to recommendations, the report found. The report found that the Marine Corps could routinely produce sound data on a timely basis for decision making. It also found that there was a need for improvements over the long term that would help ensure that the Corps produced sound data. The FIAR Guidance details the implementation of the methodology with an emphasis on internal controls and supporting documentation. The guidance directs the components to identify responsible organizations and personnel and establish effective and efficient financial management. It also provides the process for the components. to follow, through their individual Financial Improvement Plan (FIP), in assessing processes, controls, and systems; identifying and correcting weaknesses; assessing, validating, and sustaining corrective actions; and achieving full auditability. The FIAR guidance provides the. are changes at the senior leadership; therefore, it is paramount that the current initiative be institutionalized throughout the department. In May 2009, we reported that the FIAR Plan did not establish a baseline of the department’s state of internal control and financial management weaknesses as its starting point. Such a baseline could be used to assess and plan for the necessary improvements and remediation to be used in measure incremental progress toward achieving estimated milestones for each DOD component and theDepartment. DOD currently is working on a plan to correct internal control weaknesses. reported, those efforts did not achieve their intended purpose of improving the department’s financial management operations. The FIAR Plan is in its sixth year and continues to evolve based on lessons learned, corrective actions, and policy changes that refine and build on the plan. The revised FIAR strategy is still in the early stages of implementation, and DOD has a long way and many long-standing challenges to go, the report says. The DOD Comptroller has expressed commitment to the FIAR goals, and established a focused approach, it says.  Problems with asset accountability can further complicate critical functions, such as planning for the current troop withdrawals. DOD introduced a new phased approach that divides progress toward achieving financial statement auditability into five waves (or phases) of concerted improvement activities. According to DOD, the components’ implementation of the methodology described in the 2010 FIAR Plan is essential to the success of the department’s efforts to ultimately achieve full financial statements auditability. To assist the components, DOD has developed a tool to help them implement the methodology. financial management improvement efforts. We currently have work in progress to assess implementation of the department’s FIAR strategy and efforts toward auditability. I would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the Subcommittee may have at this time. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Asif A. Khan, (202) 512-9869 or khana@gao.gov. For more information on this hearing, please visit the GSA's website at: http://www.gsa.gov/. we found that weaknesses in the Navy and Air Force FIAR Plan implementation efforts indicate that the monitoring and oversight of such efforts have not been effective. For the two FIPs that we reviewed, neither individual officials nor the executive committees took sufficient action. As a result, the Navy concluded that its Civilian Pay was ready for audit, as did the Air Force with respect to its Military Equipment. The DOD Comptroller, who makes the final determination as to audit readiness, will make the final decision. necessary to align financial improvement and audit readiness efforts across the department. In May 2009, we reported that the FIAR Plan did not have clear results-oriented whether an assessable unit is ready for audit. Both DOD and the components have established senior executive committees as well as designated officials at the appropriate levels to monitor and oversee their financial improvement efforts. Effective oversight and monitoring would also help ensure that lessons learned from recent efforts would be sufficiently disseminated throughout the department and applied to other financial improvement effort. metrics. DOD has taken action to begin defining results-oriented FIAR metrics. We have not yet had an opportunity to assess implementation of these metrics. Ensuring effective monitoring and oversight of progress will be key to bringing about effective implementation, through the components’ FIPs. However, as noted in our recent report, the components' control over the accuracy of supporting data is a key concern for us. We will continue to monitor the progress made by the components and provide updates as necessary. Long-standing and pervasive weaknesses in DOD’s financial management and related business processes and systems have left the department vulnerable to fraud, waste, and abuse. GAO reported on this issue over 20 years ago, but the problems continue to persist. We have reported that continuing weaknesses in these business operations result in billions of dollars of wasted resources, reduced efficiency, ineffective performance, and inadequate accountability. In July 2010, we reported that although DOD and the military departments have efforts underway to begin addressing these financial management weaknesses, problems still exist. support of other business areas beyond the financial community before they could be fully addressed. DOD also requests billions of dollars each year to maintain its weapon systems. DOD has limited ability to identify, aggregate, and use financial management information for managing and controlling operating and support costs. Without timely, reliable, and useful financial information on cost, DOD management lacks information needed to accurately report on acquisition costs, allocate resources to programs, or evaluate program performance. In June 2010, we reported that the Army Budget Office lacked an adequate funds control process to provide it with ongoing funding. Before 1991, the military services and defense agencies independently managed their finance and accounting operations. According to DOD, these decentralized operations were highly inefficient and failed to produce reliable information. On November 26, 1990, DOD created the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) DFAS records these transactions in the accounting records, prepares thousands of reports used by managers throughout DOD and by the Congress. The military services play a vital role in that they authorize the expenditure of funds and are the source of most of the financial information needed by DFAS. travel- related expenses, paying contractors and vendors for goods and services, and collecting debts owed to DOD. In fiscal year 2010 DFAS processed approximately 198 million payment-related transactions and disbursed over $578 billion. DOD financial management was designated as a high-risk area by GAO in 1995. Pervasive deficiencies in financial management processes, according to the GAO, have led to DOD’s poor financial performance in the past. The DOD budget request for fiscal year 2012 calls for an increase in the number of DFAS employees to 5,000. implementing a comprehensive plan that identifies DOD’s internal control weaknesses will not be an easy task. It is a task that is critical to resolving the long-standing weaknesses and will require consistent management oversight and monitoring for it to be successful. Effective financial management in DOD will require a knowledgeable and skilled workforce that includes individuals who are trained and certified in accounting, well versed in government accounting practices and standards. Hiring and retaining such a skilled workforce is a challenge DOD must meet to succeed in its transformation. department had only discussed competency gap analyses for 3 mission-critical occupations. Financial management was not included in the department’s analysis. Until DOD analyzes personnel needs and gaps in the financial management area, it will not be in a position to develop an effective financial management recruitment, retention, and investment strategy. The department established a governance structure for the FIAR Plan, which includes review bodies for governance and oversight. The governance structure is intended to provide the vision and oversight for the plan. costs are basic financial management functions that are also key in analyzing areas for potential future savings. Without adequate financial management processes, systems, and controls, DOD components are at risk of reporting inaccurate, inconsistent, and unreliable data. The lack of effective internal controls hinders management’s ability to have reasonable assurance that their allocated resources are used effectively, properly, and in compliance with budget and appropriations law. Over the years, DOD has initiated several broad-based reform efforts to address its long-standing financial management weaknesses. budgetary information. To maintain accountability over the use of public funds, DOD must carry out financial management functions such as recording, tracking, and reporting its budgeted spending, actual spending, and the value of its assets and liabilities. DOD relies on a complex network of organizations and personnel to execute these functions. Also, its financial managers must work closely with other departmental personnel to ensure that transactions and events with financial consequences are properly monitored, controlled, and reported, in part, to ensure DOD does not misappropriate funds. focus efforts of the department and components, in order to achieve certain short- and long- term results. DOD revised its FIAR strategy and methodology to focus on the DOD Comptroller’s two priorities. Budgetary and asset information is widely used by DOD managers at all levels, so its reliability is important. GAO supports DOD's current approach of focusing and prioritizing efforts to achieve incremental progress in addressing weaknesses and making progress toward audit readiness. the Defense Logistics Agency, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force and the DefenseLogistics Agency are participating in the FIAR Plan. resource requirements for improvement work. In developing their plans, components use a standard template that comprises data fields aligned to the methodology. The consistent application of a standard methodology for assessing the components’ current financial management capabilities can help establish valid baselines against which to measure, sustain, and report progress. Improving the department’s financial management operations and thereby providing DOD management and the Congress more accurate and reliable information will not be an easy task. It is critical that the current initiatives being led by the DOD DCMO and the DOD Comptroller be successful. to ensure control over the valuation of new assets acquired. The existence and completeness of all mission assets are deemed effective on a go-forward basis. Given the lack of documentation to support the values of the department’s legacy assets, federal accounting standards allow for the use of alternative methods to provide reasonable estimates for the cost of these assets. The dual focus on budgetary and asset information offers the potential to obtain preliminary assessments regarding the effectiveness of current processes and controls and identify potential issues that may adversely impact subsequent waves. The financial transformation needed at DOD, and its removal from GAO’s high-risk list, is a long-term effort. Improving financial management will need to be a cross-functional endeavor; requiring improvements in some of DOD's other business operations. As acknowledged by DOD officials, sustained and active involvement of the department's CMO, DCMO, military departments’ CMOs, the DOD Comptroller, and other senior leaders is critical. Within every administration, there are successes and failures. The department is heading in the right direction and making progress, says GAO. Some of the most difficult challenges ahead lie in the effective implementation of the department’s strategy. GAO will continue to monitor the progress of and provide feedback on the status of DOD’S financial management efforts, the report says. The department and its military components are fully auditable, and DOD financial management is no longer considered high risk, says the report. The report says the department is making progress and is committed to improving its financial management. The department is facing near and long-term internal fiscal pressures. For more than a decade, DOD has dominated GAO’s list of federal programs and operations at high risk of being vulnerable to fraud, waste, abuse. All of the DOD programs on the High-Risk List relate to business operations, including systems and processes related to management of contracts, finances, the supply chain, and other areas of the agency's operations. The department is trying to balance competing demands to support ongoing operations, rebuild readiness following extended military operations, and manage increasing personnel and health care costs. chief management officer (CMO) position and a comprehensive, enterprisewide business transformation plan. In May 2007, DOD designated the Deputy Secretary of Defense as the CMO. DOD financial managers are responsible for the functions of budgeting, financing, accounting for transactions and events, and reporting of financial and other activities. In addition, the National Defense Authorization Acts for fiscal years 2008 and 2009 contained provisions that codified the C MO and Deputy Chief Management Officer (DCMO) positions. The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006 directed DOD to develop a strategic plan to shape and improve the department’s civilian workforce. In developi the plan, the department identified financial management as one of its enterprisewide mission-critical occupations. Although some aspects of the legislative requirements were addressed, DOD still has significant work to do, the authors say. The plan included gap analyses related to the number of personnel needed for some of the mission- critical occupations, they say. We found that an obligation of $200 million in excess of available funds in the Army’s military personnel account violated the Antideficiency Act. The overobligation likely stemmed, in part, from lack of communication between Army Budget and program managers, we found. Army Budget did not know the actual amounts until it was too late to control the incurrence of excessive obligations in violation of the act. We found that at any given time in the fiscal year, Army Budget didn't know theactual amounts. obligation and expenditure levels of the account. Army Budget explained that it relies on estimated obligations. The lack of adequate process and system controls to maintain effective funds control impacted the Army’s ability to prevent, identify, correct, and report potential violations of the Antideficiency Act. In our February 2011 report on the Defense Centers of Excellence (DCOE), we found that TRICARE Management Activity (TMA) had misclassified $102.7 million of the nearly $112 million in DCOE advisory and assistance contract obligations. control and account for approximately $140 billion in annual spending. GFEBS is expected to be fully deployed during fiscal year 2012, is currently operational at 154 locations, including DFAS, and is being used by approximately 35,000 users. DEAMS is intended to provide the Air Force with the entire spectrum of financial management capabilities. It is expected. to maintain control and accountability for about $160 billion and is currently deployed at Scott Air Force Base and DFAS. The Air Force is currently using DEAMS at about 1,100 locations. reports are produced, the accuracy of those reports is questionable. The Army has plans to validate the audit readiness of GFEBS in a series of independent auditor examinations over the next several fiscal years. For DEAMS, the DOD Milestone Decision Authority has directed that the system is not to be deployed beyond Scott Air Force Base until the known system weaknesses have been corrected and the system has been independently tested to ensure that it is operating as intended. In closing, I am encouraged that the Army and Air Force have stated that they have plans to address these issues.  DFAS users have devised manual workarounds and several applications to obtain the information they need to perform their day-to-day tasks. The backlog of unresolved GFEBS trouble tickets has continued to increase from about 250 in September 2010 to approximately 400 in May 2011. According to Army officials, problems include issues with transactions or system performance that have not been resolved. To compensate, DFAS uses have devised several applications that provide information on how to use the systems to perform daily tasks. The Army and DFAS are taking steps to address issues raised by DFAS. Approximately two-thirds of invoice and receipt data must be manually entered into GFEBS from the invoicing and receiving system. DFAS personnel stated that manual data entry will eventually become infeasible due to increased quantities of data that will have to be manually entry. Army officials acknowledged that there is a need for the system to be updated to accommodate the growing number of users and transactions being processed by the system.  DFAS personnel stated that the problem is the result of a problem with the Wide Area Work Flow and GFEBS interface. Manual workarounds are needed to process certain accounts receivable transactions such as travel debts. The Army has recognized this limitation and is currently developing a system enhancement that they expect will better support the users’ needs. The Department of Defense is currently working with DFAS to resolve the problem, according to DFAS officials. The problem is believed to have been caused by an issue with the wide area work flow interface. of the data not being properly converted from the legacy systems to DEAMS. DFAS officials indicated that they were experiencing difficulty with some of the DEAMS system interfaces. For example, the interface problem with the Standard Procurement System has become so severe that the interface has been turned off, and the data must be manually entered into DeAMS. DEAMS does not provide the capability to produce ad hoc reports that can be used to perform the data analysis need to perform daily operations. They also noted that when some  implementation of an integrated, audit-ready systems environment underlies all of DOD’s financial improvement efforts. According to DOD, the successful implementation of the ERPs is not only critical for addressing long-standing weaknesses in financial management, but equally important for helping to resolve weaknesses in other high-risk areas. Successful implementation will support DOD by standardizing and streamlining its financial management and accounting systems. It will also integrate multiple logistics systems and finance processes, providing asset visibility for accountable items, and integrating personnel and pay systems. DOD has identified 10 ERPs as essential to its efforts to transform its business operations. We are currently reviewing the status of two of these ERPs. GFEBS is intended to support the Army’s standardized financial management and accounting practices for the general fund, except for funds related to the Army Corps of Engineers. The Army estimates that G FEBS will be used to deliver the promised capabilities on time and within budget. The Air Force is reviewing its Defense Enterprise Accounting and Management System (DEAMS) reported that the modernization program had spent hundreds of millions of dollars on an enterprise architecture and investment management structures that had limited value. Congress included provisions in the Ronald W. Reagan National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2005 that were consistent with our recommendations. DOD continues to take steps to comply with the act’s provisions and to satisfy relevant system modernization management guidance. Until DOD fully implements these longstanding institutional modernization management controls its business systems modernization will likely remain a high-risk program, the report says. increased reprogramming thresholds granted to components that receive a positive audit opinion on their Statement of Budgetary Resources. Audit costs funded by the Office of the Secretary of Defense after a successful audit, and publicizing and rewarding components for successful audits. The challenge now is to evaluate and validate these and other incentives to determine their effectiveness and whether the right mix of incentives has been established. Well-defined enterprise architecture. For decades, DOD has been challenged in modernizing its timeworn business systems. Since 1995, we have designated DOD’s business systems modernization program as high risk. Long-standing challenges that we previously identified remain to be addressed. While DOD continues to release updates to its corporate enterprise architecture, the architecture has yet to be federated. In this regard, each of the military departments has made progress in managing its respective architecture program. There are still limitations in the scope and completeness, as well as the maturity of theMilitary departments’ architecture programs. For example, while each department has established or is in the process of establishing an executive committee with. Mission Critical Assets Existence and Completeness Audit focuses on ensuring that all assets that are recorded in the department’s accountable property systems of record exist. Wave 4—Full Audit Except for Legacy Asset Valuation includes the valuation assertion over new asset acquisitions. Wave 5—Full Financial Statement Audit focuses efforts on assessing and strengthening, as necessary, internal controls, processes, and business systems involved in supporting the valuations reported for legacy assets once efforts have been completed.include procure-to-pay, hire- to-retire, order-To-cash, and budget- To-Report. The first three waves focus on achieving the DOD Comptroller’s interim budgetary and asset accountability priorities, while the remaining two waves are intended to complete actions needed to achieve full financial statement auditability. Each wave focuses on assessing and strengthening internal controls and business systems. The department has not yet fully defined its strategy for completing waves 4 and 5. The next wave is expected to be completed by the end of the year. The Department of Defense is the largest taxpayer in the U.S., with a budget of more than $1 trillion. related to the stage of auditability addressed in the wave. Wave 1 focuses on the appropriations receipt and distribution process. Wave 2 focuses on supporting the budget-related data used for management decision making and reporting, including the Statement of Budgetary Resources. In addition to fund balance with Treasury reporting and reconciliation, other significant end-to-end business processes in this wave include budgeting, apportionment and sub-allotment activity within the department. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/government/audit/index.html#storylink=cpy. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.

ROUGE-1: 75.81, ROUGE-2: 68.64, ROUGE-L: 28.59
BERTScore: 58.66

==============================================
==================== [75/100] ====================
Summary:
DOT extended the deadline for highway agencies to implement an assessment or management method for ensuring that their signs comply with the retroreflectivity standard to May 2014. DOT said it changed the deadlines to reduce the costs and impacts of the compliance deadlines on state and local highway agencies. It noted that the original deadlines had been based on standard useful-life cycles for signs, but that varying environmental conditions meant that the actual useful life of signs varied in different areas of the country. Communities are still required to replace any signs that do not meet the standards. minimum retroreflectivity levels. Communities were required to comply with the new standard by certain deadlines. There were three deadlines: January 22, 2012 (four years after adoption), 2015, and 2018. The deadline for communities to bring all street name signs and overhead guide signs into compliance with the standard is January 22. 2018 is the deadline for bringing all street names and overhead guides into compliance. For more information on the standards, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/22/road-signs-standard/index.html. of the retroreflectivity maintenance standard is likely to be modest. The impact may be greater in smaller communities that may never have instituted sign maintenance and replacement programs. Press reports indicate that a number of state and local highway agencies stated they estimated that their costs to comply with the new standard were much higher than the estimate in the DOT study. The methodologies by which these estimates were generated were not reported. In the controversy over the newstandard, the charge was made that the standard required agencies to replace "perfectly good" traffic signs. If a traffic sign meets the MUTCD standard for retroreflectivity, it does not have to be replaced. Several comments submitted during the rulemaking process described the rule as an unfunded mandate. It would impose additional costs on state and local governments for developing sign inventories, training personnel to examine signs, and replacing signs without providing additional resources for these services. If a sign does not meet the minimum retroreflective standard, then it may create a safety hazard after dark, although it may appear to be perfectly good during daylight hours. The new standard involved two elements. First, it established measurable standards for the minimum acceptable retroreflectivity of signs. The second element was a requirement that agencies adopt a method by which to maintain the retro Reflectivity of their street signs. To provide flexibility to agencies, the standard listed several methods that can satisfy this requirement. They include visual nighttime inspection from a moving vehicle by a trained sign inspector; measurement of sign retroreflective using a retroreflectometer. and replacement of signs based on their expected status. of the state and local transportation agencies, by saying that not every sign needed to meet the minimum standard so long as agencies had a management process in place. FHWA noted that having formally implemented a method for maintaining retroreflectivity would appear to put an agency in a better position to defend lawsuits. Also, the final standard provided that agencies that have adopted an assessment or management method will be in compliance with the standard even if some signs do not meet the standard. The final standard was issued on June 25, 2013. life above the minimum standard for retroreflectivity; replacement of all signs in an area, or of a given type, at specified intervals. Replacement based on the performance of sample signs that are monitored for loss of retro Reflectivity. According to the standard, an agency using a retro reflectivity assessment or management method will be in compliance even if at times individual signs did not meet the standard. The standard is published by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) on behalf of the European Commission. meet the minimum retroreflectivity standard. Most MUTCD standards, such as the lettering standard, do not have compliance deadlines. It was given a compliance deadline because its safety impact was considered to be significant. States and local governments that are not in compliance with standards are potentially subject to having a portion of their federal transportation funding withheld. However, there is no federal enforcement mechanism for standards in the MUT CD. The reason for these requirements is the belief that uniformity in traffic control devices promotes public safety. Earlier versions of the MUTCD had declared that "All traffic signs ... should have adequate retroreflectivity" In 1985, the Center for Auto Safety petitioned FHWA to add a minimum nighttime visibility standard. Congress directed DOT to develop a minimum standard, with this provision in the FY1993 Department of Transportation appropriations bill. Generally, highway safety groups supported the standard, while state and local transportation agencies opposed the establishment of numerical minimum levels of retro Reflectivity. They preferred that the standard be limited to establishing a management process that agencies would follow. The 2007 amendment set a minimum level of retroreflectivity for signs and required state agencies to adopt a method to ensure that signs met that minimum. Because of its safety significance, this standard was given a deadline for compliance. Separately, in the 2009 edition of the MUTCD, FHWA updated the standard concerning the sign lettering style for names of places, streets, and highways (§2D.05). Formerly, names on signs could either be in all capital letters or have only the first letter capitalized. of using only uppercase letters. This standard did not have a deadline for compliance. The lettering standard applies only to signs with names of places, streets, and highways. State and local transportation agencies are required to implement the new lettering style only as they install new signs or replace existing signs. Some press reports have given the impression that the federal government is requiring communities to immediately begin replacing all street signs just to comply with this new standard. This change was made because drivers often have only a brief time to read these signs and studies indicate that mixed-case lettering is easier to read. no formal enforcement mechanism to ensure compliance. A study sponsored by DOT estimated the total additional cost to state and local governments of complying with the new standard to be $37.5 million over a 10-year period. The more significant potential enforcement mechanism for MUTCD standards is the tort liability that communities may face in the event of a lawsuit involving, in this case, a nighttime car crash in which the visibility of a street sign may be a factor. In fact, one report noted that "It is not uncommon for M UTCD principles to be violated (knowingly or unknowingly) in actual practice" Since 2007, the Federal Highway Administration has amended certain national standards for traffic signs. These new standards were the subject of some confusion and controversy. Some state and local agencies complained that the new standards would be relatively costly to comply with. The new standard took effect on January 22, 2008. The report provides background for the nighttime visibility maintenance standard and addresses some of the issues that have been raised about this standard. It was published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) in 1998. number of older drivers is increasing significantly. Ensuring that traffic signs are easily visible to older drivers at night is becoming a more significant safety issue. FHWA-sponsored research and the development of a proposed standard based on that research by a task force appointed by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), which represents state and local transportation agencies. The process of developing the new standard included FH WA- sponsored research and a proposal by AASHTo. a minimum level of retroreflectivity that must be maintained for pavement markings and signs. The reflective properties of sign materials decrease over time, due to exposure to sunlight and other factors. As the reflective materials degrade, a sign becomes harder to see at night. For many reasons, including the limited visibility available to drivers after sunset, driving at night is much more dangerous than driving during the daytime. Nighttime crash rates are estimated to be three times higher than daytime rates, and the fatality rate for nighttime driving is also higher than for daytime driving. At night, when visual cues available to drivers are much more limited, the assistance provided by traffic signs becomes more important. If a sign is necessary in the daytime, it has equal or greater value to motorists at night. Nighttime driving becomes more challenging as drivers age, because over time the lens of the eye typically become less transparent. This and other changes result in reduced sensitivity to light and reduced clarity of vision for older persons. With the aging of the U.S. population, the. period. Of this, $27.5 million would be borne by local governments, and $11.8 million by state governments. The total cost was estimated to represent a 0.5% increase in annual sign maintenance costs for states. Up to 100% of the cost of replacing traffic signs is eligible for federal funding. Most larger communities already have sign maintenance and replacement programs. For these communities, the study estimated that the impact on local government budgets would not be significant. The maximum cost in any one year was estimated at $4.5million. The minimum retroreflectivity standard's primary impact was to establish a quantifiable level for what constitutes adequate nighttime visibility. Up to 100% of the cost of installing and replacing traffic signs can be covered by federal-aid highway funding under several programs. The annual level of federal-Aid highway funding provided through the annual DOT appropriations act rose from $33.9 billion in FY2004 (when the rule was formally proposed) to $41.5 billion in Fiscal Year 2012 (FY2012) The federal government provided $27.5billion to states and localities in FY2012.

ROUGE-1: 80.44, ROUGE-2: 74.33, ROUGE-L: 31.00
BERTScore: 63.06

==============================================
==================== [76/100] ====================
Summary:
Under the statute, "proprietary trading" covers buying and selling of "financial instruments" by banking entities as "principal" for their "trading accounts" "Financial instruments" include securities, derivatives, and contracts for future sale or for options on any commodity other than foreign exchange or currency. The regulation focuses on restricting short-term trades. It establishes a rebuttable presumption that any financial instrument held for fewer than 60 days is a banned proprietary trade unless all relevant facts and circumstances rebut the presumption. in the definition of "proprietary trading," including the following: acquisitions or sales of financial products pursuant to a repurchase and reverse repurchase agreement. "highly liquid" securities as part of a valid liquidity management plan, which "the banking entity does not reasonably expect to give rise to appreciable profits or losses" as a result of short-term price movements. "Derivative clearing activities," such as in connection with a judicial or administrative proceeding, are also included in the definition. "Trading account" also covers trades by banking entities that are securities dealers and swap or swap-based securities dealers. The Rule, embodied in the regulations, expressly provides that certain activities are not included in the trading account category. The trading account is used to buy or sell one or more financial instruments "principally" for "short-term resale," to benefit from " short-term price movements," or to hedge any of these. It also covers market risk capital transactions and hedges. The Rule carves out numerous exclusions and designates myriad activities as permissible so long as various terms and conditions are met. The statutory language provides only general outlines of prohibited activities and exceptions, while empowering the Office of the Comptroller of purpose of that law. Foreign-based funds that raise money to sell or invest in securities and whose ownership interests are offered and sold exclusively outside the U.S., that either are sponsored by a banking entity or have ownership interests held by the banking entity, are among the prohibited activities. The ban on proprietary trading does not apply to a banking entity's underwriting activities. Underwriting activities must be related to the bank's role as a securities underwriter. The banking entity must have an internal compliance program, and certain other requirements must be met. The regulation's requirements include that "[t]he amount, types, and risks of the financial instruments ... are designed to protect the safety and soundness of banking entities engaged in such activities" The ban on market making activities also doesn't apply to banking entities. applicability of the Rule. It then separately analyzes the two distinct components of the rule. The Rule is to broadly prohibit banking entities from engaging in these two broad categories of activities. It also carving out specific exclusions from the scope of the two categories and exceptions for certain activities. These excepted activities are designated as permissible under the Rule unless they would involve or result in a material conflict of interest;. They are not subject to the same restrictions as those for proprietary trading or investing in and sponsoring covered funds. as they meet the same terms and conditions necessary to comply with the exceptions for underwriting and market making from the ban on proprietary trading. According to the preamble to the final regulations, [t]he Agencies believe that providing a separate provision relating to permitted underwriting. and market-making-related activities for ownership interests in covered funds is supported by [12 U.S.C. §1851(d)(1)(B)]. For underwriting activities, the requirements are the same as those for covered fund activities. Investments permitted under Bank Holding Company Act are conducted solely outside the United States. The regulation also includes various other restrictions. The agencies used this broad authority to define the scope of the regulation. The statute provides the agencies with discretion to permit proprietary trading for any other activity that they "determine, by rule, ... would permit promote and protect the safety soundness of the banking entity and the financial stability of the U.S. of the United states" The regulation is expected to go into effect in early 2015. The Volcker Rule establishes an outright prohibition on proprietary trading by a "banking entity" Subsequent provisions of the legislation provide activities that are excluded from the definition of "proprietary trading" Riskless principal transactions, where a banking entity buys or sells a financial product "to offset a contemporaneous sale or purchase" of a customer, are exempt from the ban. The statute permits trading by insurance companies for their general accounts.under certain circumstances will be permitted to trade foreign government obligations. Regulations would allow U.S. banks to purchase and sell "any municipal security" and other domestic government obligations without running afoul of the prohibition against proprietary trading. Under certain circumstances, foreign banks and foreign affiliates of U.s. banks under certain circumstances will be permitted to trade foreign government obligations. Under the regulations, banking entities would be able to buy and sell obligations of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, the Federal Home Loan Banks, Farmer Mac, and Farm Credit System institutions. compliance programs, internal controls, and recordkeeping systems to control and monitor the risk of trading and investment activities. Compliance requirements vary in accordance with the size of the banking entity. Banking entities with total assets below $10 billion may fold. banking entities conducting no proprietary trading activity (other than trading of federal, agency, or state and local obligations) and having no investments in covered funds are not required to develop a Volcker Rule-specific compliance program but must do so if they begin to conduct such activities. of material conflicts of interest, threats to safety and soundness, or exposure to high-risk assets or trading strategies. documentation of plans for seeking unaffiliated investors to meet investment limits. Board of director and senior management involvement; and CEO attestation. The regulations require any banking entity engaging in any activity or making an investment in violation of the Volcker Rule to terminate the activity and divest the investment promptly. They also authorize the agencies to "take any action permitted by law to enforce compliance ..., including directing the banking entity to restrict, limit, or terminate any or all activities" Volcker Rule compliance measures into existing compliance programs. The standard compliance requirements apply to banking entities with assets of $10 billion or more. In addition to complying with the standard compliance program, banks with $50 billion in assets or more are subject to Enhanced Minimum Standards. The Volcker Rule includes requirements for written policies and procedures documenting compliance and verifying exemptions, according to the regulations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Banking entities must be ready to purchase and sell financial instruments in commercially reasonable amounts and throughout market cycles. Underwriting positions must be "designed not to exceed the reasonably expected near term demands of clients, customers, or counterparties"; and it must have an internal compliance program. Whether the goal of the agencies for flexibility sufficient to maintain robust capital markets has been achieved, particularly with respect to some specialty markets with limited participants, awaits time and further study of the regulations. The requirements include that the banking entity "routinely stands ready to buy and sell ... financial instruments ... " (2) internal control systems, (3) management frameworks, (4) independent testing and review, (5) personnel training, and (6) recordkeeping. For banking entities subject to the standard compliance program, the final regulations also require and establish methods of calculating quantitative measurements that banking entities must furnish for seven aspects of each trading desk. Appendix A sets forth non-exclusive recordkeeping and reporting requirements, including quantitative measurements of risk factor sensitivities, position limits and usage, profit and loss attribution, inventory turnover and aging, and customer facing trade ratio. metrics, for banking entities with "significant trading assets and liabilities" The preamble to the final regulations make clear, however, that these are not safe harbors. "Banking entities [must ensure] that they have robust measures in place to identify and monitor the risks taken in their trading activities," the regulations say. The Enhanced Minimum Standards include instructions as to the specific ingredients of the entity's policies, the regulation says. The proposed rule is expected to come into effect in early 2015. and procedures applicable to its trading desks and to its covered fund activities or investments. For the trading desks of banking entities that are subject to the heightened compliance program, there are specific requirements regarding how the trading desk "identif[ies], authoriz[es], and document[s] financial instruments to be purchased or sold" "types and amounts of risks allocated" to each trading desk; how those risks will be measured; why those risks are appropriate; "the process for setting new or revised limits"; and types of permissible customers and counterparties. compensation arrangements. There are also provisions on describing the firm's risks and risk management process. For covered fund activities or investments, the Enhanced Minimum Standards requirements include management involvement in reviewing and testing the identification and documentation of all covered funds sponsored or organized by components of the organization. The requirements include identification of the lines of authority with respect to such funds; explanations of monitoring for and prohibition of covered funds; and specifics of its analytical policies and procedures and quantitative measurements. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/business/finance-finance/firms-must-report-their-risk-management-process-to-the-fraudulently-dodged-investment-authorities. activities any transaction or class of activities, otherwise permitted, that would involve or result in a material conflict of interest. The regulators may impose additional capital and quantitative limits as "appropriate to protect the safety and soundness of banking entities engaged in such activities" The Rule also provides standards by which the regulators may set further limits or conditions on these permissible activities, and includes authority for the regulators to add to the list of permitted activities. It provides standards for how the regulators might set limits on these activities. to meet a list of widely divergent objectives. The statute states the prohibitions and conditions in very broad terms and applies them to an array of financial institutions. It applies to community and global banks, every variety of insurance firm, securities firms, and foreign banking institutions operating in the United States, among others. The federal financial regulators have been tasked with diverse objectives, among which are the following: promoting safety and soundness of the entities covered by the Rule; protecting taxpayers and consumers; limiting inappropriate transfers of money. the safety net provided by FDIC deposit insurance. reducing conflicts of interests between the entities and their clients. limiting unduly risky activities by these entities. "appropriately" accommodating the business of insurance; and " appropriately" timing divestiture of illiquid assets affected by the Rule. It includes a broad explicit delegation of discretion to exclude from the basic prohibitions of the statute "[s]uch other activity as the appropriate [federal] activity" The statutory language requires the regulators to explicate such critical terms as "banking entity," "covered fund," and "illiquid fund" Risk-mitigating hedging activities are "related to individual or aggregated positions ... that are designed to reduce the specific risks to the banking entity" The final rule seeks to make it clear that portfolio hedging will not be permitted; or otherwise significantly mitigate the specific, identifiable risk. Banking entities must have written internal programs in place to ensure that hedges comply with the Volcker Rule both at the time of acquisition, as well as through the life of the bank. The limitation to "specific, identifiablerisk[s]" appears to prohibit portfolio hedges akin to the JPMorgan London Whale trades. This provision is aimed at preventing incidents like the $6 billion loss that JPMorgan & Co. suffered in 2012 as a result of derivatives trades. The statute authorizes the purchase and sale of U.S. obligations, obligations of federal agencies and obligations of Ginnie Mae and GSE Obligations. The provision was passed in response to the Senate Banking Committee's investigation into the London Whale trading scandal. The trading was conducted by a trader known as the London whale and which were documented in a Senate investigation. that are treated like bank holding companies pursuant to the International Banking Act of 1978. This includes foreign-based banks that are permitted to operate branches in the U.S. An affiliate is "any company that controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with [a company described in categories 1-3]." 4. Affiliates and subsidiaries of companies described in 1-2. The Volcker Rule applies to all depository institutions and to most companies that are owned by or have a common ownership interest with a depository. The Volcker Rule prohibits banking entities from holding an ownership interest in a covered fund. The prohibition does not apply if the interest is acquired by a banking entity while "acting solely as agent, broker, or custodian," fiduciary, or trustee for a customer. A banking entity's ownership interest will be considered an "other similar interest" if the banking entity has any of the following: 1. control over the removal or hiring of acovered fund, or 2. any control over an employee compensation plan organized for the benefit of the bank's employees. The Volcker Rule authorizes banking entities to acquire ownership interests in, sponsor, organize, and offer covered funds. The rule allows banks to act as a securitizer or, in accordance with the credit risk retention requirements of Section 15G(a)(3) of the Exchange Act, to hold investments in a covered fund that is an issuer of asset-backed securities. The banking entity takes certain steps to assure the investors in the fund that losses of the fund will be borne solely by its investors. for the purposes of the Volcker Rule. This broad definition of ownership interest has caused some consternation among banking entities. For example, certain collateralized debt obligations (CDO) backed by trust preferred securities (TruPS) generally was a prohibited investment under the original Volcker rule regulations. The American Bankers Association and several community banks are among those who are concerned about the rule's impact on their operations. The rule's effect on the U.S. economy is expected to be felt in the first quarter of 2014. a material exposure to high-risk assets or high- risk trading strategies; pose a threat to the safety and soundness of the banking entity. The report concludes by addressing other aspects of the Rule that apply generally to banking entities. The Volcker Rule is not likely to remain static over time, the report says. Rather, regulators likely will modify and clarify the requirements through regulations and guidance to address unforeseen complexities, it says. The thrust of the Volcker rule's restrictions applies to banks. On December 10, 2013, more than two years after the statutorily mandated deadline, five federal financial regulators published final regulations. The regulations are implementing Section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Together these are known as the Volcker Rule, which is designed to prohibit banks and their affiliates from engaging in risky, short-term, speculative trading. These are practices long condemned by the Rule's namesake, former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul A. Volcker. The Volcker Rule aims to distinguish prohibited activities from activities considered essential to the safety and soundness of banking institutions or to the maintenance of strong capital markets. The report begins by analyzing the integral definition of "banking entity," which serves as the foundation for the Volcker rule. It then analyzes the details of the rulemakings to fill in the details and complete the difficult task of crafting regulations. The full report is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/business/volcker-rule-report-1.html. The Federal Reserve Board set the date when conformance with the Rule is required as July 21, 2015. That date could be extended an additional two years, and banking institutions and their affiliates are under an obligation to meet that date with full compliance. The Volcker Rule, which according to an analysis by one of the issuing regulators might impose significant costs on covered institutions, could trigger the need for future bailouts, the FRB said in a statement. The FRB added that the Volcker rule is not intended to replace conventional banking principles. banking organizations promptly filed a lawsuit challenging this aspect of the financial regulators' interpretation of the Volcker Rule. The financial regulators responded by issuing an interim final rule on January 14, 2014, that will serve as a companion to the December 10 Volcker rule regulations. Shortly after the regulators issued the interim final rules, the plaintiffs withdrew their lawsuit. While the focus of theinterim final rule is on TruPS issued and issued, it will also apply to TruPS-backed CDO (or similar investment vehicle) Under the FRB's recent extension, the conformance date is July 21, 2015. The statute generally requires divestiture of nonconforming activities within two years of the Rule becoming effective. The FRB has authority to extend this two-year period one year at a time, not to exceed an aggregate of three years. For a company that was not a banking more time to conform, developing an appropriately specific conformance plan, and immediately terminating any stand-alone proprietary trading operations.this part and dispose of any investment. entity or a subsidiary or affiliate of a banking entity on that date, conformance is required before the later of July 21, 2015, or two years after the date on which the company becomes a banking entities. A company becoming a banking. entity on July 21,. 2015, thus, would have two years, until July 21. 2017, to conform its activities and investments. Banking entities are expected to engage in good faith efforts to be in compliance with the rules. by not expanding covered activities or expecting them to. illiquid fund, the entity may apply to the FRB for an extension which may be granted for no more than five years. divestiture would be required either at the end of the five years or on the contractual date—whichever is earlier. The entity would then have to sell off the assets to pay off the debt. The FRB has the power to grant or deny an extension to any of the powers granted to it by the European Court of Justice or the European Convention on Human Rights. generally excluding debt and equity securities, subject to various terms and conditions. Covered Bonds Vehicles. Funds holding a pool of loans or certain other permissible assets "for the benefit of holders of covered bonds" Smaller Business Investment Companies (SBICs) and Other Public Welfare Investment Funds . Small business investment companies and similar. Small business Investment Companies and other public welfare Investment Funds. Small Business Investment Company (SBI) Funds. SBIs and similar public welfare investment funds. SBICs and such public welfare funds. companies organized "to make investments [d]esigned primarily to promote the public welfare" or investments in certain qualified historic tax credit programs. Registered Investment Companies and Business Development Companies (BDCs) Issuers registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940 and business development companies regulated by the SEC. FDIC Conservatorship or Receivership. Issuers organized " to facilitate the disposal of assets acquired in the FDIC's capacity as a conservator or receiver [of a depository institution or non-bank financial institution]." Banking entities that are organized in a foreign country and are not controlled, either directly or indirectly, by a U.S.-based banking entity may be exempt from the Volcker Rule. Insurance companies and their affiliates generally may sponsor or acquire ownership interests in covered funds if those interests are retained solely for the insurance company's or its affiliate's own account. Such investments comply with a state insurance regulatory regime, unless the federal banking regulators jointly determined that the state law permitting such investments "is insufficient to protect the safety and soundness of the banking entity" banking entity that is an insurance company or an affiliate of an insurance companies is permitted to buy or sell financial instruments for its own account. The transaction "is conducted in compliance with, and subject to, the insurance company investments laws" of the applicable state. Federal banking regulators, in consultation with the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) and relevant state or foreign insurance regulators, may jointly proscribe otherwise permissible insurance company investment activities if the state regulation of those activities "is insufficient to protect the safety and soundness of the banking entity" a foreign jurisdiction. Separate Life Insurance Accounts. Issuers of certain asset-backed securitizations, including certain loans, foreign exchange derivatives, and interest rate derivatives, but not life insurance policies. "A separate account, provided that no banking entity other than the insurance company participates in the account's profits and losses," says the FDIC. "No banking entity (or multiple banking entities) to acquire life insurance. policies for its benefit so long as the banking entity does not control the. account's investment decisions" to "banking entities" "Banking entity" is defined as: 1. FDIC-insured depository institutions. 2. Companies that own or control these depositories. 3. Foreign-based companies that hold a controlling share of a company's stock or influence over its decision-making process. "Bank holding companies" are typically organized as bank holding companies (BHCs), financial holding company (FHCs) or savings and loan or thrift holding companies. For more information, go to: http://www.finance.gov/. "banking entity," as discussed below. Because they may engage in little or no activities that are banned by the Volcker Rule, the recordkeeping and reporting requirements and other compliance standards that apply to community banks and their subsidiaries and affiliates generally will not be as onerous as those imposed on the country's largest FHCs. As another example, foreign banks and foreign affiliates of U.S. banking entities may not be subject to the same recordkeeping requirements as their American-based counterparts. affiliates, directors, and employees. Wholly Owned Subsidiaries. Entities that are directly or indirectly owned entirely by the banking entity. Joint Ventures. Joint ventures between a banking entity or its affiliates and up to ten unaffiliated entities. Merger and Acquisition Vehicles. Issuers established for the sole purpose of effectuating "a bona fide merger or acquisition" Foreign Retirement and Pension Funds. Retirement or pension funds that are organized in, subject to regulation in, and provide benefits to residents or citizens of. De minimis investments in covered funds are subject to both per fund and aggregate caps. A de minimis investment made by a banking entity and its affiliates must "not exceed 3 percent of the total number or value of the outstanding ownership interests of the fund" The Rule establishes various methods for calculating per Fund De Minimis Cap. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. fund de minimis investment caps based on the type of fund in question. Total ownership interests in covered funds by a banking entity and its affiliates "may not exceed 3 percent of the tier 1 capital of the banking entity" For those banking entities that must report tier 1capital levels to appropriate banking regulators in accordance with other law, the calculation will remain the same for the purposes of the Volcker Rule. However, the final regulations establish how tier 1. capital levels will be calculated in the future. Capital should be calculated for those banking entities that are not otherwise required to maintain and report capital levels. The FRB may provide up to two additional years to conform with the per fund de minimis cap if such an extension "would be consistent with safety and soundness and not detrimental to the public interest" Certain SEC-registered business development companies, investment companies, and foreign public funds, which generally are excluded from the definition of "covered fund" as described above, will not be considered an affiliate of a banking entity if the banking entity does not own, control or hold with the power to vote 25 percent or more. Banking entities are permitted to take ownership stakes in covered funds for hedging purposes subject to important limitations. Such acquisitions are only permissible to the extent that they are "designed to demonstrably reduce the reasonably expected near term demands of clients, customers, or counterparties"; and the banking entity must have an internal compliance program. Any ownership interest acquired by a banking entity conducting underwriting or market making activities with a covered fund must be included in both the per fund and aggregate de minimis investment cap calculations discussed above. fund's managers, directors, or investment advisors, except when exercising creditor rights upon a default or acceleration trigger. A right to share in a covered fund's "income, gains, or profits"; 3. a right to receive all or a portion of excess spread"; 4. a duty to pay acovered fund for the ownership interest that could be reduced based on lower interest rates owed on the covered fund; and 5. a "right" to receive "all or a part" of the fund's assets. such ownership interest or as a result of a loss in value of the fund's assets; 6. any earnings of pass-through income from the covered fund; or 7. "any synthetic right to have, receive, or be allocated any of the rights in [1-6]." The regulations state that, under certain circumstances, "restricted profit interests" held by a banking entity or one of its current or former employees that served as a trading or investment advisor, manager, or similar service provider is not considered an ownership interest. minimis interest in the funds; (4) the banking entity and its affiliates engage in no transaction with the fund that would be designated as a "covered transaction" under Federal Reserve Act (FRA) Section 23A; (5) the Banking entity does not guaranty the obligations of the covered fund; and (6) thecovered fund does not have the word "bank" in its name or share a name with the banking securities so long as the banking entities retains only a de minimis interest. Banking entities that provide advisory or investment management services to or hold a permissible interest in a covered fund are prohibited from entering into a transaction that would be considered a "covered transaction" for the purposes of FRA Section 23A with the covered fund. Any permissible transactions between covered funds and banking entities and their affiliates must be entered into in accordance with the "arms-length" requirements of Section 23B. The statute requires the federal financial regulators to issue regulations to "insure compliance with [Section 619]." its name or share a name with the banking entity. No director or employee of the banking entities, other than those directly engaged in providing investment advisory or other services to the covered fund, acquires an interest in the fund. The banking entity takes certain steps to assure the investors in the hedge fund or private equity fund that losses of the fund will be borne solely by its investors. Although not explicitly excepted by the statute, pursuant to the regulations, banking entities generally may engage in underwriting and market making activities for covered funds. The Volcker Rule regulations define "covered fund" to largely encompass entities that are exempt from various registration requirements with either the SEC or CFTC. The term includes issuers that rely on Investment Company Act of 1940 Sections 3(c)(1) or 3( c)(7) to avoid being considered investment companies. Even if a banking entity acquires an investment in or sponsorship of a covered fund that meets one of the permissible exceptions described below, it could still be barred by the Volcker rule. Act of 1940 if such funds were subject to U.S. securities laws. The rule explicitly excludes a number of activities and products from the "covered fund" definition. These exclusions include the following: Foreign Public Funds. Issuers that are not organized or established in the United States that "issue ownership interests to retail investors in [their] home jurisdiction" and such interests are sold "predominantly" through one or more public offerings outside of the United states. This exemption only applies if "the ownership interests in the issuer are sold predominately to persons other than such sponsoring banking entity" and their

ROUGE-1: 76.68, ROUGE-2: 69.84, ROUGE-L: 27.17
BERTScore: 59.36

==============================================
==================== [77/100] ====================
Summary:
of room and board and miscellaneous personal expenses in their cost of attendance, as is done for other students. We estimate that about 13,000 less-than-halftime students who do not receive a Pell award under current law would receive an average award of $630 under this alternative in the 2003-2004 academic year. We found that the Pell Grant policy change would increase the average Pell Grant award from $0 to $630 for 0.63 percent (12,679/2,007,542) of the less- Than-Halftime student population. Policy change would increase the number of people who are qualified to receive an award. This policy change may cause people to change their postsecondary enrollment behavior. Students who are already enrolled less than halftime in postsecondary education are unlikely to change enrollment in response to the policy change. We estimate that the Pell Grant policy change will cause about 35,000 people between the ages of 18 and 35 who are not currently enrolled in school to enroll less thanftime. This conclusion was reached based upon the following calculations: less-than- halftime students are independents. Seftor and Turner estimated price elasticities that fall in the range of –0.34 to -0.14. To estimate the possible behavioral response to a change in Pell Grant policy, we applied a price elasticity in the middle to the less than halftime Pell award amounts estimated in this study. We assumed that changes to the Pell Grant cost of attendance methodology, if adopted, would be applied to the cost of Attendance for both dependent and independent students. Using the 1999-2000 National Postsecondary Student Aid Study, we estimated a Pell Grant for all students in the sample who were less-than- halftime students seeking a certificate or undergraduate degree. We estimated Pell Grant awards under the current law, and under an alternative COA. Federal costs were projected to school year 2003-04 by assuming that the ratio of these estimated federal costs to the total cost of the Pell grant program were the same as in school year 1999- 2000. To estimate the average Pell grant, we projected the estimated number of Pell grant recipients in school Year 1999-00 who are less than halftime students to school Year 2003- 04. total federal budget cost of changing Pell Grant policy for less-than-halftime students would be approximately $25 million for the 2003-2004 academic year. This cost estimate assumes that adults who are not enrolled in school will not choose to enroll in response to the policy change. If about 35,000 individuals who were not in school respond to this change in policy by enrolling less than halftime, an estimate implied, in part, by some research, could be an additional $10 million. establish the share of income and assets that are expected to be available for the student’s education. If the EFC is greater than the cost of attendance, the student is not considered to have financial need for federal Title IV aid programs. As table 2 indicates, the elements included in the student's cost of. attendance for the purpose of calculating the Pell Grant award vary according to the extent of. their enrollment. The elements included for the purposes of calculating Pell Grant awards vary depending on the institution. If the student did not apply for financial aid, or the institution they attended did not have any Pell recipients in 1999-2000, we assumed that the student’s estimated Pell Grant to be $0. To receive a Pell Grant under the alternative COA, the individual must have applied for financial help. Inherent in this assumption is that an alternative Pell cost of attendance will not be available. The same steps were taken in estimating a student's Pell Grant. under theAlternative COA except that the Pell Cost of attendance was estimated to include room and board and personal expenses. Pell Grant awards are calculated by subtracting the student’s EFC from the maximum Pell Grant award. In 1999-2000, the maximum award for a less-than- halftime student was $781. The maximum subsidized Stafford loan award is equal to the student's calculated financial need, subject to statutory limits on annual and cumulative borrowing. Students attending less than halftime are eligible to receive one-quarter of the maximumelliport award. For full-time students, maximum award was $3,125 for fulltime students. proportion of adults who enrolled on a less-than- halftime basis had household incomes over $30,000 than did adults enrolled halftime or more. An estimated 7 percent of all adult students enrolled less than halftime in 1999-2000 had incomes at or below 100 percent of the federal poverty guideline. About 7 in 10 of the nation’s less- than-halftime adult students received assistance equaling about 44 percent of their school costs, typically from sources other than federal and state student aid. Few adults who enrolled less-than-halftime in 1999-2000 had incomes below 150 percent of the federal poverty guideline. Those who did received the bulk of assistance with their school costs from student financial aid. A smaller proportion received work-related assistance, either from their employer or the Lifetime Learning tax credit. Adults who work part-time receive employer financial assistance for enrollment in credential programs less often than those who work fulltime.award ($465) or the average level of employer support ($784) In 1999-2000, most adult students (85 percent) had incomes above 150 percent of the federal poverty guideline. According to federal and state financial aid rules, these adult students typically had incomes and assets that were sufficient to meet their postsecondary costs. While lower-income adult students received about two-thirds of their assistance (66 percent) from federal, state, institutional, and other aid, the opposite was true of higher-income student assistance (71 percent of their support from work-related sources assistance) education or training costs, which are estimated to have been, on average, $1,058 for all less-than-halftime adult students in 1999-2000. About one-half of these costs were comprised of tuition and fees, while the remaining amount was comprised of books, equipment, childcare, and transportation costs. The average Lifetime Learning tax credit ($74) was significantly smaller than the average Pell Grant. For those less- Than-Halftime adults who received assistance in1999-2000, the average amount was $462, or 44 percent of their school costs. of recipients in school year 2003-04. Our estimate of students’ subsidized loan awards is based upon the federal needs analysis methodology for subsidized Stafford loans. For each student we estimated a cost of attendance (minus room and board and personal expenses) for the period enrolled in school (loan COA). We calculated and prorated the expected family contribution for the number of months the student attended school. We also calculated each student’s estimated financial assistance, adding federal, state, private, and institutional aid. Estimated subsidized loans, if above the loan limit level, were set at the maximum amount allowed by law. school year 2003-04, we projected the estimated number of Stafford subsidized and unsubsidized recipients in school year 1999-2000. All students were assumed to borrow the Stafford loan amounts for which they qualify. Education officials provided information on federal subsidy rates for Stafford loans and budget estimates for the Pell Grant program. Tables 7-31 contain the sample-based estimates and tables 7-32 contain the average loan award estimates and the loan volume estimates. The average loan awards for students seeking a certificate or undergraduate degree to school year 2003/04 are shown in the table. and class year were projected from school year 1999-2000 to school year 2003-04. The federal cost of this policy change equals the projected loan volume times the applicable subsidy rate. Federal costs other than the subsidy costs of the loans were not considered. To estimate the average loan awards in, FFELP/FDLP, school type, and class year was used. The average loan award was estimated to be in the range of $2,000 to $3,000 per student. Proposed changes to the Pell Grant program include allowing room and board and miscellaneous personal expenses, as is done for fulltime students. Another proposed change would be to allow less-than-halftime students to participate in the Stafford Loan programs. Administrators of postsecondary institutions in the four states we visited expressed concern about potential negative consequences of the Stafford loan proposal. Allowing room, board, and personal expenses in calculating their Pell Grant cost of attendance would most often assist students who are currently receiving a Pell grant, providing them with an estimated $100 annual increase. less than halftime basis do not intend to complete a degree, and many others expect to do so, but are unable to continue to completion. If less than halftime adults who do not complete a credential nonetheless benefit from completing a few postsecondary courses, then federal policy tools designed to support shorter-term and non-credential adult learning can better assist these learners than can Title IV programs. The potential costs—to the federal government, institutions, and students—of proposed changes to the Pell Grant and Stafford Loan programs, particularly the latter, are significant. less-than-halftime students and changing the Stafford loan programs. For the purposes of this report, adult students are those who are 24 years or older. In designing our study, we reviewed data and literature pertaining to financial aid for adult students and part-time students. We analyzed focus group findings examining the barriers to enrollment and persistence faced by low-income adults. We interviewed officials at the Department of Education, researchers, and representatives of higher education organizations, such as the American Association of Community Colleges. Ohio ($2,300). Within each state, we contacted three to six institutions (see table 1). Because most less-than-halftime adult students are enrolled at 2-year public institutions, we visited more of this type than other postsecondary schools. In addition, we selected institutions with large proportions of adult students in their overall student body. We met with a range of school administrators at these institutions, including financial aid officers, student affairs officers, directors of institutional research, and other administrative officers. Administrators expressed the potential disadvantages associated with expanding eligibility. They observed that expanding eligibility to less-than-halftime students might increase their institution's cohort default rate. They expressed concern that Stafford borrowing by lower-income adults enrolled less than halftime might burden these students with unmanageable debt. Some students might choose to enroll for a few credits each term as a way to delay repayment, they noted. the administrative burden faced by campus financial aid offices as a result of changing Stafford eligibility rules. campus administrators anticipate that the change could have undesirable effects on postsecondary institutions and on students. Permitting all less-than-halftime students to participate in the Stafford loan programs would increase federal subsidy costs by approximately $113 million in fiscal year 2004. We estimate that the average unsubsidized Stafford loan taken out by adult students enrolled less than halftime would be approximately $680. Federal subsidy costs in subsequent fiscal years would change depending upon the number of students enrolled at eligible institutions, loan amounts per student, and federal subsidy cost per loan dollar. The maximum unsubsidized Stafford loan award is equal to the student’s cost of attendance, subject to statutory limits on annual and cumulative borrowing. Adult students also received financial aid from states, postsecondary institutions, and other federal sources. In 1999-2000, states awarded a total of $975 million to adult students enrolled in undergraduate education, typically on the basis of estimated financial need. About half of the states did not have aid programs in which adults enrolled less than halftime were eligible to participate. Some sources of funding available to adult learners, particularly work-related assistance provided by employers or the Lifetime Learning tax credit, permit short- term study that does not lead to the completion of a degree or certificate. In contrast to these funding streams, the federal student assistance programs authorized under Title IV of the Higher Education Act provide assistance for adult learning that takes place in eligible postsecondary institutions. Requiring that students enroll in—and make progress toward—a postsecondary credential ensures that the federal investment in Title IV programs is used to support learning. Adult students received about $3.3 billion in grant assistance and $8.5 billion in loan assistance from programs authorized under Title IV of the Higher Education Act. To receive federal financial aid, adult students must apply for federal WIA and TANF funds. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Programs authorized under Title IV include Pell Grants for low-income students and Stafford Loans. Stafford loans may be either subsidized or unsubsidized. If the loan is subsidized, the federal government pays the interest cost of the loan for the time a student is enrolled in school. The borrower is responsible for paying interest during the life of theloan. Title IV also authorizes programs funded by the Pell Grants program and by the Stafford Loans program. The federal government does not pay interest on Stafford loans. Students who apply for Title IV aid must do so using the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) Information from the FAFSA is used to determine the amount of money that the adult student is expected to contribute to his or her own education. Statutory definitions establish the criteria that students must meet to be considered independent of their parents for purposes of financial aid, and statutory formulas are used to calculate the expected family contribution (EFC) The EFC is the amount that students are expected to pay for their education. assistance to adults who are not currently receiving Pell Grants. In written comments on our draft report, Education stated that it appreciated our thorough review and examination of the financial, and other, impediments that are often unique to adult learners. Education noted that the report would complement a recent report of its own and that it would assist Education in achieving one of its departmental strategic goals. Education also provided technical comments, which we incorporated where appropriate. Education’s written comments appear in the report. The HOPE tax credit is limited to students who are enrolled halftime or more in a degree or certificate program. The Lifetime Learning tax credit may be used by tax filers who enroll for any number of credits. Federal programs authorized by WIA and PRWORA may also provide some adults with assistance in meeting the costs of postsecondary education. Under WIA, adults and dislocated workers may be eligible to receive job training. For taxpayers filing jointly, both credits were initially phased out at $80,000 adjusted gross income, and fully phased in at $100,000. and for any course that aids in learning new or improving existing job skills, including those that are not part of a degree or certificate program. Tax filers may use the credit for as many years as they are enrolled, without regard to degree progress or completion. In 1999-2000, all of the first $1,000 and half of the next $1,.000 of qualified education expenses per student could be used to compute the HOPE credit, for a maximum credit of $1.500. of assistance they received did vary by household income. Student financial aid from federal, state, and institutional sources comprised the majority of assistance received by lower-income adults. Very few adults enrolled on a less-than-halftime basis seldom received assistance from either federal WIA or TANF sources. An estimated 70 percent of less- Than-Halftime adults received assistance with their postsecondary lower- income counterparts in 1999-2000. We estimate that less than 1 percent of all less-Unlikely adult students received either WIA and TANf assistance with the cost of postsecondary education. Under PRWORA, block grants are made to states, which may use these funds to assist TANF recipients in meeting costs associated with vocational training or education. WIA funds may be used for postsecondary training only for expenses remaining after the receipt of Pell Grant and other sources of assistance. State and local workforce investment boards are authorized to establish limits on the amount of time or the amount of WIA  funds that may be used to meet training expenses. Under PRWORa, block grants are made to states, which may use these  funds to assist TANF recipients in meeting costs. The number of adult students enrolled with assistance from WIA was lower than the number enrolled under the previous federal workforce policy, the Job Training Partnership Act. The time and dollar limits established by local workforce investment boards may make it difficult for adult students to use WIA funds for the extended training that may be required for the completion of a postsecondary vocational credential, even for those who are enrolled on a fulltime job. Many students are unfamiliar with WIA, but those familiar with the program reported that very few adult students were WIA recipients. of considerations other than financial need. About $1 billion was available to the nation’s veterans and eligible service members through the Montgomery GI Bill. Financial assistance was also available to adult students from work- related sources. Employers may pay postsecondary educational expenses directly, or indirectly through employee reimbursement, and they are encouraged to do so by the federal tax code, which provides favorable tax treatment for them. The federal higher education tax credits and from employer-provided educational assistance are also available. In 1999-2000, employers provided $1.28 billion in assistance to adult students enrolled in undergraduate postsecondary education. Most often to those workers who were most likely to increase company productivity or profitability as a result of their education, such as high-skill, high-demand workers and managers. Assistance was also available to students through two federal higher education tax credits, the HOPE and HOPE tax credits.Employees were usually required by employers to meet a number of conditions to obtain this educational assistance. They were not obligated to enroll in degree or certificate programs, or to complete their studies. costs for resident tuition and fees at public 2-year institutions and the amount of available state aid varied. For example, in California the cost for resident 2- year tuition was lower than for all other states ($330), but no state aid is available to students pursuing their postsecondary credentials on a less-than-halftime basis. Maryland ranked 9th among states in tuition and Fees ($2,564) and, like California, did not have state financial aid available to less- Than-Halftime students. Both Virginia and Ohio had state aid available for less- than- Halftime students; however, Virginia’s $1,304 tuition was higher than that of Ohio. response to the policy change. This enrollment response would cost the federal government $9,764,063. In addition to those named above, the following people made significant contributions to this report: Cedric Burton, Betty Clark, Cindy Decker, Gordon Mermin, John Mingus, Susan Conlon, and Corrina Nicolaou. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. administrators of two institutions of higher education not included in our four sample states: the City University of New York and Kaplan College. We also reviewed studies and surveys of employer- provided educational assistance. To determine the extent of less-than-halftime enrollment among adult students, we analyzed national data and visited selected postsecondary institutions. We analyzed two datasets created by the National Center for Education Statistics: the 1999-2000 National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS) and the 2001 Beginning Postsecondary Students Study (BPS) National datasets provide valuable but limited information. For example, NPSAS is a cross-sectional rather than longitudinal study. We interviewed school administrators from 19 postsecondary institutions in four states. These institutions were located in California, Maryland, Ohio, and Virginia. The data were collected from 2-year and 4-year institutions in California and Maryland, and 2- year and 4 year institutions in Virginia. It is not clear if the data can be used to identify the duration for which students enrolled on a less-than-halftime basis. collected institutional data on less than halftime enrollment among students graduating from 10 of the 19 we visited. We solicited information from each institutional research officer about the reliability of these data. Because these are not samples of a larger student population, there are no confidence intervals associated with them. The following steps were taken to estimate the additional federal budget costs associated with permitting degree-seeking students enrolled less than halfway to include room, board, and miscellaneous personal expenses in calculating their cost of attendance (alternative COA) Less than 1 percent of less-than-halftime adult students received TANF assistance in 1999-2000. Many adult students entering certificate programs needed 1 year of remedial coursework before beginning their program and were, therefore, unable to complete their coursework within the 1-year time limit established by the local workforce investment board. NPSAS collected no data on the extent to which T ANF funds assisted these students in meeting costs associated with their training or education. School officials at the institutions we visited were generally unaware of the extent of TANf assistance to adult students. We computed estimates of the Lifetime Learning credits received by less-than-halftime adult students. NPSAS data are collected at the individual student level, and cannot be aggregated into families or linked to tax filing status. We treated individual students as if they were credit claimants and recipients. We reviewed existing information about the sample to assess the reliability of the N PSAS and BPS sample data. The study was published in the online edition of the Journal of the American College and University Studies. In Maryland, the Baltimore City Community College and city and state officials established the School Counts Program. TANF recipients who enroll at the community college are provided with advising, assistance with transportation and childcare expenses, and federal work study assistance. These supports permit a relatively large proportion of program participants to complete a certificate or degree. The program is not available in all states, but in Maryland, it is available to TANf recipients who are enrolled in community college. It is also available in other states, such as New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania. We determined that the NPSAS and BPS data were sufficiently reliable for this report. Because both surveys are samples of a larger student population, there is some sampling error associated with them. Sampling errors are often represented as a 95-percent confidence interval: an interval that 95 times out of 100 will contain the true population value. The upper and lower bounds of the 95- percent confidence intervals for each estimate are presented in the tables in appendix II. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. in appendix IV. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time we will send copies to the Secretary of Education and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions or wish to discuss this material further, please call me at (202) 512-8403. Administrators at one community college pointed to a lack of flexibility in employer work schedules. Adult students often need to refresh or develop college-level skills, they noted. Some adults may also lack confidence in themselves or their abilities, or feel out of place in school.in alternative times and formats. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. a college setting. One administrator noted that some adult students at her institution experienced stress-related illnesses after they had begun their coursework and needed to leave mid-semester. National data indicate that most adults who enrolled on a less-than- halftime basis during their first year of postsecondary education expected to complete a degree or certificate, but six years later the majority had left school with no credential. Moreover, data show that adults enrolled in college on less than halftime basis are more likely to be encountering academic difficulties than other adult students. Some adult students may have to pursue postsecondary education on a less-than-halftime basis. College administrators identified several other significant reasons. These include the difficulty meeting the direct costs of school, scheduling conflicts, and students’ limited readiness for postsecondaryEducation. While many adult students receive some financial support towards postsecondary costs, most students pay the majority of school costs from their own resources. The majority of adult students pay for their own education through tuition and fees, as well as transportation, childcare, and books. School administrators say many adults have too little time to be a fulltime student. The routines of adult lifecompete with class attendance and the completion of course assignments, they say. Faced with this, many adults find it difficult to balance work and school, the administrators say. It's a balancing act that many adult students find difficult to achieve, they add. It can be difficult to meet family responsibilities and work obligations at the same time, school administrators say, adding that many adults struggle with this balancing act. Adults may find it easier to plan and manage their schedules over 5 to 7 weeks than they do over longer time periods, such as a traditional 10 or 15- week semester. At one 4-year school, only 10 percent of the undergraduate courses were offered during evening hours. At another institution, administrators noted that 3,000 course sections were offered each semester, but only 10 were available to adults in a shorter 5-7 week format, owing to reluctance of faculty to teach them. In the 1999-2000 academic year, an estimated 7.1 million adults were enrolled as undergraduates in the nation’s postsecondary institutions. About three- quarters of these adult undergraduates were between the ages of 24 to 40, while about one-quarter were 41 or older. Compared with undergraduate students under the age of 24, adult students enrolled in.credential program, such as a continuing education class. The average age of these students was 24.5 years old. 1999-2000 were more likely to be working full time (35 or more hours per week), to be married, to have dependents, and to lack a conventional high school diploma. While the majority of undergraduates under the age of 24 were enrolled in baccalaureate programs, adult undergraduate students were primarily enrolled in certificate or associate programs in 1999-2000. Most adult students (55 percent) were enrolled at 2-year public institutions, while another 22 percent were enrolling in a public 4-year institution. In 1999, an estimated 90 million persons 16 and older reported that they had participated in some sort of formal learning activity. Much of this learning takes place outside of formal credential programs that confer a certificate or degree. In the workplace, where employers offer classes for job-specific skills, or in the many courses offered by postsecondary institutions that are not part of a formal credential program. The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that 1 in 4 adults are involved in some form of learning in the United States. Few adults who succeeded in completing a certificate or degree consistently enrolled on a less-than-halftime basis. Some adults who enroll in credit-bearing courses at postsecondary institutions may not intend to complete a degree or certificate. We estimate that about two-thirds (66 percent) of adults who began in 1995-1996 did not complete a Certificate or degree by 2001-2002. In comparison, only about 30 percent who enrolled as halftime or fulltime students in their first year of school had left school without completing a degree. In 1999-2000, about 2.3 million adult undergraduate students were enrolled less than halftime. Compared with adult students enrolled halftime or more, the typical less-than-halftime adult student was older, more likely to be working and married, and had a higher household income. Of those adults who expected to complete a certificate or degree during their first year of school, most had not completed a degree or certificate, and were no longer enrolled in school. A substantially larger number of adults enrolled in 2-year postsecondary institutions. Of the 1,830 baccalaureate graduates who completed their degrees in 2001- 2002 at four 4-year institutions we visited, slightly more than one-half never enrolled on a less-than-halftime basis. Another 36 percent did so for only one or two terms. No graduates relied exclusively upon less- Than-Halftime enrollment to complete their degree. (See fig. 3.) Of the 1.927 students who completed an associate degree in 2001/2002 at four 2-year. institutions we visiting and who first enrolled at age 24 or older, almost one- half never enrolled.

ROUGE-1: 70.54, ROUGE-2: 64.38, ROUGE-L: 22.76
BERTScore: 56.50

==============================================
==================== [78/100] ====================
Summary:
Some veterans are exempt from the enrollment requirement if they meet special eligibility requirements. Once a veteran is enrolled in the VA health-care system, the veteran remains in the system and does not have to reapply for enrollment annually. Those veterans who have been enrolled in Priority Group 5 must submit a new VA Form 10-10EZ annually with updated financial information demonstrating inability to defray the expenses of necessary care. Eligibility for VA health care is based on delivery of inpatient and outpatient medical care. with no service-connected disabilities and with attributable incomes above an established means test (see Appendix C ). P.L. 104-262 also authorized the VA to establish a patient enrollment system to manage access to VA health care. The provision of health care to veterans was dependent upon the available resources, according to the report language accompanying the bill. The report also stated that the provision of hospital care and medical services would be provided to "the extent and in the amount provided in advance in appropriations Acts for these purposes" Not every veteran is automatically entitled to medical care from the VA. Prior to eligibility reform in 1996, provisions of law governing eligibility for VA care were complex and not uniform across all levels of care. All veterans were technically "eligible" for hospital care and nursing home care, but eligibility did not by itself ensure access to care. The Veterans' Health Care Eligibility Reform Act of 1996, P.L. 104-262 , established two eligibility categories and required the VHA to manage the program. All outpatient appointment requests must be acted on as soon as possible, but no later than seven calendar days from the date of the request. Priority scheduling of any veteran must not affect the medical care of any other previously scheduled veteran. VHA guidelines state that veterans with service-connected conditions cannot be prioritized over other veterans with more acute health-care needs. The VHA is funded through multiple appropriations accounts that are supplemented by other sources of revenue. Although the VHA does not have a budget, it does have a number of funding options. P.L. 104-262 authorized the VA to provide all needed hospital care and medical services to veterans with service-connected disabilities, former prisoners of war, veterans exposed to toxic substances and environmental hazards such as Agent Orange. The VA looks at applicants' income and net worth to determine their specific priority category and whether they have to pay co-payments for nonservice-connected care. The other category of veterans are those disability that was incurred or aggravated in the line of duty. The VA places applicants into one of two categories. The first group is composed of veterans with service-connected disabilities or with incomes below an established means test. These veterans are regarded by the VA as "high priority" veterans and are enrolled in Priority Groups 1-6. The VHA is mandated to provide priority care for non-emergency outpatient medical care for any condition of a service- connected veteran rated 50% or more. According to VHA policies, patients with emergency or urgent medical needs must be provided care. veterans are asked to provide the VA with information on any health insurance coverage they have, including coverage through employment or through a spouse. The VA may bill these payers for treatment of conditions that are not a result of injuries or illnesses incurred or aggravated during military service. The second group of veterans is composed of those who do not fall into one of the first six priority groups.primarily veterans with nonservice-connected medical conditions and with incomes and net worth above the VA-established means test threshold. Under the current co-payment billing process, in cases where the cost of a veteran's medical care for a nonservice-connected condition appears to qualify for billing, the VA sends the bill to the insurance provider. The veteran's co- payment obligation is placed on hold for 90 days pending payment from the third-party payer. If no payment is received from theThird-Party payer within 90 days, a bill is sent to the veteran. Under the Administration's proposal, veterans receiving medical care services for treatment of non-service-connected disabilities will receive a bill for their entire co- Payment. Under current law, the VA is authorized to collect from third-party health insurers to offset the cost of medical care furnished to a veteran. If the VA treats an insured veteran for a nonservice-connected disability, and the veteran is also determined by the VA to have co-payment responsibilities, theVA will apply the payment collected from the insurer to the veteran's care. The VA also established co-payments from veterans for this care. In 1986, Congress authorized theVA to collect payments for the treatment of veterans with nonservices-connected disabilities. who completed the term for which they were called, and who were granted an other than dishonorable discharge, are exempt from the 24 continuous months of active duty requirement. National Guard members who were called to active duty by federal executive order are also exempt from this two-year requirement. When not activated to full-time federal service, members of the reserve components and National Guard have limited eligibility for VA health-care services. Members of the Reserve components may be granted service-connection. The National Guard may be given service- connection. for any injury they incurred or aggravated in the line of duty while attending inactive duty training assemblies, annual training, active duty for training, or while going directly to or returning directly from such duty. Reserve component service members may be granted service-connection for a heart attack or stoke if such an event occurs during these same periods. The granting of service- connection makes them eligible to receive care from the VA for those conditions. National Guard members are not grantedService- connection for any injury, heart attack, or stroke that occurs while performing duty ordered by a governor. Veteran's status is established by active-duty status in the military, naval, or air service and an honorable discharge or release from active military service. People enlisting in one of the armed forces after September 7, 1980, and officers commissioned after October 16, 1981, must have completed two years of active duty or the full period of their initial service obligation to be eligible for VA health-care benefits. Servicemembers discharged at any time because of service-connected disabilities are not held to this requirement. the VHA, an 11.3% increase over the FY2006 enacted amount of $29.3 billion. The FY2007 request included $25.5 billion for medical services. For FY2008, the Administration requested $27.2 billion. As in FY2003, FY2004, FY2005, FY2006, and FY2007, the administration included several cost-sharing proposals. These legislative proposals are discussed in detail in the " Key Budget Issues " section at the end of this report. H.R. 5385 provided $32.7 billion for the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) for FY2007. $3.6 billion for medical facilities, $25 million above the budget request. $412 million for medical and prosthetic research, a 3.2% increase over the President's request of $399 million (see Table 5 ). $28.7billion for medical services, a 26.0% Increase over the FY2006 enacted amount, and a 12.5% increase. On May 19, 2006, the House passed its version of the Military Construction, Military Quality of Life, and Veterans Affairs Appropriations bill (MIL-CON-QUAL-appropriations bill) for FY2007 ( H.R. 5385 , H.Rept. 109-464 ). The bill provided $32.7 billion for the VHA, a $3.4 billion (11.4%) increase over the FY2006 enacted amount of $29.3 billion and about the same as the President's request. On June 14, 2007, the full Senate Appropriations Committee approved the measure. $32.7 billion for the VHA for FY2007, a $14.7 million increase over the President's request. Of the total amount appropriated for VHA, $29.1 billion has been allocated to the medical services account. $2.6 billion was designated as contingent emergency funding and was to be available for obligation only after the President submitted a budget request to Congress. $3.3 billion was allocated to medical and prosthetic research account, which was $15 million above request. On May 24, 2007, the House and Senate approved the U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans' Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act, 2007 ( H.R. 2206 ). The bill was signed into law on May 25 ( P.L. 110-28 ). Among other things, the bill provided a total of $1.34 billion for the VHA for FY2007. This amount included $400 million for medical services: $9.4 million for polytrauma residential transition rehabilitation programs. 2007, the House and Senate adopted the Conference Report ( H.Rept. 110-153 ) to accompany the Concurrent Resolution on the Budget for FY2008 ( S.Con.Res. 21 ). The conference agreement provided a total of $85.3 billion in budget authority for all veterans benefits and services for FY 2008. Similar language has been included in the Defense Appropriations conference report. In its FY2008 budget request, the Administration has put forward several legislative proposals. These proposals are similar to previous ones included in budget requests for FY2003, FY2004, FY2005, FY2006, and FY2007 and rejected by Congress each year. ). The committee did not recommend any fee increases as requested by the Administration's budget proposal for the VHA for FY2008. H.R. 2642 provided $29.0 billion for medical services. This included the transfer of $125 million from the medical administration account to the medical services account. The reason for this transfer was because during House floor debate, Representative Shelley Moore Capito offered an amendment to the bill that would have increased the amount of money spent on medical services from $25 billion to $30 billion. The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have expressed concern that the President's budget has not accurately projected the future cost of health care for veterans from FY2008-FY2012. The House Appropriations Committee expressed doubt in the actuarial model currently used to project health-care demand for Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) and Operation Iraqi freedom (OIF) veterans. The Senate Appropriations Committee has included a general provision in H.R. 2642 directing the CBO to submit a CBO report on the issue. above the FY2008 Administration's request ( Table 5 ). All other amounts for the VHA were equal to the committee-recommended funding levels. H.R. 2642 , as amended by the Senate, provided a total of $1.7 billion for VA construction projects. Unlike the House Appropriations Committee, the Senate Appropriations Committee provided funding for specific construction projects requested by the President. However, the committee continued the practice of not earmarking major construction projects that are not requested in the President's budget proposal. levels. H.R. 2642 has provided approximately $2.2 billion for VA construction projects. A large portion of this amount was for construction and building improvements of VA medical facilities. The House Appropriations Committee did not recommended any funding amounts for various construction and projects submitted by Members of Congress or by the Administration. According to H.Rept. 110-186 , "individual project allocations will be considered comprehensively after the Committee has properly analyzed all relevant information" on June 13, 2007. H.R. 2764 was passed by the House on December 17, 2007; the Senate passed the measure the next day, December 18, with an amendment. The House agreed to the McConnell Amendment on December 19. The bill was signed into law ( P.L. 110-161 ) on December 26. The Military Construction and Veterans Affairs and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2008 (MILCON-VA Appropriations Act) provided $37.2 billion for VHA for FY2008. At the end of the 109 th Congress, Congress did not pass the MIL-CON-VA-appropriations bill for FY2007. Congress funded most government agencies, including the VA, through a series of Continuing Appropriations Resolutions. On February 15, 2007, the President signed into law the Revised Continuing Appropriations Resolution, 2007 ( H.J.Res. 20 , P.L. 110-5 ). It provided funding for the VA through the remainder of the fiscal year, through September 30, 2007. $2.9 billion for speciality mental health care, $130 million for the homeless veterans grant and per diem program. $100 million for blind rehabilitation services. $3.6 billion for medical administration, $193 million above the Administration's request. $480 million for medical and prosthetic research, a 17% increase over the President's request of $411 million. $12.5 million for expanded outpatient services for the blind, and an additional $15 million for Vet Centers. caseworkers; (3) $20 million for substance abuse treatment programs. $193 million for treatment of Operation Enduring Freedom/Operation Iraqi Freedom (OEF/OIF) veterans; and (10) $25 million for prosthetics. P.L. 110-28 also provided $326 million for the Construction, Minor Projects account, with specific funding of $36.0 million for construction costs related to establishing polytrauma residential transitional rehabilitation programs. It also included $100 million for enhancement of mental health services. amendment to transfer $5 million to the medical services account for the establishment of an Office of Rural Health within the Office of the Under Secretary for Health. The MILCON-VA appropriations bill, as amended, also provided $3.5 billion for the medical administration account, $68.6 million above the FY2008 request. With this transfer of funds, $29.1 billion would have been available for medical services. All other amounts for the VHA were equal to the committee-recommended funding. The Administration is proposing a tiered annual enrollment fee, which is structured to charge $250 for Priority 7 and 8 veterans with family incomes from $50,000 to $74,999. The VA has estimated that this proposal would contribute more than $138 million to the Treasury annually, beginning in FY2009. The MILCON-VA Appropriation Act ( P.L. 110-161 ) does not include any bill language that would give the VA money for the tiered enrollment fee. VA the authority to impose enrollment fees. At present, veterans in Priority Groups 2-8 pay $8 for a 30-day supply of medication, including over-the-counter medications. The VA estimates that if the current proposal to raise the co-payment were enacted, it would contribute $311 million to the Treasury in FY2008 and will increase revenue by $1.6 billion over five years. The MILCON-VA Appropriation Act ( P.L. 110-161 ) does. The President's FY2008 budget request includes three major policy proposals. Assess a tiered annual enrollment fee for all Priority 7 and 8 veterans based on the family income of the veteran. Increase pharmaceutical co-payments from $8 to $15 (for each 30-day prescription) for all enrolled veterans. Bill veterans receiving treatment for nonservice-connected conditions for the entire co-payment amount. The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have not addressed this issue because it is an issue in the purview of the authorizing committees. not include any bill language that would give the VA the authority to increase co-payments. According to VA estimates, of the 5.8 million unique patients that it expects to see in 2008, 111,000 may choose not to use the system if an enrollment fee is imposed. The Administration is requesting that Congress amend the VA's statutory authority by eliminating the practice of reducing first-party co-payment debts with third-party health-insurance collections. The VA asserts that this proposal would align the VA with the DOD health-care system for military retirees and with the private sector. the Administration's budget requested consolidating several medical existing collections accounts into one MCCF. The funds would be available for medical services for veterans. These collected funds do not have to be spent in any particular fiscal year and are available until expended. The purpose of this pilot project is to provide a "comprehensive restructuring of the complete revenue cycle including cash-flow management and accounts receivable" The conferees included this provision because the FY2006 Military Construction, Military Quality of Life and Veterans Affairs Appropriations Act required the VA to establish a revenue improvement demonstration project. The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 ( P.L. 105-33 ) gave the VHA the authority to retain these funds in the Medical Care Collections Fund (MCCF) Instead of returning the funds to the Treasury, the VA can use them for medical services for veterans without fiscal year limitations. To increase the VA's third-party collections, the act also gave the VA authority to change its basis of billing insurers from "reasonable costs" to "reasonable charges" This change in billing was intended to enhance VA collections to the extent that reasonable charges result in higher payments than reasonable costs. Appropriation Committees were concerned that the VHA was collecting only 41% percent of the billed amounts from third-party insurance companies. The VHA has established a pilot Consolidated Patient Account Center in VISN 6. MCCF collections increased by 31%, from $1.5 billion in FY2003 to $2.0 billion inFY2006. In FY2006, first-party collections represented approximately 43% of total MCCf collections. The Administration requested $32.7 billion for the program in FY2007. appropriations account structure has been subject to change from year to year. The appropriation accounts used to support the VHA traditionally include medical care, medical and prosthetic research, and medical administration. Congress also appropriates funds for construction of medical facilities through a larger appropriations account for construction for all VA facilities. In FY2004, "to provide better oversight and [to] receive a more accurate accounting of funds," Congress changed VHA's appropriations structure. The Department of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 2004 ( P.L. 108-199 ) funded VHA through appropriations to the medical services appropriations. four accounts: (1) medical services, (2) medical administration, (3) medical facilities, and (4) medical and prosthetic research. The medical services account covers expenses for furnishing inpatient and outpatient care and treatment of veterans and certain dependents. In its FY2008 budget request to Congress, the VA requested the transfer of food service operations costs from the medical facilities account to the general account. The general account covers salaries and expenses of employees hired under Title 38, United States Code; and aid to state veterans homes. During FY2007, the VHA had an estimated total enrolled veteran population of 7.9 million. The number of unique veteran patients is estimated to increase by approximately 110,000. The total number of outpatient visits, including visits to Vet Centers, reached 60.2 million during FY2006 and is projected to increase to 64.4 million in FY2007. Unlike Medicare or Medicaid, VA health care is not an entitlement program. The VHA estimates that it will spend approximately 64.8% of its medical services obligations on outpatient care. broad array of veteran-centric health topics, such as treatment of mental health conditions, rehabilitation of veterans with limb loss, traumatic brain injury and spinal cord injury. VA researchers receive funding not only through this account but also from the DOD, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and private sources. As a percentage of total VHA funding, report projecting the annual funding level necessary for the VHA to continue providing health care for veterans from FY2009 through FY2012. Appendix A. Priority Groups and Their Eligibility Criteria Appendix B. Financial Income Thresholds for VA Health-Care Benefits Appendix D. VHA Appropriations for FY2005 and FY2006. $2.6 billion was designated as contingent emergency funding and was available for obligation only after the President submitted a budget request to Congress. Table 1 provides funding levels for VA and VHA as included in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008. The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who meet certain eligibility rules, including disability compensation and pensions, education, and health care. The VA is responsible for providing health care, pensions, disability compensation, and other benefits to veterans. The VA's budget includes both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts. Mandatory funding supports disability compensation, pension benefits, vocational rehabilitation, and life insurance. Discretionary funding supports a broad array of benefits and services, including medical care. The VHA operates the nation's largest integrated direct health-care delivery system. The VA's health- care system is organized into 21 geographically diverse regions. The agency's budget authority of approximately $80 billion is about 48.1% of the total VA budget authority. International Classification of Diseases-9 th Revision (ICD—9) codes to better reflect the TBI patient population within both DOD and VA. Beginning with FY2009, the appropriators are directing the Administration to include TBI as a select program within the medical services account. The Appropriation Committees expressed concern about insufficient funding levels for mental health and substance abuse services in the FY2008 budget request. The Administration's budget request had included a reduction in the number of inpatient beds for psychiatric care and an anticipated increase of less than one. The Consolidated Appropriations Act ( H.R. 2764 , P.L. 110-161 ) includes increased funding for substance abuse services. The appropriators also directed the VA to reexamine the policy for a reduction in psychiatric inpatient care, taking into account the needs of returning OIF and OEF veterans. Furthermore, the bill directs the VA not to reduce the number of inpatient psychiatric beds at any facility that currently has a waiting list. The bill is expected to become law by the end of the year. have urged both DOD and VA to seek every opportunity to partner to improve the continuity of care for veterans. Joint clinics; joint Centers of Excellence for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) Joint research and/or treatment; and the development of joint clinical practice guidelines for polytrauma injury, TBI, burns, and amputee care, among other things. Currently, there is no medical diagnostic code specific to TBI. It is a challenge to quantify the number of TBI cases. in remote rural areas has been a long standing issue. To address this issue the appropriators have directed the VA to provide a report to the committees that includes a description of the unique challenges and costs faced by veterans. The report should also identify the need to fund alternative sources of medical services in areas where VA medical facilities are not accessible to veterans without them leaving such areas. Moreover, the report should identify the needs for funding to provide care in these areas without the need for veterans to leave the area. The Consolidated Appropriations Act directs the DOD and VA to provide a joint report to the Committees on Appropriations detailing the actions being taken by each Department to achieve an interoperable electronic medical record (EMR) system. The report should also contain an assessment of the potential for increasing local access to medical services for veterans in remote rural areas through strategic partnerships with other government and local private health care providers. The bill was passed on a bipartisan basis and is expected to be signed into law by President Barack Obama. training and rehabilitation services, hospital and medical care, assistance to homeless veterans, home loan guarantees, and death benefits that cover burial expenses. The VA carries out its programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans appeals (BVA) The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) is responsible for health-care services and medical research programs. The Veterans Benefits Administration is responsible, among other things, for providing compensations, pensions, and education assistance. The National Cemetery Administration (NCA) isresponsible for maintaining national veterans cemeteries. In FY2007, the VHA operated 155 medical centers, 135 nursing homes, 717 ambulatory care and community-based outpatient clinics (CBOCs) The VHA also pays for care provided to veterans by private-sector providers on a fee basis under certain circumstances. Inpatient and outpatient care is also provided in the private sector to eligible dependents of veterans under the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Department of Veterans Affairs (CHAMPVA) In addition to the grants for construction of state-owned nursing homes and defined Veterans Integrated Service Networks (VISNs) Although policies and guidelines are developed at VA headquarters to be applied throughout the VA health-care system, management authority for basic decision making and budgetary responsibilities are delegated to the VISNs. Congressionally appropriated medical care funds are allocated to VISNs based on the Veterans Equitable Resource Allocation (VERA) system, which generally bases funding on patient workload. Prior to the implementation of the VERA system, resources were allocated to facilities primarily on the basis of their historical expenditures.

ROUGE-1: 68.92, ROUGE-2: 65.12, ROUGE-L: 27.02
BERTScore: 58.37

==============================================
==================== [79/100] ====================
Summary:
Since Congress passed TSCA nearly 33 years ago, EPA has issued regulations under the act to ban or limit or restrict the production or use of only five existing chemicals or chemical classes. In 1991, EPA’s 1989 regulation broadly banning asbestos was largely vacated by a federal appeals court decision. In contrast to the United States, the European Union, as well as a number of other countries, has banned all, or almost all, asbestos and asbestos-containing products. that it had no known safe exposure level. the court concluded that EPA did not present sufficient evidence to justify the ban on asbestos because it did not consider all necessary evidence. EPA had not calculated the risk levels for intermediate levels of regulation because it believed there was no asbestos exposure level for which the risk of injury or death was zero. As articulated by the court, the proper course of action for EPA, after an initial showing of product danger, would have been to regulate the product at a lower level of exposure than the current level of regulation. Asbestos is a known human carcinogen that can cause lung cancer and other diseases if inhaled. Asbestos has been used widely in products such as fireproofing, thermal insulation, and friction products, including brake linings. EPA invested 10 years in exploring the need for the asbestos ban and in developing the regulation. Based on its review of over 100 studies of the health risks of asbestos as well as public comments on the proposed rule, EPA determined that asbestos is a potential carcinogen at all levels of exposure. required under the act to protect trade secrets and privileged or confidential commercial or financial information against unauthorized disclosures. EPA has not performed any recent studies of the appropriateness of confidentiality claims, but a 1992 EPA study indicated that problems with inappropriate claims were extensive. While EPA may suspect that some chemical companies’ confidentiality claims are unwarranted, the agency does not have data on the number of inappropriate claims, EPA says. The agency also says it doesn't have the resources that would be needed to investigate and challenge claims. EPA focuses on investigating claims that it believes may be both inappropriate and among the most potentially important. EPA challenges about 14 such claims each year and that the chemical companies withdraw nearly all of the claims challenged. Officials who have various responsibilities for protecting public health and the environment from the dangers posed by chemicals believe that having such a list helps.determine the number of claims that are inappropriate, the EPA says. The EPA says it will investigate claims relating to health and safety studies performed by chemical companies involving chemicals. on chemicals in certain circumstances or provide other data, such as production volumes, on existing chemicals. If EPA finds that a chemical’s risks are unreasonable, it can prohibit or limit its production, processing, distribution, use, and disposal. Chemical companies may claim some of the information they provide to EPA under TSCA as confidential business information. EPA is access to confidential T SCA information would allow them to examine information on chemical properties and processes that they currently do not possess and could enable them to better control the risks of potentially harmful chemicals. information will be published on the chemical agency’s Web site. REACH also includes a provision under which confidential information can generally be shared with government authorities of other countries or international organizations. In previous reports, we recommended that the Congress consider providing EPA additional authorities under TSCA to improve its ability to make more chemical information publicly available. For example, in our June 2005 report, we suggested amending TSCa to authorize EPA to share with the states and foreign governments the confidential business information. and REACH have provisions to protect information claimed by chemical companies as confidential. While REACH requires greater public disclosure of certain information, such as basic chemical properties. REACH places greater restrictions on the kinds of information chemical companies may claim as confidential, including brief profiles of hazardous properties and authorized uses. The European Union’s approach to public's access to information combines a variety of ways that the interests of the public's right to know is balanced with the need to keep certain information confidential. As such, nonconfidential information is not considered confidential. that chemical companies provide to EPA, subject to regulations to be established by EPA in consultation with the chemical industry and other interested parties. In our September 1994 report, we recommended that the Congress consider limiting the length of time for which information may be claimed as confidential without resubstantiation of the need for confidentiality. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or Members of Congress may have about this issue. I am happy to answer them. In Canada and the European Union, testing requirements for low-volume chemicals are less extensive and complex than for high- volume chemicals. Congress could give EPA, in addition to its current authorities under section 4 of TSCA, the authority to require chemical substance manufacturers and processors to develop test data. Another option would be to provide EPA with greater authority to requirement testing targeted to those areas in which EPA’s analysis models don't work well, the authors say. The authors conclude that providing EPA with more authority to obtain test data from companies would enhance the effectiveness of T SCA. TSCA requires EPA to find that current data is insufficient; testing is necessary; and that the chemical may present an unreasonable risk. Once EPA has made the required findings, the agency can issue a proposed rule for public approval. TSCA can take months or years to develop, EPA officials say, because the specific chemicals used in commerce are constantly changing, as are their production volumes. The agency must first make certain findings before it can require testing, they say. The process is time-consuming, costly, and inefficient. TSCA generally requires chemical companies to notify EPA of their intent to manufacture or import new chemicals. EPA estimates that most premanufacture notices do not include test data of any type. Chemical companies do not have an incentive to conduct these tests because they may take over a year to complete, and some tests may cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. The cost of initial testing could be reduced by amending TSCA to require EPA to review new chemicals before they are marketed, EPA says. EPA officials told us that finalizing rules can take from 2 to 10 years and require the expenditure of substantial resources. Given the time and resources required, the agency has issued rules requiring testing for only about 200 chemicals. Because EPA has used authority to issue rules to require testing so sparingly, it has not continued to maintain information on the cost of implementing these rules. However, in our October 1994 report on TSCA, we noted that EPA officials said that issuing such a rule would take such a long time. chemical companies are not required to develop and submit toxicity information to EPA on existing chemicals. There are currently over 200 high-production- volume chemicals for which chemical companies have not voluntarily agreed to provide the minimal test data that EPA believes are needed. EPA officials told us that in cases where chemical companies do not voluntarily provide test data and health and safety studies in a complete and timely manner, requiring the testing of existing chemicals of concern is the only practical way to ensure that the agency obtains the needed information. TSCA places the burden on EPA to demonstrate a need for data on a chemical’s toxicity. As a result, EPA does not routinely assess the risks of the roughly 80,000 industrial chemicals in use. TSCA could be amended to require individual chemical companies or the industry as a whole to compile and submit chemical data, such as that included in the High Production Volume (HPV) Challenge Program. It could also be required as a condition of manufacture or import above some specified volume. Key contributors to this testimony were David Bennett, Antoinette Capaccio, Nancy Crothers, Christine Fishkin, Richard Johnson, and Ed Kratzer. For further information about this testimony, please contact John Stephenson at (202) 512-3841 or stephensonj@gao.gov. The Subcommittee may have. questions or concerns that you may have about the report. The report is available online at: http://www.GAO.gov/chemicals. This work is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. Because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. certain toys and child care articles after January 1, 2009, if the products contain concentrations of phthalates exceeding 0.1 percent. In 2008, Congress took similar action. California has also enacted limits on formaldehyde in pressed wood. EPA recently issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking suggesting several regulatory options the agency could pursue under its TSCA section 6 authority to limit exposure to formaldehyde. However, because of the legal hurdles the agency would face in regulating formaldehyde under T SCA, some stakeholders are concerned. have recommended that EPA pursue legislation to control formaldehyde. In our previous reports on TSCA, we identified a number of options that could strengthen EPA’s ability to regulate harmful chemicals. Potential changes to T SCA include reducing the evidentiary burden that EPA must meet to take regulatory action under the act, and amending the standard for judicial review that currently requires a court to hold a TSC a rule unlawful and unlawful. We are happy to discuss these options with the EPA. legal threshold that has proven to be difficult for EPA. In order to regulate an existing chemical under section 6 of TSCA, EPA must find that there is a reasonable basis to conclude that the chemical presents or will present an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment. EPA officials believe that demonstrating anreasonable risk is a more stringent requirement than demonstrating, for example, a significant risk. The EPA Administrator must consider and publish a distribution in commerce, or disposal or use, or require warning labels on the chemicals. the rule is not supported by substantial evidence in the rulemaking record. As several courts have noted, the substantial evidence standard is more rigorous than the arbitrary and capricious standard normally applied to rulemaking. Further, according to EPA officials, the economic costs of regulating a chemical are usually more easily documented than the risks of the chemical. It is difficult to show substantial evidence that EPA is promulgating the least burdensome requirement. EPA has had difficulty demonstrating that harmful chemicals pose an unreasonable risk. been to consider each regulatory option listed in TSCA, beginning with the least burdensome, and the costs and benefits of each option. The court further criticized EPA’s ban of products for which no substitutes were currently available stating that, in such cases, EPA “bears a tough burden” to demonstrate that a ban is the less burdensome alternative. In addition, the court stated that in evaluating what risks are unreasonable, EPA must consider the costs of any proposed actions. be claimed as confidential business information by chemical manufacturers and processors. EPA generally must protect such information against public disclosure unless such disclosure is necessary to protect against an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment. We have previously recommended that the Congress amend TSCA to reduce the evidentiary burden that EPA must meet. Alternatively, the European Union’s recently enacted chemical control legislation, REACH, represents a regulatory model that differs from the T SCA framework in key ways, we say. Under REACH, authority exists to establish restrictions for any chemical that poses unacceptable risks. These restrictions could include banning uses in certain products, banning uses by consumers, or even completely banning the chemical. Authorization will be granted if a manufacturer can demonstrate that the risks from a use of the chemical can be adequately controlled or that the socioeconomic benefits outweigh the risks. In addition, a key aspect of REACH is that it places the burden on the manufacturer to prove that there are no suitable alternatives to be used. when EPA began reviewing chemicals in 1979. Since then, over 21,000 new chemicals were added to the inventory and are now in use as existing chemicals. TSCA generally requires the industry to notify EPA at least 90 days before producing or importing a new chemical. The anticipated production volume, uses, exposure levels, and release estimates outlined in premanufacture notices generally do not have to be amended once manufacturing begins, the authors say. However, the potential risk of injury to human health or the environment may increase when chemical companies increase production levels or expand the uses of a chemical. REACH generally requires that chemical companies provide information on chemicals’ effects on human health and the environment. TSCA generally requires EPA to demonstrate that chemicals pose risks to human health or the environment prior to controlling risks related to their production, distribution, or use. Under REACH, chemical companies must obtain authorization to continue to use a chemical of very high concern, such as a chemical for which there is scientific evidence of probable serious health or environmental effects. Generally, to obtain such authorization, the chemical company must demonstrate that it can adequately control risks posed by the chemical. statement regarding the effects of the chemical on human health and the magnitude of human exposure to the chemical. The benefits of a chemical for various uses and the availability of substitutes for those uses. The reasonably ascertainable economic consequences of the rule, after consideration of the effect on the national economy, small business, technological innovation, the environment, and public health. TSCA offers EPA a range of control options when regulating existing chemicals—ban or restrict a chemical’s production, processing, and use. The Toxic Substances Control Act was enacted in 1976. TSCA authorizes EPA to review chemicals already in commerce (existing chemicals) and chemicals yet to enter commerce (new chemicals) Of the over 83,000 chemicals currently in the T SCA inventory, about 62,000 were already inCommerce. EPA lists chemicals in commerce in theTSCA inventory. EPA has the authority, upon making certain determinations, to collect information about the hazards posed by chemical substances and to take action to control unreasonable risks. on manufacturers, importers, and downstream users to ensure that they manufacture, place on the market, or use such substances that do not adversely affect human health or the environment. While TSCA authorizes EPA to review existing chemicals, it generally provides no specific requirement, time frame, or methodology for doing so. Significantly, the precautionary principle means that where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures.

ROUGE-1: 66.71, ROUGE-2: 61.34, ROUGE-L: 24.75
BERTScore: 60.79

==============================================
==================== [80/100] ====================
Summary:
response and offensive actions. Many security observers suggest that an equally daunting group of strategy and policy challenges must be addressed if the United States is to continue to rely on technology as a major component of societal activities. Since 2008, a number of strategy. and policy proposals have been offered that may assist in addressing the appropriate balance. of relying on emerging technology and network-centric governance while safeguarding critical infrastructure. and control systems, as well as the nation's cyber infrastructure. The U.S. needs to find a way to balance the need for emerging technology with the need to protect critical infrastructure and control. systems. Cybersecurity is not just about protecting computers, but also has implications for U.S. national security and economic well-being. The Obama Administration declared that U.s. critical information infrastructures are a strategic national asset in a May 29, 2009, speech by the President. Both the legislative and executive branches of government have developed cybersecurity legislation and related initiatives. However, just as important as cybersecurity is privacy and civil liberty considerations, so is the need to protect the public. national strategy for securing communications and information infrastructure. Legislation proposed in S. 733 calls upon the President to present a national strategy within one year of the bill's enactment. This bill would also create a national advisory panel to oversee implementation of the strategic plan and to periodically advise the president on the need for revising the strategy. Some have criticized the provision, which would give the President emergency control over public and private networks in the event of a crisis, and have argued that the bill is vague. Some point to the 2003 National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace as a framework for organizing and prioritizing federal cybersecurity efforts, including the private sector. Others note that this document fails to take into account the rapid rate of change in technologies. Multiple federal information systems enterprise networks make a concerted strategic approach to network security even more difficult, in that each has its own authentication procedures and security standards. Another cybersecurity difficulty for the government is balancing the protection of civil liberties and individual privacy protections with the desire for comprehensive security. A persistent set of issues has stymied significant progress in detecting and deterring existing threats and implementing effective safeguard measures. Issues that appear to continually challenge U.S. cybersecurity efforts include uncertainty of the geographic location of the perpetrators of cyber attacks. The introduction of new vulnerabilities to the nation's infrastructure from increasingly sophisticated threats. A poorly coordinated federal-private sector approach to addressing emerging risks; and legal ambiguities with respect to U.s. cybersecurity. The evolving integration of mobile technology devices into critical information infrastructure. cyber-related issues from a comprehensive national approach. Such concerns often assert that a continuation of addressing cyber incidents as a myopic individual agency responsibility will eventually lead to increased systemic vulnerabilities and put the nation at greater risk. It is argued by some that a more strategic approach to detecting, identifying, mitigating, and responding to future cyber incidences may strengthen both the individual agency and the whole-of-government approach to securing the technologies that underpin every aspect of modern society. The following table is designed to assist in identifying emerging cybersecurity themes contained within previously enumerated respective executive branch activities. and deploy intrusion prevention tools. Review and potentially redirect research and funding. Connect current government cyber operations centers. Develop a government-wide cyber intelligence plan. Increase the security of classified networks. Expand cyber education. Define the role of cybersecurity in private sector domains. Develop multi-pronged approaches to supply chain risk management (potential tampering within the production line and the risk associated with computer products and parts made outside the U.S). Define enduring deterrent technologies and programs. The report was published by the National Security Agency. as one of the President's key management priorities and establish performance metrics. Designate a privacy and civil liberties official in the NSC cybersecurity directorate. Convene appropriate interagency mechanisms to conduct legal analysis of priority cybersecurity issues. Initiate a national cybersecurity public awareness and education campaign. Develop U.S. government positions for an international cybersecurity policy framework. Prepare a cybersecurity incident response plan. Develop a framework for research and development strategies that focus on "game-changing" technologies that enhance security. Cybersecurity is broadly defined as the protection of critical information infrastructure and its processes and content. This report does not discuss reorganizing the executive branch to better address cybersecurity-related issues. The report presents the emerging issues in cybersecurity as identified by the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI), the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) Report to the 44 th President, and the Obama Administration's 60-day policy review report. A lack of consensus on what sort of government resolution may be necessary as a network security measure. need for a current comprehensive national cybersecurity strategy. The most recent strategy, the 2003 National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, outlined a unified, whole-of-government approach to dealing with cybersecurity. Some say that the 2003 policy has not kept pace with the rapidly evolving technologies and threats in cyberspace. Others say it is not a comprehensive strategy but is instead a set of recommendations, much like the CSIS Commission report. The Administration's 60-day review's near-term action plan calls for preparing and updating a new strategy. including both Administration-led initiatives, federal agency programs, statutes, and proposed legislation. Table 1 notes corresponding legislation proposed in both the 111 th Congress and the 110 th Congress to relevant existing statutory frameworks. Current appropriations bills are shown to illustrate congressional spending priorities. overview lists and summaries of the cybersecurity-related legislation are found in the Appendix. The lists are not exhaustive, but rather are designed to give a representative overview of cybersecurity related activities in the federal government and to assist in identifying priority areas where legislation might be proposed. The report groups common themes into broad subject areas. Issues are compared to the current statutory framework, new legislative efforts in the 111 th Congress, and executive branch initiatives to identify commonalities and possible gaps. Some of the apparent gaps discovered may actually be addressed by existing classified programs, which cannot be discussed in this unclassified report. Critics maintain that without an overall government strategy and underlying policies to outline cybersecurity priorities, goals, and how to achieve them, executive organization and program funding may be a muddled process. freedom of speech protections on the Internet while devising cybersecurity procedures. Outreach, collaboration, and policy formation —working across government and with the private sector to share information on threats and other data. Establishing a permanent Congressional Commission or Task Force that would assess and report to Congress successes and ongoing challenges in U.S. cybersecurity programs and activities. The assessments could address issues relating to current and emerging threats, current best security practices, and mitigation and remediation recommendations, as well as provide a venue for the recipients of this report to submit threat information and requests for assistance to the Department. there is no single congressional committee that can claim primary jurisdiction over cyberspace. Neither is there a single executive agency or department with sole cybersecurity responsibility or commensurate authorities. Cybersecurity is a cross-cutting field that affects many government and private sector agencies. No single official oversees cybersecurity policy across the federal government, and no single agency has the responsibility or authority to match the scope and scale of the challenge, the President said. "When it comes to cybersecurity, federal agencies have overlapping missions and don't coordinate and communicate nearly as well as they should," he said. Cuba and Cuba's Relations With Other Countries" includes "the status and extent of Cuba's cyberwarfare program" as one of the seven subjects to be addressed by the report on Cuba required from the Director of National Intelligence. No more than 200 full-time student positions may be filled at any one time by private sector employees enrolled under this section. Eligible private sector. employees will be those engaged in providing significant defense related support to the Department of Defense or other federal agencies. or those whose work product is relevant to national security policy or strategy. The U.S. military views cyberspace as a warfighting domain as well as a force enabler. For the Department of Defense, cybersecurity takes on an offensive or defensive national security role. For other government stakeholders, cybersecurity means information security, or securing the information that resides on cyber infrastructure such as telecommunications networks. And coordinate. DHS's task is complicated, as cyberspaces technology and processes are largely owned and operated by the private sector, and as the authority of the federal government to exert control over cybersecurity activities may be limited. The Department of Defense has a number of programs designed to address vulnerabilities and threats to its own networks. Secretary Gates recently announced the creation of a new sub-unified command under the U.S. Strategic Command. This new command is to coordinate a unified approach to defending and securing military cyber networks. The December 2006 National Military Strategy for Cyberspace Operations (NMS-CO) guides the DOD's efforts to protect and secure its networks and systems. The National Cyber Security Center is a clearinghouse whose mission is tocoordinate information from all agencies. and emerging cyber risks to the nation. Drafting legislation, strategy, and policies that take into account rapidly changing telecommunications and Internet-based technologies. Ensuring risk reduction education and training is a core component for all federal government employee performance assessments. Requiring the National Intelligence Council to produce classified and unclassified annual reports addressing current and emerging cyber-related based threats. Require the Department of Homeland Security annually to produce cybersecurity risk assessments for all nonfederal government entities with non-U.S. citizens. The bill provides authority for the Secretary of Defense to permit private sector employees to enroll in and receive instruction at the Defense Cyber Investigations Training Academy. No more than 200 full-time student positions may be filled at any one time. Eligible employees will be those engaged in providing significant defense related support to the Department of Defense or other federal agencies or those whose work product is relevant to national security policy or strategy. In addition to the above section (932)—section 1222 "Report on" The Defense Industrial Base (DIB) initiative provides a vehicle through which DOD and industry partners can better share information on cyber threats and defense practices. DOD also has established a Cybercrime Center (DC3) that assists in criminal, counterintelligence, counterterrorism, and fraud investigations by the Defense Criminal Investigative Organizations (DCIOs) and DOD counterintelligence activities. In addition to setting forensics standards, it provides training and testing laboratories for protection of defense information systems. Common themes often noted by many cybersecurity experts underscore a lack of transparency and dearth of defined departmental roles and responsibilities. The section would require the Secretary of Commerce to develop and integrate a national licensing, certification, and periodic recertification program for cybersecurity professionals. It would also require the Director of the National Science Foundation to give priority to computer, information science, and engineering research to ensure support is provided to meet cybersecurity challenges. See under: Section 18—Cybersecurity Responsibilities and Authority. The section would requiring the President to develop a comprehensive national cybersecurity plan. The President would also be required to establish measurable security cybersecurity standards for federal government, government contractor, or grantee critical infrastructure information systems and networks. The Department of Commerce's National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has primary responsibility for reducing cyber vulnerabilities in the electrical grid. Programs in several departments address various aspects of cybersecurity within their respective areas of responsibility. Some organizations have appeared to have greater authority and capability than others. A few of the departments and their accompanying responsibilities are noted below. In the Energy Independence and Security section of this article, we highlight some of the programs in the Energy Department's Cybersecurity Program. For more information, visit www.energysecurity.gov. Act of 2007 (EISA; P.L. 110-139 ), Congress directed NIST to lead the Department of Energy and other agencies in ensuring an interoperable, secure, and open energy infrastructure. Cybersecurity and associated standards are being addressed as part of this Smart Grid Interoperability Framework that is under development. NIST is also tasked to promote the development of a Smart Grid interoperability framework for the U.S. electrical grid. The framework will include protocols and model standards for information management for smart grid devices and systems. of key security standards and guidelines to support the implementation of and compliance with the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA; P.L. 107-347 ). HHS is responsible for implementing privacy and security standards for electronic personal health information. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) leads the cybersecurity coordination for non-military departments and agencies in the federal government. The National Cyber Security Directorate works with private industry on a voluntary basis to promote safe cybersecurity practices. DHS is also home to the National Security Agency. The Bush Administration initiated the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI) The initiative aims to make the United States more secure against cyber threats. The CNCI is seen as a plan of action for programs and initiatives to be addressed at the operational and tactical level. Given the classified nature of the presidential directives and the secrecy accompanying department and agency implementation activities, some details of the initiative have been made public through departmental press releases, speeches by executive branch leaders and analysis offered by individuals who follow cybersecurity- and terrorism-related issues. activities related to this issues, few details are known about CNCI-related federal government implementation efforts. According to one media account, Steven Chabinsky, Deputy Director of the Joint Interagency Cyber Task Force for the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, said there are 12 objectives. These include the following: Move toward managing a single federal enterprise network (an integrated communications system architecture for the federal government with common security standards across the network). 2. Deploy intrinsic detection systems. 3. Develop. Section would require TSA to implement system of risk-based allocation of resources. Report would include "a summary that ranks the risks within and across transportation modes" H.R. 1910 Chief Technology Officer Act of 2009 Status of bill : Introduced in House; referred to House Subcommittee on Information Policy, Census, and National Archives. See under: Title I—Authorization of Appropriations; Section 102. Risk-Based System for Allocation of Resources; Assessment and Prioritization of Risks. "Vulnerability of a cyber attack" would be considered a risk. The bill would create the office of the Chief Technology Officer within the Executive Office of the President. The CTO would assess the impact of information technology and networked information technology systems and applications on cybersecurity and personal privacy. Other responsibilities would be ensuring "the security of the federal government's information technology infrastructures, information technology strategy, and use of Information technology" The bill is expected to be voted on in the next few weeks and could be signed into law by the President in early 2015. Some Members of Congress have proposed legislation that would create new offices or positions. It is unclear how proposals such as S. 778 to establish the Office of the National Cybersecurity Advisor fits with the administration's recently proposed Cyber Coordinator. The position would serve the President as the principal advisor for all cybersecurity related matters. In addressing civil liberties protections. As this legislation is marked up, alternative proposals may be considered. Another area of interest is executive branch organization. As the federal government continues to organize to defend its strategic cyber assets. The new coordinator will have "regular access to the president" and will be considered a key member of the national security staff. The position's exact mandate and scope of responsibilities is unclear, but some duties will include improving federal agencies' computer security and coordinating national cybersecurity awareness campaigns. Some security observers are concerned that the lack of apparent cyber related activities may be a problem for the U.S. government. The new position will be based in Washington, D.C. and will work with the White House National Security Council. President Obama announced the creation of a new cabinet-level position to coordinate cybersecurity strategy and policy across the federal government. This new "Cyber Coordinator" would report to the National Security Advisor and the Director of the National Economic Council. On December 22, 2009, the White House announced that the President's new Cybersecurity Coordinator would be Howard Schmidt. Schmidt is an information security expert with many years of experience in government, law enforcement, and industry. According to an e-mail announcement sent to a White House e-mails list by John Brennan, S. 177 would amend the Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act to improve federal response efforts after a terrorist strike or other major disaster affecting homeland security. In the section for the definition of a major disaster it would include cyber attack on computer systems as one of the possibilities under "terrorist attack" S. 177 Strengthening Our Economy Through Small Business Innovation Act of 2009 Status of bill: Introduced in Senate,referred to Senate Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship. See under: Section 6—Inclusion of Energy, Security, Transportation, And Energy. Water Related Research In The List of Topics Deserving Special Consideration As SBIR Research Topics. The bill would extend allocation of funds for research programs related to the Small Business Innovation Research program. Section 6 includes cybersecurity as one of the topics of interest, in particular the research by the National Academy of Sciences relating to cybersecurity. S. 1391 Department of Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 Status of bill: Awaiting conference. See under : Title IX—Department of Defense Organization and Management; Subtitle D—Other Matters; Section 932—Instruction of Private Sector Employees in Cyber Security Courses of the Defense. best support efforts to enhance security of the bulk power electric grid. Cybersecurity threats are mentioned together with biological, nuclear, radiological, and chemical threats. H.R. 3293 provides $607,482,000 for the public health and social services emergency fund. S. 1436 Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2010 Status of bill: Placed on Calendar in Senate. energy and water development and related Agencies appropriations act, 2010 (placed on calendar in Senate) The bill seeks to amend Part II of the Federal Power Act in order to address cybersecurity threats to the reliability of the bulk power system. In addition, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission would be authorized to respond in cases of imminent cyber security threats. The section also emphasizes ensuring that the Commission protects cybersecurity-related information. See under: Section 3—Protection of Bulk Power System From Cybersecurity Threats. H.R. 2195 to provide additional authorities to adequately protect the critical electric infrastructure against cyber attack. The bill attempts to improve the cybersecurity of the critical electric infrastructure. The Secretary of Homeland Security would be required to initiate several interim measures to protect the system from cyber attack. Section 4 would require the Secretary of Commerce to implement a system to provide dynamic and real-time cybersecurity status and vulnerability information for all federal government information systems and networks managed by the Department of Commerce. S. 773 Cybersecurity Act of 2009 Status of bill: Introduced in Senate, Referred to Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. Transportation Security Administration Authorization Act (referred to Senate committee after being received from House)—mentions a cyber attack as a security concern. S. 1436 Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2010 (placed on Calendar in Senate)—for the "purpose of forming and governing a national energy sector cyber organization" The bill was passed by the House of Representatives and is now being considered by the Senate. The bill would create a cyber organization to focus cybersecurity research and development and to identify and disseminate best practices. Delivery and Energy Reliability. The section would allocate funding for the Department of Energy as it relates to electricity delivery and energy reliability. As part of the funding the Secretary must establish an "independent national energy sector cyber security organization" to institute research, development and deployment priorities. H.R. 2200 Transportation Security Administration Authorization Act Status of bill: Referred to Senate Committee. The bill is expected to be voted on by the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee in the coming weeks. The Senate has yet to vote on the bill. The bill would allocate $1,700,000 for the Center for Counterterrorism and Cyber Crime, located in Norwich University, Northfield, Vermont. One of the objectives of the mentioned "federal policy" is to provide cybersecurity for the regional electrical grid. H.R. 2454 American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009 Status of bill : Placed on Calendar in Senate. See under: Title III—Protection, Preparedness, Response, and Recovery; Federal Emergency Management Agency; State and local programs; item 12 (B) S. 177 Strengthening Our Economy Through Small Business Innovation Act of 2009 (referred to Senate committee)—cybersecurity mentioned as a research priority for small businesses. Includes a cyber attack in the listing of major disaster. H.R. 1174 FEMA Independence Act: Assistant Secretary for Cybersecurity is mentioned for an independent FEMA. S. 2454 American Clean Energy and Security Act: Cybersecurity mentioned in energy bill. HR. 2200 and privacy of the federal information technology infrastructure and networks: "coordinating closely with other federal departments and agencies" H.R. 2868 Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Act of 2009 (referred to House committee)—several sections mention cybersecurity in connection with overall security for chemical facilities. S. 1494 Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 (passed/agreed to in Senate)—has an extensive and detailed section (340) on cybersecurity oversight. H.R 1910 Chief Technology Officer Act of2009 (reached House subcommittee)—to create the Office of the Chief technology Officer within the Executive Office ofThe President. H.R. 7007 would have established the "American Cybersecurity Commission" The commission would have focused on "strategy for American business, national infrastructure, and United States Government non-military and non-national security related computer systems" H.R 5959 would have created a "comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative advisory panel" The bill was referred to the Senate Committee after being Received from the House. The bill called for the President to create an advisory panel to report on information security for the federal government. as of September 28, 2009. For the most up-to-date information, please consult the Legislative Information System (LIS) at http://www.congress.gov/ . Overview list of Bills in the 111 th Congress that Address a Cybersecurity-Related Issue Directly tied to cybersecurity S. 1438 Fostering a Global Response to Cyber Attacks Act (referred to Senate committee). H.R. 266 Cybersecurity Education Enhancement Act of 2009 (reached to House subcommittee)—expansion of professional cybersecurity education programs. S. 778 To establish, within the Executive Office of the President, the office of the National Cybersecurity Advisor. S. 921 would establish the National Office for Cyberspace within the Executive Office of the President. The Office would play a crucial role in deterring cyber attacks and defending the cyber critical infrastructure. H.R. 2165 Bulk Power System Protection Act of 2009 Status of bill : Introduced in House—referred to House Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. See under: Subchapter II—Information Security; Subsection 3552—National Office forCyberspace.Act of 2009 The proposed S. 733 in its initial version contained provisions for presidential cybersecurity authorities. Rewrites of this legislation reportedly may revise this provision. Such activities could be replaced or supplemented with the inclusion of cyber-security authorities. This may suggest to some that existing programs have emphasized securing networks before tackling the attendant issues such as freedom of speech, privacy, and civil liberty protections as they pertain to the Internet. Another common area of focus appears to be addressing issues related to workforce development, outreach, and collaboration-based initiatives. be addressed by the report required from the Director of National Intelligence on Cuba. S. 1494 Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 Status of bill: Passed/agreed to in Senate. See under: Title III—General Intelligence Community Matters; Subtitle D—Congressional Oversight, Plans, and Reports; Section 340 – Cybersecurity Oversight. Section 340 would improve congressional oversight of federal cybersecurity programs. It would require that the President inform Congress about every cybersecurity program currently in operation and every new program created thereafter. The program notification must include some type of certification on the legality of the program. expresses the interest of Congress is improving the nation's cybersecurity overall. Section 4 would require the Secretary of State to submit to the Senate and House a report describing "any actions taken by the United States to work with the governments of foreign countries to improve cybersecurity" Under "Procurement—Defense Wide": Major Equipment DISA #027—Cyber Security Initiative $18,188. Under "Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Air Force": Cybersecurity for control networks research $4,000. P.L. 110-329 ( H.R. 2638 ) Consolidated Security, Disaster Assistance, and Continuing Appropriations Act, 2009. Includes $143,539,000 in FBI salaries and expenses to "address emerging threats in counterterrorism and cybersecurity" P.L110-329 would have directed $3,500,000 for State and local cybersecurity training. Would have also directed $4,000,000 to the Idaho National Laboratory's Power and Cyber Systems Protection, Analysis, and Testing Program. the Secretary of Homeland Security, acting through the Assistant Secretary of Cybersecurity, to establish a program awarding competitive grants to institutions of higher education for cybersecurity programs. H.R. 4791 Federal Agency Data Protection Act would have required agencies to comply with information security policies and procedures. (CRS summary) Final status: Reported by the Committee on Homeland Security. In section 4, under the "authority of Director of Office of Management and Budget to establish information security Policies and procedures," it would haverequired agencies comply with. P.L. 110-5 ( H.J.Res. 20) Provides $43,075,000 for "cybersecurity" activities for the Department of Energy. Creates an Under Secretary responsible for overseeing critical infrastructure protection, cybersecurity, and other related programs. Also, creates R&D program that can "research technologies that mitigate damages in the event of a cyber attack" Mandates that the "smart grid" must incorporate "full cybersecurity" for "smart" grid. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008. Indicates that the annual report on the military power of the People's Republic of China must include "developments in China's asymmetric capabilities" Section 1814 requires the Secretary of Defense to prepare a plan for response to natural disasters and terrorist events. Section 3123 includes cybersecurity threats as part of the "plan for addressing security risks posed to nuclear weapons complex" P.L. 110-161 ( H.R. 2764 ) Consol Security Appropriations Act, 2010 (awaiting conference)—"$1,700,000 shall be for the Center for Counterterrorism and Cyber Crime." H.R. 2647 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 (waiting conference)—civilian cybersecurity training authorization, creation of Joint Program Office for Cyber Operations Capabilities. Peripheral cybersecurity related or mentions P.L. 111-5 ( H.r. 1 ) American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, 2009 —under Title XXX Health Information Technology and Quality, section 13001 directs privacy standards for electronic health information. Title VI directs the Commerce Department and the Federal Communications Department. P.L. 107-347 on December 17, 2002. Title III of the E-Government Act of 2002. Contains standards for securing information and information systems within federal agencies. 18 U.S.C. § 2510 Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986. Title I of the ECPA protects wire, oral, and electronic communications while in transit. It sets down requirements for search warrants that are more stringent than those issued under the Patriot Act of 1973. It requires compliance reports be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in other settings. Title II of the ECPA, the Stored Communications Act (SCA) protects communication held in electronic storage, most notably messages stored on computers. 18 U.S.C. § 1030 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1984 Status of bill: P.L. 98-473 , 98 Stat. 2190 on October 12, 1984. Defines criminality of security breaches and unauthorized access to data on federal computer systems and certain financial institutions. 42 USC § 201 The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPA A) Privacy and civil liberties concerns are not highlighted in recent congressional proposals. There are Internet privacy and non-disclosure policies written into statutory frameworks that may not specifically address cybersecurity. Civil liberties is an area of concern for both Congress and privacy advocates, but does not appear to be an immediate priority reflected in proposals. The National Security Advisor and the Director of the National Economic Council are among those who have raised privacy and civil liberty concerns in the past. The White House has not responded to requests for comment. of individually identifiable health information in computerized insurance records. 15 U.S.C. § 6801 Financial Services Modernizati on Act of 1999 (Gramm-Leach-Blil ey) Status of bill: P.L. 106-102 , 113 Stat. 1338, enacted November 12, 1999. See under: Disclosure of Nonpublic Personal Information (Financial Privacy Rule). Summary: Requires financial institutions to provide consumers with a privacy notice at the time the consumer relationship is established and annually thereafter. of networks and information. It is difficult to secure information infrastructures and their content without tradeoffs between security and the freedoms associated with the Internet. Many concerned about civil liberties fear that the executive branch will use its national security powers and national defense mandate as justification for encroaching on privacy without adequate oversight. Others regard security measures, such as network traffic monitoring, as a violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Complicating the issue is a lack of consensus on how to proceed. with third-party companies. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-most-cnn-top-stories-of-the-year-2013/story.html?storylink=cpy. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. Click here for more information on CNN.com's top 10 stories of the year 2013. Click through the gallery to see more stories from 2013.

ROUGE-1: 75.09, ROUGE-2: 69.20, ROUGE-L: 31.31
BERTScore: 72.34

==============================================
==================== [81/100] ====================
Summary:
The General Mining Law of 1872 (17 Stat. 91) can be traced to 16 th Century English and Spanish property and mineral rights laws and customs. One of the earliest statutes was the "Royal Code of 1783" This Spanish law became the basis for acquiring mineral rights in Spanish colonies in the U.S. The law encompasses many other issues, such as whether public domain lands should be patented, which are not addressed in this report. It was passed in 1872 to protect the rights to lands including those containing minerals. a claim holder could obtain title—called a patent—to the land and mineral rights upon demonstrating the discovery of economically recoverable minerals. The claim holder may also claim and patent nonmineral, noncontiguous lands to mill and process the ores. As noted, the General Mining Law was enacted to promote westward migration and the economic development of the West. The land and mining rushes that followed further accelerated the great Westward settlement and expansion. Originally, the Mining Law applied only to minerals. The Lode Law of 1866 provided free and open access to federal lands with lode deposits for prospecting, claiming, and patenting. The Placer Act of 1870 applied the same provisions to placer deposits. The General Mining Law was approved by President Ulysses S. Grant on May 10, 1872. It was the consolidation of amended versions of both the 1866 Lode law and the 1870 Placer act. Under the law, gold mining was legal in the United States. Land charters issued by England to the original thirteen colonies provided generally that 1/5 th of the minerals on chartered lands were reserved for the crown. Several ordinances were enacted but these did not address the question of mineral royalties specifically. The "California gold rush" of 1849 and the "Golden Age of Mining" of the late 1800s led to a change in the rules on mineral royalties in the U.S. The first royalties were paid in 1841, and the second in 1852. silver strike in Nevada of 1860 caused a significant westward population migration for the purposes of prospecting and claiming public domain lands. During this pre-Mining Law period, the issue of land ownership and easy and free access to federal lands was very controversial and fiercely debated. The Congress had approved several temporary leasing or land sales acts for gold, silver, lead, and iron. But prospectors disregarded them, trespassed onto federal lands, laid their claims anyway, and paid no royalty to the federal government. mine shafts) generally ranked fairly low, relative to assets used in other industries. mining companies pay a variety of claims fees (location fees, Bureau of Land Management processing fees, annual maintenance fees) These are charges for specific types of administrative services provided by the BLM. The claims location fee is presently $30 per claim, which is about 20 acres. The annual maintenance (or holding) fee, necessary to hold a claim on public land, is currently $125 per claim. This fee applies to claim holders with 11 acres or more. The location fee and the annual maintenance fee are adjusted for inflation. The BLM also assesses a processing fee of $15. These fees help the BLM cover its costs of administering the mining law and regulations. They cover costs for such actions as processing and recording applications, certain exploration permits, name changes, and corporate mergers. On November 1, 2007, the United States House of Representatives approved a substitute version of H.R. 2262 (with amendments), the Hardrock Mining and Reclamation Act. lands; create an abandoned mine reclamation program similar to the one currently in place for coal sites; make the income from hardrock mining fees and royalties available, subject to appropriation, to support reclamation programs and to provide assistance to certain state, local, and tribal governments. 50% of the cleanup funding would be directed to the state in which the royalties were generated; direct the Secretary of the Interior to prioritize reclamation projects that protect public health and safety, particularly from water pollution, and for projects that restore wildlife habitat. the Committee bill, watershed areas would be designated as eligible reclamation projects and among the top priorities for receiving cleanup funds. establish environmental standards specific to the hardrock mining industry. establish a new definition of "undue degradation" of public lands and resources and give the Secretary of the Interior broader authority to block mining operations that would cause such harm. allow Native American tribes to petition the federal government to withdraw federal lands with cultural and religious values. The substitute version of H.R. 2262 would be less prescriptive and more performance-oriented than the original bill. from mining activities (similar language has been in place for states and localities) Set guidelines for administrative and judicial review of actions authorizing mining on public lands. Allow citizen lawsuits challenging federal decisions. Set guidelines to allow citizen lawsuits against federal decisions on mining activities. Allow for citizen lawsuits to challenge federal decisions about mining activities on public land. Allow state and local governments to sue the federal government to stop mining on their land. For more information on the bill, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/mineral-mining/index.html. the current and past royalty debates and is the base proposed in H.R. 2262. The main reason for suggesting this royalty base is that not only is gross income under the tax depletion rules consistent with the economic concept of an ad-valorem royalty, but the legal and regulatory apparatus has been in place since 1932, the year that percentage depletion first became available to the hardrock mining industry. This would tend to reduce the costs of industry compliance and government administration of the royalty system. Most of the revenues estimated under H.R. 2262 would come from existing claims. The 8% royalty on new claims is unlikely to generate significant revenues during the forecast period (2008-2017) It typically takes at least 10 years for a hardrock mine to begin production. No royalties would be paid in 2008 due to a provision that would defer royalties during the first 12 months after enacting the bill. The bill would also reauthorize and raise both the claim's location fee and the annual maintenance or payment of a royalty to the federal government for the services from the mineral land would increase federal revenues. The Congressional Budget Office has estimated the budgetary effects, revenue and spending, of H.R. 2262. The estimates are replicated in Table 3 , which shows both revenue effects of the 8% and 4% royalty and from the proposed higher fees. As noted, the bill would establish, beginning after its enactment, a 4% royalties on existing claims, and an 8% royalty on new claims. bills were introduced in the 103 rd Congress to impose a royalty. H.R. 322 went to conference in 1994 but was not approved reportedly because of opposition from Western lawmakers. In 1995, there was an unsuccessful attempt to incorporate a royalty as part of the FY1996 budget. S. 775 passed the Senate in May 1993 and was incorporated into H. R. 322 which was approved by the House in November 1993. In its 1993 session of Congress, the House of Representatives passed a bill that would have imposed a royalty on the U.S. Virgin Islands. a 4% royalty. On October 2, 2007, the Subcommittee on Energy and Minerals of the House Natural Resources Committee held a hearing on this bill. A substitute bill was marked up and approved by the full committee on October 23. The House approved this committee bill, with minor amendments, on November 1 by a vote of 244 to 166. The comparable bill in the Senate is S. 2750 , which also proposes an 8% royalty, and also also proposes a 4% royalties. The Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 introduced a leasing system for coal, oil, and gas, and certain other minerals. But over time all but the hardrock or "locatable" minerals were removed from the law's purview. Where there is competition, the minerals are alienated through a bonus bidding process. In 1955, the Mineral Materials Act of 1947 instituted a leasingsystem for the non-hardrock and non-locatable minerals. The act also provided for an annual rental per acre and a fixed royalty of so many cents per ton. non-energy minerals—the common and less valuable minerals such as sand and gravel. For coal, this system of leasing continued until the early 1970s, when the Arab oil embargo and shortages of petroleum reserves focused attention on the vast coal deposits in the western states. In 1976 the Federal Coal Leasing Amendments Act was enacted, which among other changes, replaced the fixed royalty with an ad-valorem royalty of 12.5% for surface mines and 8% for underground mines. This kind of royalty payment system is now also used by the federal government in leasing oil and gas. For geothermal resources, the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (as amended) instituted a 10%-15% royalty on federal leases based on the value of the steam or any other form of heat or energy produced and sold. Under amendments made by the Energy Policy Act of 2005 ( P.L. 109-58 ), if the geothermal energy is not sold but is instead used to create a marketable product, the costs are deductible. These rules for oil, gas, and coal clarify that value is determined as close to the mine as possible. Law has been made almost from the time it was signed by President Grant. Many Presidents have endeavored to reform the law. The law makes no provision for the payment of a royalty on the production of the hardrock minerals from federal lands. The royalty-free treatment is unlike mining arrangements (leases) on private and state lands, mining of the leasable energy minerals (coal, oil, and gas) on federal lands, and even unlike this law, as amended, public lands with hard rock minerals. Since 1872, hardrock mining on federal lands has been governed by the General Mining Law. The law allows virtually free access to open public domain lands for mineral prospecting, staking claims, exploration and development, and extraction without payment of a royalty. Until 1994, claimants on hardrock mineral lands could take title to both the mineral rights and the land, after paying to the U.S. Department of Interior (DOI) the required fee or either $2.50 or $5.00 per acre. hardrock minerals on acquired (as contrasted with public) federal lands, all of which provide for a royalty payment to the landowner. In recent years, the Congress has repeatedly considered, but not passed, reform of the Mining Law, including, in part, to require the payment of royalties. In 1990, committees held several hearings on proposed Mining Law reform, e.g., on S. 1126 (101 st Congress) which among other things would have imposed an 8% ad-valorem royalty. In 1993, President Clinton's comprehensive economic proposal, part of the State of the Union Address, included claims fees and a 12.5%. The major reform bill in the House is H.R. 2262. It would impose an 8% ad-valorem royalty based on the value of the minerals. The proceeds would be used for the cleanup of abandoned sites. The 8% royalty would apply to new production, and existing mining operations would pay the same. The bill has not been passed by the Senate. The Senate is expected to vote on the bill this week, but it's not certain if it will be passed. of 2007. This bill would: establish a new regulatory framework for administering permits to develop hardrock minerals. permanently end the sale or "patenting" of public lands for mining, which has been under moratorium since the early 1990s. Use 75% of the proceeds for the cleanup of abandoned sites; impose an 8% gross income royalty future hardrock mining operations, and an 4% royalty rate on current mining operations; require miners to seek additional permits to explore for and develop mineral resources and meet certain standards related to reclamation of mined. For oil, gas, and coal, federal royalties are calculated on the gross proceeds (or gross sales revenues) from the contract sale. As a factor payment, this type of royalty makes little economic sense, being equivalent to charging fixed interest payments on capital regardless of the value of the capital loaned. Being assessed on only one variable, rather than price and output, does, however, avoid the usual complexities associated with determining value (price), costs, or even profits. For oil and gas this generally occurs close to the end of the contract. Royalties on coal extracted from federal lands, at the 8% or 12% royalty rate, are also assessed on the "gross proceeds" from the sale of the coal. The price is determined at the point of sale, which for coal is typically at or near the mine-mouth when the coal is weighed and loaded. Transportation and washing costs, and other costs not deemed to be mining or production.deducted to determine gross proceeds for royalty purposes. The royalty rate is 8% to 12%. wellhead, and so the contract price is used to determine gross proceeds. In situations where oil is not sold in an arm's-length transaction, or is sold without a contract, royalties are based on various types of benchmarks such as comparable sales or even local spot-market oil prices, adjusted for any quality differences and transportation costs. In cases where the oil or gas is transported before it is sold, then transportation charges are generally used to calculate the royalty figure. The price at which oil and gas is sold to a pipeline company is the price on which the royalty is based. or the return, to land as both a marketable capital asset and input to production. It is a payment made by the renter of the land to the landowner (whether private or public) in a voluntary exchange for the flow of services provided by that land over time. As a factor payment, the royalty is analogous to the wage rate, or the interest rate, for the services of capital. The exception to this rule has been the case of locatable minerals on public (or federal) lands in the United States. bonus bids and annual rentals depends primarily upon how production risk is shared between landowner and mineral producer. The royalty becomes a way of allowing for mineral land rents to be paid, for the landowner to earn a return on the land. As a land rental, then, an ad-valorem royalty protects the mineral producer against excessive royalty payments (overestimation of rents) and the government against underestimation of economic rents. A royalty is not a tax, which is a compulsory levy on individuals. rentals, or a royalty, or in various combinations of these depending on the type of mineral, and whether there is a lease or not. For example, under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act of 1953, as amended, the federal government leases lands for oil and gas development in return for a bonus bid, annual rents, and royalties. Lease sales are conducted through a competitive bidding process, and leases are awarded to the highest bidder, who makes an up-front cash payment.  mineral rents are an attempt to capture the returns to the land above and beyond the returns paid to labor (wages), capital (interest), entrepreneurship (profits), and other factors. Annual rents range from $5 to $9.50 per acre, with lease sizes ranging form 2,500 to nearly 6,000 acres, and royalty rates are either 12.5% or 16.67%. With perfect knowledge and no risks, the rents resulting from mineral lands could be captured by the landowner as up-front payments. A factor payment in a competitive market for a royalty to be based on other than market value minus the costs of obtaining it. For example, if instead of payments in kind (deer or crops or precious metals) the landowner were to be paid in money, one would expect him to receive the monetary equivalent of the value of the output. Rational landowners would not settle for less than what the deer, crop, or metal is worth because they could always have the deer and crops taken to market and sold for at least that amount. The ad-valorem royalty appears to be economically the most efficient type of royalty. But the question becomes to what base specifically should the royalty rate apply? The aggregate value of a commodity being the product of a price (value/unit) and a total output, the questions are what is the appropriate royalty rate for this commodity? The answer is that it should be based on the aggregate value, rather than the price/unit, of the commodity as a whole. If the renter wanted less rent, then presumably that would have been negotiated as a smaller share. and businesses to finance the cost of government for the common welfare and not a return to a factor of production in exchange for specific services provided. This is an important point, one that might be used, for example, to argue against proposals to impose a royalty based on net profits. The distinction between a tax and the rental payment also distinguishes between the federal government as a sovereign entity with the power to tax, and as a landowner or proprietor with the right to pay a rental payment. Forgoing royalty and other payments through the location system in effect means that the services of a factor of production are provided free of charge. In economic terms, this is comparable to the free provision of labor or capital equipment. Economic theory suggests that a consequence of providing factor services for free that would otherwise have economic value would be to distort the value of the land.earn a return on that land for the public. The services of federal land are provided for free to the producer by virtue of the fact that no royalty is ever collected from its use. allocation of resources. This theory holds that if a factor is provided to a firm without charge, too much of that factor would be hired and the output of the firm would exceed the socially desirable amount. From another perspective, the federal government is the steward of the public lands which it holds as trustee of American public. The development of public resources should only occur at a fair market value return to the nation, it is argued. An implication of the location system on federal lands is that all. economic surplus that may be earned by the industry in the long run is retained by industry rather than allocated to society at large. These profits are excess or surplus returns to a resource owner above the level required to produce or supply the resource, i.e., above the normal rate of return. In theory, they accrue naturally to the owner of any natural resource but are not necessary to secure the continued supply of the resource. Only a normal long-run return is necessary to ensure such a supply. This is an important rationale for the payment of bonus bids. rate. Much land is also privately owned or owned by state or local governments or Indian tribes, which suggests that the market-determined royalty rates might be a reliable indicator of competitive rates. As to the hardrock mineral industry structure, available data suggest that the industry, both in the United States and throughout the world, is somewhat concentrated. Hardrock mining is a highly capital intensive business and large enterprises can operate more efficiently. In the U.S., many of the mining firms are large multinational mining conglomerates. Five of the top ten claim holders (who hold more than $1 billion) are multinationals. 16% of all claims on western public lands are foreign corporations. The hardrock mining industry is dominated by about 40 companies. The top four account for 35% of total market capitalization. This would suggest that the market-determined royalty rate might actually be too low. On balance, it might be the case that the above two opposing forces tend to offset each other and the government would want to use the more appropriate competitive rate. This is more consistent with economic efficiency, and social welfare, than a zero rate. cannot be shifted. This would further add somewhat to financial pressures for the marginally profitable mining company. On the other hand, the hardrock mining industry has been booming over the last four years. One indicator of this is the growth in metals and minerals prices, which have increased overall and have contributed to industry profitability. According to the Department of Commerce, relative to its size in the economy, the mining industry group generally was the largest contributor to growth in the Gross Domestic Product price index in 2007. 2006, accounting for 6.6% of price growth, more than three times its share of current-dollar GDP. PricewaterhouseCoopers predicted that 2007 should bring with it both record financial results and further consolidation within the industry. rates of return on capital for the U.S. mining industry have also been higher as compared with many other industries. These negative industry and regional effects would be a natural and unavoidable part of the transition from a policy of resource subsidization to a Policy of resource neutrality. Subsidies for hardrock mining clearly produce economic benefits to the industry receiving the subsidy and to the communities dependent upon that industry. But these benefits are not external benefits that the markets are not capable of taking into account. When resources are scarce, a condition that affects all economic systems and all countries alike, the use of resources in one sector means the loss of the resource in another sector. The loss of economic efficiency implies that the private benefits are smaller than the private costs to the hard rock mining industry. There is another side to the externality concept: external costs. It appears that some external effects associated with hardrock mineral production are net "external costs" rather than net external benefits. Without land reclamation, there would presumably be damage to the environment, which is an external cost to society. This is a cost that the typical profit-maximizing hard rock mineral producer does not usually account for in its decision-making. The external costs from hardrock Mineral production are the degradation of the environment. Arguments are made that the economic stimulus to the industry resulting from royalty-free treatment produces benefits. It is argued that imposition of a federal royalty on hardrock mining would damage most of the American hardrock industry. Some argue that there is a national security aspect to subsidizing certain hardrock minerals, although there is no presumption that royalty- free treatment is the appropriate way to address these concerns. It was also pointed out that damage to theindustry would harm those western communities that are economically dependent upon the industry. imported oil, and often used to justify subsidies for the domestic oil industry. Some argue that the threat of a domestic supply disruption might be better met with a stockpiling of that mineral. It seems clear also that not all hardrock minerals are of U.S. national security concern. In any event, if a financial subsidy for certain strategic hard rock minerals industries was appropriate, a tax subsidy would probably be more efficient than total forgiveness of royalty payments. (The current tax subsidies for hardrock mineral industry are discussed in the section "Federal Tax Treatment of the Hardrock Mining Industry," below). policy of free access (i.e., royalty forgiveness) involves a trade-off: Policymakers choose the benefits to the hardrock mineral industry above the benefits that would accrue to another domestic economic sector. A policy of royalty (or other rental) payments would be more neutral; it would let the markets be the arbiter of the relative size of the various economic sectors. Even if the health and competitiveness of the domestic hardrock Mineral industry is of sufficient concern to warrant federal subsidies, there may be more economically efficient ways of providing these subsidies. to other sectors. This suggests that removal of the subsidies would produce a net welfare gain to citizens of the United States. As to the national security argument, there are minerals that are often referred to as "strategic minerals"—cobalt, columbium, chromium, manganese, platinum, and others. Excessive dependence upon foreign producers of these and other economically vital minerals might pose an economic disruption or national security threat to the U.S. These arguments are similar to those made about the U.-S. dependence upon other countries. The royalty rates currently in effect on various types of minerals, both leasable and locatable, from federal lands are shown. Under an ad-valorem royalty, the royalty payments are based on the value of the mineral. In most types of private royalty arrangements in the early 1990s, the most common type of royalty was the ad-Valorem royalty at rates ranging from 2-8%, with an average rate of 5%. Even for hardrock minerals on acquired lands (as opposed to public domain lands, which are governed by the 1872 Mining Law), the Congress has established a 5% royalty rate. If there is to be an ad-valorem royalty based on price or value, at what stage in the mineral producing process should value (or price) be measured? Should it be based on gross income (value of the mineral at the mine) or net smelter return (the value at the smalter less certain deductions)? When does a mining company produce a saleable or marketable product whose mineral, etc. is the ad-Valorem royalty? If there is a royalty, payments are made in installments over the life of the mine, rather than partially up front. on new production and a 4% royalty on production from existing leases. This report analyzes the economic issues underlying proposals to impose a royalty on hardrock (locatable) minerals on public domain lands. It also discusses the federal tax treatment of the hardrock mineral industry. In particular, the report addresses the following questions: What exactly is a royalty, and how does a royalty differ from other rental payments or, for that matter, taxes? Were a royalty imposed, what would be the best way to structure such a royalty? be too low. These are complex issues which are difficult to analyze. Much of the land from which hardrock minerals are produced is owned by the federal government. It might be in a position to take advantage of its power to obtain royalty payments above the competitively determined rates. Such payments, combined with the bonus bids, would appropriate for society the economic rents—the abnormal or excess profits (i.e., windfalls)—from the production of scarce natural resources. In reality, of course, the government policy is just the reverse: It charges a royalty rate of zero, which is definitely below the market-determined rates. value can be measured? What deductions, if any, should be allowed from that price? What should the royalty rate be? And how does Congress decide what a fair royalty rate is? How does one balance the various considerations, such as efficiency and administrative considerations in deciding whether to impose a royalty? What would be the economic effects of introducing a system of royalty payments and other rental payments where one did not exist? Would a royalty harm the domestic and international competitiveness of the U.S. hardrock mining industry? Finally, what taxes and fees does the hardrock mineral industry pay? The location system for the hardrock minerals industry has remained essentially unchanged since 1872. Part of the problem is confusion over just what a royalty is and what it is not. Economics is very clear on this: A royalty is a factor payment, part of the rent paid, and other rental payments. The theory suggests that any pure economic surplus return from a natural resource should accrue to society. The type of royalty that most closely is intended to capture the rents from mineral lands whose future productivity cannot be precisely determined due to risk. Hardrock mineral production would be lower as marginal mines closed. This would also adversely affect those parts of the U.S. that rely on these industries. The payment of royalties combined with higher fees could also alter the competitive balance among mineral producers both domestically and internationally. The hardrock mineral industry generally would be less competitive in relation to other domestic mineral producers and with international mineral producers. Hardrock mineral prices would probably not increase very much because for most minerals, prices are determined in the international market. The policy of introducing a royalty payment system for locatable minerals would be expected to have positive economic effects in other sectors. Less land would be mined and fewer U.S. hardrock minerals would being produced. But more of other, higher-valued commodities would be produced. This would likely contribute to a more economically efficient use of the nation's resources, which would tend to promote the welfare of society. The current discussion suggests, however, the current royalty system is not a good idea. If there are sufficient positive economic and social effects from the use of public lands for mining, there might be an economic rationale for charging the mineral producer a lower than market rate. Such externality arguments were apparently a principal rationale for the location system involving no royalties and other rent payments established in 1872. But these arguments may not be valid in today's economy. The hardrock minerals industry is not an infant industry, and there is no longer a need for settling in the American West. mineral rights, for example. However, mineral production, like all business, is risky. It is difficult to know in advance of production precisely the quantity and quality of the mineral. There are long lead times between exploration, discovery, and actual production. These and other uncertainties make it risky for both the hardrock mineral producer and landowner to predict up front what rents would be earned by mineral lands. In general, the precise division between royalties or royalties or mineral rights is not known. windfall profits) the more net smelter returns diverge from gross income. Reducing royalty payments to the federal government might be a major reason that it is supported by much of the hardrock mining industry and its supporters. This method could create incentives for mining companies to claim significant deductions from their income such that there would rarely be a profit against which to levy the royalty. Depending upon the royalty rate this could lead not only to smaller royalty payments than either a gross income or net smalter return royalty, but perhaps to no royalty at all. after-tax profit type of royalty, for example the 1993 bill S. 775 , would have measured net profits at the mine mouth. Further, a net profit royalty at the minemouth creates complications in allocating costs between extraction and other mining processing. Another effect of a net-profit type of royalties on hardrock minerals would be to expose the federal government to the risks of an investor—much like investors in stock are as owners subject to risks—rather than the much less risky status of landowner. arrangement would not serve to impose the market-determined factor costs (royalties) on the mining operations. If net profit were to mean net before-tax profits, then the royalty would essentially operate like an income tax. This would not be consistent with mainstream economic theory that a royalty is not a tax, but a factor payment. Yet another royalty base, one which is used less frequently, is the royalty based on a constant rate per unit, say $5/ton, of mineral output (i.e., the ore concentrate) royalty rate should apply to all hardrock minerals or whether the rate should vary by type of mineral in some logical way. More valuable minerals pay greater absolute royalties per unit. Introducing a royalty payment system for locatable minerals could have an adverse economic and financial effect on the producers of these minerals, particularly on marginal producers. Both average and marginal costs would increase, and profits and employment in the hardrock mineral industry would decrease. For example, lead and zinc, which qualify for a 22% depletion rate, would have a higher royalty burden than gold or silver. mineral's price. Column (6) of Table 2 shows one hypothetical schedule of such rates beginning at 8% for platinum, the most valuable metal, and declining in steps of 1 percentage point to 1% for aluminum. With such a schedule the absolute amount of royalty payments declines even more rapidly as the value of a mineral declines. Another possibility would be to vary the royalty rates in direct proportion to the percentage depletion rates applicable to gross income from mining as shown in Table 3. Such a royalty rate structure would produce a different pattern of absolute royalty payments than the current schedule. on federal lands, the statutory royalty rates range from 5%-16.67%. For oil and gas, the royalty rate is either a 1/8 (12.5%) or 1/6 ( 16.67%) share of the value of the mineral. On some leases, the rate could be higher than 1-6. For coal, the royalties are either 12% (surface mines) or 8% (underground mines) The royalty could be paid "in-kind" rather than of the price. A constant royalty rate tends to minimize both economic distortions and administrative costs. Private royalty agreements, which are negotiated on a case-by-case basis, have widely varying royalty rates. These can range from 1-10%, and differ by mineral types. Under one possible structure that has been suggested, the royalty rate itself would be a function of—it would vary positively with—the amount of such costs. The figures do not represent either net smelter returns or gross income from mining, both of which would be less by the amount ofSuch costs. mitigate against the use of the market-determined royalty rate. If private landowners exercise monopoly power or some other type of market power, then it would be possible to extract from the mining companies higher than competitive royalty rates. In the second case, if the mining industry is concentrated and exercises market power—control over prices, for example—it might lead to underpayment of royalties. The market- determined royalty rates might actually be higher than they appear to be, the authors say. generate electricity—in most cases it is. The royalty is between 1% and 2.5% and it is based on the gross proceeds from the sale of electricity rather than the value or volume of geothermal energy used in the generation of electricity. In some cases, a deduction against gross proceeds for transmission and wheeling costs is allowed. With regard to a specific royalty rate, economic theory is less clear beyond the implication that a royalty rate determined in the competitive marketplace is generally the most economically efficient rate. the normal business decisionmaking process. Consequently, since the accountable business costs are lower than the real costs (including external costs) prices are lower. Under this reasoning, if the presence of external benefits is dismissed and the Presence of external costs is considered significant, the appropriate federal policy would be a tax. This is the economic rationale for the abandoned mineland reclamation fee under SMCRA, the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act. Two other conditions might be required for the fee to be reinstated. This provision allows mining companies to deduct the costs of mine closing and land reclamation in advance of the actual closing and reclamations, i.e., before the occurrence of the activity giving rise to the expenses. This provision is contrary to the general tax rule. Under the cash method of accounting, expenses can only be deducted when the payment is actually made. under the accrual method ofAccounting, expenses to be incurred in the future cannot be deducted currently. Under this provision, the company can deduct the cost of the reclamation before the actual reclamation takes place. companies incur geological and geophysical (or surveying, and reconnaissance investigation) costs. These include the costs of staking the claim, removal of property line obstructions, limited removal of overburden, and limited sluicing. The costs of exploratory drilling to ascertain the extent of commercially marketable ores are treated by the tax law as a mineral exploration cost. Expenditures made after the existence of ores or minerals has been disclosed are considered mine development expenditures. These types of costs are all deductible rather than capitalized. also qualify for expensing treatment. These are costs associated with bringing the mine to production. Activities associated with development are building roads, clearing the land, and other activities to prepare a site for the production stage. Expensing applies only to domestic mines; exploration and development cost of foreign properties must be either depleted or amortized over a 10-year period using straight-line method. The costs of constructing or sinking a mine shaft, or the costs of driving tunnels and galleries, are development costs, which may be expensed. amortization. Mining companies may only expense 70% of the exploration and development; the remaining 30% must be amortized over five years. Recapture is accomplished by either including the amount expensed as ordinary income or by subtracting it from the percentage depletion allowance. This makes it especially important for mining companies to determine when exploration ends and development begins, as well as when production commences and when the mine is sold. It is also important to know when exploration begins and development ends, so that the company can determine when to recapture costs. Mining companies are allowed a depletion deduction, at varying percentages, based on the gross income from mining. Because value is added as mining production moves from the extraction or quarrying state to the smeltering stage, a net price (such as net smelter return) further downstream would generally be greater than a gross price further upstream. If the mining.is further complicated when the firm or industry is vertically integrated, there may not actually be a sale throughout the mining-production-processing-marketing (sale) stage. physical and other requirements are such that the ore or mineral must be transported a greater distance to such plants or mills [IRC §613(c)(2)." Also under subparagraph (5) of IRC§613(C) the following treatment processes are not considered to be mining processes and are thus NOT included in gross income. "Electrolytic deposition, roasting, calcining, thermal or electric smelting, refining, polishing, fine pulverization, blending with other materials, treatment effecting a chemical change, thermal action, and molding or shaping" The term "gross income" as used for purposes of percentage depletion is somewhat confusing. While the term is intended to measure only sales revenue from mining operations, income in the context of a business generally refers to profits and not sales. The term may be misleading because it may suggest a larger percentage depletion deduction, and therefore a larger royalty payment than a "net" royalty. But, in fact, whether a gross royalty base is smaller or bigger than a net royalty base depends on the point in the production stage the price is. firm is an integrated producer, i.e., it has smelting/refining operations, and also applies non-mining processes to the ore concentrate before the mineral is sold. There may be no sale of either the raw ore, or ore concentrate, and hence no price for the mineral firm's output until the final metal (gold, for example) is sold in the commodities markets. In these cases, percentage depletion is based not on actual gross income but what is called "constructive" gross income. This is income derived from or approximated by using representative market prices elsewhere in that particular market. The present depreciation treatment is known as the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System. Under this system, assets are depreciated for regular tax purposes over a specified recovery period. The applicable recovery periods are prescribed for each property class. Mining equipment, assets used in the mining, quarrying, milling, and other industries are included in this class of property. The annual depreciation deductions are determined by applying this formula to the assigned recovery period, as well as the 200% declining balance method or formula. Hardrock mineral producers are highly capital intensive and highly capital-intensive. This system also allows producers to use a depreciation method that maximizes the value of the deduction over time. This is more advantageous than the theoretical treatment, which would call for a depreciation schedule based on the actual economic depreciation. It also reduces the effective marginal tax rate on the income generated by the equipment. It is a more advantageous system than a theoretical treatment that would have a longer recovery period and a less accelerated formula, which increases the tax value. amounts that can be recovered through percentage depletion generally exceed the total investment cost of the property. This is true even with the net-income limitation, which limits the deduction to 50% of the taxable income from the mine. Percentage depletion rates range from 5% for stone and clay to 22% for uranium and beryllium. Most of the hardrock minerals have a depletion rate of 22%, and several have either a 15% or 14% rate. The allowance is available to virtually all mineral producers except integrated oil and gas producers. The percentage depletion allowance is a tax deduction against the federal income tax available to a mining firm. It is intended to give the mineral producer a deduction for the depletion of the investment in the mine. Any depletion deduction in excess of cost depletion is considered by economists to be a tax subsidy or incentive because the present value of the total amount deducted typically exceeds the initial investment. The percentage depletion deduction for a mine is calculated as a percentage of "gross income" (annual sales revenue) irrespective of the actual investment. the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 ( P.L. 97-248 ). In effect this limitation reduces the 22% depletion rate to an effective depletion rate of between 17.6% and 22%, depending upon the amount of cost depletion. As noted above, the imposition of a royalty, where none existed before, would increase a mining firm's operating costs and reduce profitability. Further, due to the deductibility of the royalty (as an operating cost of doing business) against the federal income tax, the deduction reduces tax liability. marginal tax rate; the same royalty however is effectively a 6.44% royalty with a gross income offset if the percentage depletion allowance is 22%. Equations (2) and (3) are the same as equation (1) In equation (3), the effective royalty is shown as a gross royalty, the r term, and the offset term - rt. For example, a 4% royalty without the gross Income offset is effectively 3% royalty at a 25% marginal tax rate. such as hardrock mining companies, the current deduction of 6% is equivalent to a marginal corporate income tax rate of 32.9% (35% x 0.94) rather than 35%. Another untargeted or general tax provision that is important to the hardrock mineral companies is accelerated depreciation. In addition, at the federal level there are three special, or targeted, tax preferences available to the mining industry generally, that are also available to hard rock mining firms. It is analogous to the cost depletion allowance for investment in a mineral deposit (as discussed that the equipment used can cost tens of millions of dollars) trigger the minimum tax, and thereby reduce the value of the special tax provisions. These special tax preferences or subsidies, combined with accelerated depreciation (a significant tax benefit for highly capital intensive business such as hardrock mining) have historically resulted in relatively low effective average and marginal tax rates. Thus, firms that mine hardrock minerals on public domain lands pay no royalty, and benefit from fairly significant tax subsidies. For example, CBO recently published a study of effective tax rates on different types of assets, and those used in mining. fully phased in by 2010. For the domestic mining industry (which includes the oil and gas industry), the deduction applies to any primary product "manufactured, produced, or extracted in whole or in significant part in the United States" Note that extraction is considered to be manufacturing for purposes of this deduction. Effectively, the deduction is equivalent to a reduced marginal tax rate. For example, at the top marginal corporate tax rate of 35%, which typically applies to large corporations, this would be a 35% deduction. holding fee, from $30 to $50 per claim, and from $125 to $150 per claim respectively. Under federal budget rules fees collected by federal agencies, such as the Department of the Interior, are considered as offsetting budget receipts, or negative spending. Such receipts reduce the agencies' outlays. The U.S. hardrock minerals industry is a major source of revenue for the federal government. The revenue estimates are net of federal income tax revenues due to the deductibility of royalty payments and fees against business taxes. subject to the same income tax laws which apply to all other for-profit businesses, paying federal income, payroll, and other federal taxes. The federal corporate income tax applies a 35% rate to most corporate taxable income. Reduced tax rates, either 15%, 25%, or 34%, apply to "smaller" corporations, those earning less than $10 million of income. In addition, corporate stockholders pay individual income taxes on their corporate-source capital gains and dividends. As business entities, hardrock mining companies benefit from many different different tax rates. from these three provisions over five years is $1.8 billion, an average of $360 million/year. This is the amount by which the industry lowered its tax burden, or conversely, the loss in tax revenues to the federal government. The bulk of these preferences is claimed by corporations, only a small share is claimed for proprietorships and partnerships. There is another provision of the current IRC that attempts to limit the benefits from the special tax breaks available to the mining industry and other industries. future expenses may be deducted in advance of actual payment but not before economic activity that gives rise to the expenses. The Joint Tax Committee estimates the revenue losses from the above three special tax preferences or subsidies. The latest five-year estimates (from FY2007-2011) are as follows: $0.5 billion for expensing of mine exploration and development costs, $1.1 billion for the excess of percentage over cost depletion, and $ 0.2 billion for mine reclamation reserves deduction. items are tax breaks that are important to the mining industry. Excess of percentage depletion over cost depletion, and the excess of the exploration and development cost deduction over a hypothetical deduction. A third item of tax preference that the mining firm would have to include in its list of tax preferences is accelerated depreciation over straight line depreciation. To the extent to which mining companies use these and other items of tax preference, this could have a significant impact on their tax bills in the future. It could also have a negative impact on the mining sector as a whole. types of untargeted tax incentives, provisions that are generally available to non-mining businesses, as well as some tax provisions specifically targeted toward mining. Under IRC §199, "manufacturing" businesses are allowed a deduction, as a business expense, for a specified percentage of the qualified production activity's income. The deduction was 3% of income for 2006, is currently 6%, and is scheduled to increase to 9% when it goes into effect in 2009. The tax benefits are the §199 manufacturing deduction and accelerated depreciation. The deductions are subject to a limit of 50% of the wages paid that are allocable to the domestic production. industry—there may be several different types of mineral products with value. Does the mine produce the raw mineral ore, the ore concentrate, or the final metal or mineral sold to wholesalers? Further, even if the output of the mine can be determined, there is the problem of what is the value or price of that output. For example, copper is traded in many forms that relate to different stages of processing: at the mine, copper may be sold as ore or precipitate. are: At what point can the value of a mine's output first be determined? Further, since throughout the production stage value is added or increased, at what stage does mining value end, and non-mining value begin? Production of valuable mineral products from raw hardrock minerals (e.g., metals such as iron, copper, aluminum, gold, lead) generally involves various stages: extraction or quarrying of the raw minerals, delivery to a plant or mill in order to produce valuable products. Production stages are shown for the typical case or mineral in Figure 1. Within these production stages, from extraction to the first sale to manufacturers, there may be various points at which there is created a valuable output. At this stage, there is a demand for the mineral ore concentrate as an input into the smelting/refining process for final sale in the wholesale commodities or manufacturing markets. Consider gold, for example. Raw gold is usually delivered to the refiner where it is purchased from the miner, processed, and refined. For most hardrock minerals extraction produces a raw mineral ore, which of itself has little value and is generally not marketed. For most minerals, after the ore is mined it is sent to a mill or plant to be crushed and ground, and in some cases (lead, for example) is beneficiated to the point that it is saleable as a metal concentrate. The first marketable mineral product created as a result of mining and before any non-mining processes (e.g., manufacturing processes such as refining or smeltering) are applied. and any treatment processes necessary or incidental to the mining process, specific treatment processes and also generally the costs of transporting the ores or minerals from the point of extraction to the plant or mill in which the treatment processes are applied. More specifically, The term "mining" includes not merely the extraction of the o Res or Minerals from the ground but also the treatment process considered as mining described in paragraph (4) [IRC §613(c)(4)(D)];" In addition, "and so much of the transportation of ores. or minerals (whether or not by common carrier) from the. point of extracted to the plants or mills in which such treatment processes. are applied" from the ground to the plant or mills in which such treatment processes are applied thereto as is not in excess of 50 miles unless the Secretary [of the Treasury] finds that the physical and other requirements are such that the ore or mineral must be transported a greater distance to such plants or mills. Subparagraph (4) of IRC §613(c) defines, for the different categories of minerals, the treatment processes that when applied by the mine owner or operator are considered as mining. The costs of such processes are included in the value or price for purposes of mining. percentage depletion): "In the case of iron ore, bauxite, ball and sagger clay, rock asphalt, and ores or minerals which are customarily sold in the form of a crude mineral product" "Sorting, concentrating, sintering, and substantially equivalent processes to bring to shipping grade and form, and loading for shipment [613(c)(4)(C)];" "Lead, zinc, copper, gold, silver, uranium, or fluorspar ores, potash" in cases where there is no representative price from sales of the same ore concentrate (the mining output) in other markets, then gross income from mining is estimated by multiplying gross sales by the ratio of mining to total costs. As a hypothetical example, assume that the market price of the final cast copper on the commodities exchanges is $3.60/lb, which is $7,937/metric tonne of pure copper. Also assume that one metric ton of copper ore concentrate contains 30% pure copper and no other valuable minerals. The remaining 70% is sulfur, iron, and other impurities that have no value. of transportation and handling of such concentrates, metals (including bullion) or products from the Claims to any mint, smelter, refinery or other purchaser. c) related insurance on such concentrate, metals, bullion or products. Thus, continuing with the above hypothetical copper example, the net smalter return would be the price at which cast copper could be sold after the costs of smelting and refining the copper ore are subtracted. Using the same figures as before, the market price of the final cast copper is $3.60/lb. tonne (2,205 lbs) of pure copper would be valued at $7,938. One ton of copper ore concentrate contains only 30% pure copper, so that the value of one tonne of that ore concentrate is 30% of that, or $2,381. To calculate smeltering and refining costs assume that these are 10% of the price of the cast copper. Then costs would be $238/tonne of copper concentrate (equal to $0.36 x 0.30 x 2,205) "Net-smelter return" is a common term used in the mining industry to refer to the net average revenue per unit of the smelted mineral product sold by the miner. If annual sales were 100,000 metric tonnes of copper concentrate, total net smalter return revenues would be $214 million. At 8%, the royalty on this wouldbe $17 million. This is because final metal prices are high relative to smelting/refining costs. In general, the higher are metals prices relative to costs (in which case mineral producers earn extra or more) Net smelter return is the amount received by the mine or mill owner from the sale of the mineral product to the treatment plant that converts the output of the mill to marketable metal. In non-metal mines the selling price is usually 'fob mine site' because of the transportation costs involved in delivering the mineralProduct to the buyer. From the gross proceeds received there may be a profit. In Canadian law, net smelters return is defined in the same way as in UK law. "Net Smelter Returns" shall mean the actual proceeds received by the Purchaser from a smelter or other place of sale or treatment in respect of all ore removed from the Claims. The Purchaser will deduct from such proceeds the following charges levied by third parties to the extent that they are not deducted by the purchaser in computing payment: a) assay costs and umpire assay costs charged by any mint, smalter, refinery or other purchaser; b) smelting and refining charges, penalties, and the cost of transporting ore. The permitted deductions will include all charges by the smelter, such as smelting and refining charge as well as penalties for impurities in the ore. In some cases deductions may also be made for taxes except income taxes and, depending on the nature of the commodity, for marketing costs. The similarity of these definitions of net smalter return (gross price less non-mining costs) times output to the gross income base under the percentage depletion rules is readily apparent. The following two examples, from contracts or royalty deeds between a landowner (the vendor) and the mining company (the purchaser), illustrate the legal language used in defining a net smelters return. deductions for costs incurred by the owner after the property leaves the mine property and before sale. Costs of transportation, insurance, or security, penalties, sampling and assaying, refining and smelting, and marketing. No deductions are made for the operating costs of the mine-mill complex. A net smelter return will be ... the net value of minerals from the property, where Net Value is Gross Value less certain permitted expenses. Gross value will usually be defined with reference to the spot price of an average weekly or monthly spot price on specified markets.

ROUGE-1: 80.26, ROUGE-2: 75.43, ROUGE-L: 26.64
BERTScore: 59.24

==============================================
==================== [82/100] ====================
Summary:
operational suitability, testers determine whether or not the agency can logistically support the asset to an acceptable standard. Critical operational issues (COI) are one metric used to determine an asset’s operational effectiveness and suitability and are stated in the form of a question. COIs are examined during testing to evaluate a system's ability to provide the desired capability and perform its mission. COTF assessed the NSC's COIs, for example, by comparing the outcome of the test event against the full scope of the COI. determine whether the COI was met or not. Unmet COIs are often the result of related deficiencies, which are identified during testing and include any system that is lacking in its ability to meet normal standards or to function as intended. Deficiencies are scored based on the severity of the problem and its impact on the asset’s ability to accomplish its mission. COIs and deficiencies identify during testing both factor into an asset's overall operational effectiveness and suitability rating. In addition to verifying that an asset is operationally effective and suitable, operational testing also tests key performance parameters. Operational testing can occur over many test events. Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&E) is meant to gather the data necessary to resolve COIs. Follow-on operational test and evaluation (FOT&e) is conducted after IOT &E and an asset’s full rate. The test event concludes with a rating of operationally effective or not effective, operationally suitable or not suitable. Table 1 provides examples of COIs and KPPs for the NSC. production decision and focuses on refining the conclusions that were made during previous operational test events. It also validates any incomplete or deferred requirements and verifies the correction of deficiencies identified during IOT&E. COTF writes a test report that focuses on the resolution of the asset’s COIs and any deficiencies that were identified during testing. These reports typically include a summary of the resolutions of the COIs. FOT&e concludes with an operational effectiveness and suitability rating similar to that of IOT &E. It focuses on evaluating production changes and reevaluating the system to ensure that it continues to meet operational needs. DHS and Coast Guard acquisition guidelines require operational test and evaluation by an independent test agency. The Coast Guard uses the U.S. Navy’s COTF to conduct operational tests and other evaluations for its major acquisition programs. For operational effectiveness, testers determine whether or not an asset can meet its missions. For for operational suitability, testers assess an asset's operational effectiveness and suitability to perform its duties as a Coast Guard vessel or aircraft carrier. For full-rate production, testers must confirm that the production configured system meet all requirements before approval. The Coast Guard has encountered several issues that require major retrofits and design changes on the NSC. The total cost of changes we identified as of June 2015 totals approximately $202 million. In order to minimize cost increases, the Coast Guard plans to maintain the original equipment design for the production of the remaining NSCs and conduct retrofits after accepting delivery of the cutters. The Coast Guard will be faced with paying for the replacement of these systems with new equipment that it must also purchase. The Coast Guard is in the process of designing the OPC, which is the last of the major cutter classes to be built. This cutter class is intended to bridge the mission gap between the FRC and NSC. The OPC is estimated to cost $12.1 billion, making it the most expensive Coast Guard recapitalization program to date. Without updated guidance that establishes timeframes and responsibilities for completing all testing, the Coast Guard risks encountering the same scenario with OPC and other future DHS assets. studies underway to identify the root causes of these problems. Until the causes are identified and corrective actions implemented, the Coast Guard is at risk of experiencing costly and potentially mission-limiting problems. DHS agreed to provide oversight and specify any further actions the NSC program should take at the conclusion of the studies related to the propulsion systems. The process has matured in its acquisition of cutters, it has matured its acquisition processes, which has been demonstrated in its approach with the FRC and OPC programs. High engine temperatures limit the top speed of the cutter in certain conditions. Cracked cylinder heads are the NSCs number one operational degrader and cost driver for maintenance. Overheating generator bearings have caused at least one patrol to be cut short due to the lack of an effective backup generator. Although the Coast Guard has two Coast Guard ships, they are not fully operational. The Coast Guard is currently working on a new fleet of six ships to replace the current fleet of four. The new ships are expected to be ready by the end of 2014. The problems identified with these systems during operations will continue to impact the NSC until the design changes are implemented across the fleet. Early testing can allow performance issues to be discovered at a point when fixes can be incorporated into the design of an asset while it is still in production. As we have previously found for Department of Defense programs, continuing with full-rate production before ensuring that assets meet key requirements risks replicating problems in each new asset until such time as the design is complete. Figure 1 shows selected systems that will require retrofits after all eight cutters are built. The Coast Guard could continue to buy assets without having demonstrated their full capabilities in testing. DHS’s guidance for its major acquisitions does not require programs to conduct FOT&E. We concluded in our January 2016 report that this gap in DHS guidance also has implications for that is the Coast Guard will be operating 6 NSCs before it has resolved issues from Iot&E and knows the cutter's full capabilities. of at least the 6th NSC before the testing is complete. DHS approved the NSC program for full rate production in October 2014. FOT&E will begin in the fall of 2016 and is scheduled to continue through at least 2017, COTF officials say. The Coast Guard will conduct FOT &E and the acquisition review board (ARB) will review major acquisition programs for proper management, oversight, accountability, and alignment with DHS’s strategic functions at acquisition decision events and other meetings as needed. The resulting acquisition decision memorandum (ADM) from October 2014 directed the Coast Guard to conduct Fot & E and the ARB. IOT&E that involved equipment failures by restoring the operational status of the related systems on the Stratton. They have plans to correct four more. According to Coast Guard documentation and officials, they may not correct 2 deficiencies due to the cost of making fleet-wide changes. The Coast Guard has developed a warranty provision under its contract with the FRC. For the OPC, the Coast Guard plans to begin IOT&e by December 2023, by which time it expects to have 1 operational OPC of a planned buy of 25. IOT&E took place about 2 years later than planned and after 7 of the 8 planned NSCs were under contract, with 3 operational. We have previously found that delaying critical test events can lead to late discoveries and could result in additional design changes and costs to programs. During testing, the NSC successfully demonstrated 18 of its 19 COIs, with one COI — cybersecurity—being a success. The 8 N SCs are planned to be fully operational by 2020 and the Coast Guard is phasing out the legacy 378-foot High Endurance Cutters. are measures of the capabilities considered essential to mission accomplishment. In our January 2016 report, we found that during IOT&E and other test events, the NSC fully met 12 of its 19 KPPs. The Coast Guard is not able to demonstrate that it is providing the capabilities that it intended to field. For instance, the Coast Guard has not yet demonstrated that it can achieve a hard and soft kill against a subsonic cruise missile as required, or fully meet interoperability requirements with the Department of Defense, DHS and other government agencies. Of the 7 KPPs not met, 3 pertain to the NSC’s cutter boat operations. We found that the Coast Guard and COTF have different interpretations of the cutter boat K PPs. The cutter boats are designed to be integral to the. NSC's overall capability, operate both within. and beyond the visual range of the N.SC, and enhance the overall mission effectiveness of theNSC in. every mandated mission area. The NSC conducted IOT&E according to the test and evaluation plan for the cutter boats. and determined that the three KPPs involving cutter boats were not fully met since the boats are unable to operate through all sea state 5 conditions. According to Coast Guard officials, the September 2012 requirements document for the NSC should have been written more clearly to convey the sea state expectation for cutter boat launch and recovery operations. The NSC’s sea state KPP was never intended to be applicable to the operation of the cutter boats. In January 2016 we recommended, and the Coast Guard concurred, that the N SC’S K PPs for the operation  should be. are the capabilities considered essential for mission accomplishment. KPPs are listed by threshold values, which are the minimum acceptable level of performance. For example, a KPP for the NSC is being able to reach a maximum speed of 28 knots for a threshold value and 31 knots for an objective value. K PPs differ from COIs in that KPP's focus on specific performance metrics, while COIs focus on certain types of missions that an asset should be able to conduct or an asset’s ability to be ready to perform those missions. deferred to FOT&E. This deferral was due to the DHS Director of Operational Test and Evaluation postponing the testing of the NSC’s cybersecurity capabilities until a more robust test plan could be developed to reflect emerging threats. Five of the 10 major deficiencies pertained to the N SC’S weapon systems and cutter boats. None of the major deficiencies were rated as severe, which would preclude the NCC from accomplishing its mission. In its assessment, COTF found the NNC to be operationally effective and suitable, but with 10major deficiencies. of the NSC’s IOT&E event, DOT&E stated that the reliability and operational availability issues of the weapon systems. The CIWS, NULKA launcher, and TRS-3D air search radar, and the 57-mm gun were all repaired following the event. Post-operational reports indicate that problems persist with these systems as they were often unavailable during operations. Despite these findings, as noted above, COTF found the N SC to be operationally effective and suitable. complete three action items: (1) complete testing of the cybersecurity COI; (2) verify the correction of all major deficiencies, including the unmet KPPs; and (3) assess the NSC’s cyber-security capabilities. The cybersecurity COi is planned to be tested in 2016, which, if successful, will address the first and third requirements of the ADM. Other testing events are expected to occur through 2017 and possibly beyond. According to Coast Guard officials, they have corrected 4 of the 10 major deficiencies. award, by the end of fiscal year 2016, a contract to one of these shipbuilders to complete the detailed design of the vessel and construct the first 9 to 11 ships. Competitive contracts can allow for the best return on investment for taxpayers by saving taxpayer money, conserving scarce resources, improving contractor performance, curbing fraud, and promoting accountability for results. According to Coast Guard officials, the Coast Guard currently plans to award the construction contract for the lead OPC ship in fiscal year 2018. The Coast Guard’s fiscal year 2016 Capital Investment Plan reflects $1.5 billion in funding for the OPC. After the first 3 of the planned fleet of 25 OPCs are built, the Coast Guard plans to increase its purchase to 2 O PCs per year until the fleet is complete.and deliver this ship in 2021. The Coast Guard attributes the delays to procurement delays, including a bid protest that GAO ultimately denied in June 2014. As we found in April 2015, the initial and full operational capability dates both slipped 15 months. to date reflects some lessons learned from the NSC acquisition, for example in the areas of competition and the schedule for IOT&E. As the $12 billion OPC program moves forward, it may have opportunities to further incorporate some best practices that we have highlighted in our past work on shipbuilding. The Coast Guard is using a two- phased, competitive strategy to select a contactor to construct the OPC. In general, as we have previously found, competition is likely to save taxpayer dollars as opposed to a sole source acquisition approach. The Coast Guard plans to award a contract for the second phase of this acquisition by the end of June 2016. The government owns technical data rights, it does not need to rely on only one contractor to meet requirements. The key performance parameters remain the same and the design for several critical systems remains the same. As a result, the Coast Guard will be able to make certain design changes to the ship, though the key performance requirements will not change. The contract will allow bidders to change the design of the ship. Bollinger Shipyards for the FRC program that has held the contractor responsible for production deficiencies. Coast Guard does not always have insight into how much it costs the contractors to fix these issues. Officials noted they are confident that the Coast Guard has received value from this warranty. The Coast Guard plans to use these strategies when purchasing the OPC. Based on best practices that we have previously identified, the Coast Coast Guard may have opportunities to incorporate additional shipbuilding best practices with the O PC program. 2009, we reported on best practices that commercial shipbuilders use to ensure that ships are delivered on time and within budget. We found that before a contract is signed, a full understanding of the effort needed to design and construct the ship is reached. To minimize risk, buyers and shipbuilders reuse previous designs to the extent possible and attain an in-depth understanding of new technologies included in the ship design. Before construction begins, commercial ship builders complete key design phases that correspond to ship performance parameters. with the completion of a three-dimensional product model. Final information on the systems that will be installed on the ship is needed to allow design work to proceed. During construction, buyers maintain a presence in the shipyard and with key suppliers to ensure the ship meets quality expectations and is delivered on schedule. We will continue to assess the progress of the FRC and OPC acquisitions going forward. If you or your staff have any questions, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to respond to any questions. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, please contact GAO at (202) 512-4841 or mackinm@gao.gov. In addition, contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this statement. other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary. If you wish to reproduce this material separately, please contact us for permission. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-TALK (8255). In the UK call the helpline on 0800-8255.

ROUGE-1: 84.86, ROUGE-2: 78.12, ROUGE-L: 41.05
BERTScore: 76.32

==============================================
==================== [83/100] ====================
Summary:
peer review agencywide, including peer review of the next MOBILE model. According to the ORD project director, it is too early in EPA’s study to predict whether the agency may recommend that EPA require its offices to follow the other actions listed above. While concerned about resources, OMS officials explained that making model improvements is an ongoing, continuous process. They pointed out that their goal is for each new version of the MOBILES model to reflect the latest testing, data collection, and research. limitations in the current version of EPA’s MOBILE model and (2) describe EPA's process for improving both current and future versions of the model. To describe the major limitations in theCurrent model, we obtained and reviewed theMOBILE5a User’S Guide; EPA/OMS model documentation; the most recent published sensitivity analyses; and relevant EPA guidance and memorandums. We also discussed model limitations with individuals identified as key stakeholders in the development of the current model. to us by EPA or other representatives, as well as through our own efforts as noted above. To describe EPA’s process for improving both current and future versions of the MOBILE model, we obtained and discussed information from knowledgeable EPA/OMS air quality officials. We also discussed EPA's past, ongoing, and planned actions with representatives of academia, industry, environmental groups, consulting firms, and other government agencies. And we observed one process—EPA’S open solicitation of input by external stakeholders not involved in the model’‘s development—at work. items for improvement in the current model, and EPA and workgroup representatives are examining these limitations. EPA is also in the process of developing new procedures for improving models in general, which are discussed below. Several model experts told us that it is the nature of models such as MOBILE5a to have limitations and to be in a continuous improvement mode. Agency officials agreed with this assessment, noting that theCurrent model is better than any previous versions and reflects consistent growth in the quality and quantity of information available. data that were available to them at the time (1991-1992) to estimate the deterioration rate of such vehicles. They also said the model’s correction factor for vehicles with 50,000 or more odometer miles would likely be lowered in MOBILE6. A special subgroup of the FACA mobile model workgroup has been established to address this issue, and their work is still ongoing. A fourth audit will be carried out in the coming months to assess the impact of the changes. emissions model that may one day allow users to model additional parameters, such as the relative emissions impact of sequencing traffic signals to enhance traffic flow. Agency officials said that it is their plan for each new version of the model. An EPA-sponsored FACA mobile model workgroup made up of representatives from other federal, state, and local government agencies, academia, the automobile and oil industries, environmental groups, and others has been assisting EPA in improving the current model. Much of the research to fill data gaps and update aging databases was still ongoing at the time of our audit. in June 1994, established a FACA mobile modeling workgroup in July 1995, and has held five meetings since that time to obtain external views by those not involved in the model’s development. OMS officials acknowledged that some of the key formulas in the current model have not been properly documented. They said they have efforts under way or planned to address these and other modeling needs. Agency officials explained that declining modeling resources have resulted in fewer confirming data, and that the MOBILE model has not been peer reviewed. The revisions to the next MOBILE model have been undertaken with significantly increased openness and input from other government agencies, academia, the automobile and oil industries, environmental groups, and others. Several commended EPA’s efforts in recent years to reach out to persons outside of the agency, and some noted that the outreach effort had given them a much greater appreciation of the model. While acknowledging that, historically, there have been few firm criteria on the processes that should be followed, some said the new approach was a step in the right direction. EPA has a project under way to develop agencywide procedures for improving models. Office of Research and Development (ORD) is planning a workshop in December 1997 to discuss the status of modeling across several media and other modeling issues. The project director also said that the Science Advisory Board’s January 1989 resolution on models was one of the best documents on models. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. The SAB executive director and the ORD project director told us that in their opinion, there are specific actions that can enhance a model’s predictive capabilities. Among other things, these actions include the following: Obtaining external stakeholders’ input. Documenting the implicit and explicit assumptions so that others can evaluate the basis of the formulas embedded in the model. The SAB is available on its website at: http://www.sab.org/predictive-models. The SAB executive director pointed out that because of continuing concerns with the quasi-regulatory use of agency models, EPA issued agencywide guidance in 1994 specifically calling for the peer review of such models. The SAB is now conducting peer review to enhance the quality, credibility, and acceptability of the model’s applications. The agency is also performing sensitivity analyses over key parameters to identify the most sensitive parameters and to establish the areas most in need of further research. This is the first time the SAB has conducted such a review. directive was a follow-on to EPA’s January 1993 agencywide policy requiring peer review of the scientific and technical work products used to support agency decisions. In September 1996 and March 1997, we reported and testified on the uneven implementation of EPA's peer review policy. EPA agreed with our recommendations for educating staff and managers about the merits of and procedures for conducting peer review and for ensuring that all relevant products are considered for peer review. The agency has set in motion a three-pronged approach to improve the implementation. 15 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to the Administrator of EPA and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. Please call me at (202) 512-9692 if you or your staff have any questions. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV. According to agency officials and model experts we contacted, it is the nature of models to have limitations and to be in a continuous improvement mode. As a result, the Environmental Protection Agency has periodically updated the estimating capabilities of its models. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order. EPA’s process for improving models in general with the Science Advisory Board and EPA”s Office of Research and Development. We conducted our review from October 1996 through August 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We are happy to answer any questions you may have about the process. We will provide a written version of the GAO findings in a future version of this article. the effects of road grade on emissions are obtained, state and local agencies would have to plot road grades for millions of miles of roadways in their jurisdictions. However, as global positioning technologyfor vehicles becomes less costly and more widely available and used, it is envisioned that the impacts of roadGrade emissions will be modeled in the future. According to EPA officials, the amount of data needed to estimate the impact of roadgrade is still years away. They also noted that time would be needed to develop consistent guidance on how state. Research Council report, “Virtually all motor vehicle testing has been based on a limited set of driving test cycles that inadequately represent current urban driving conditions” EPA officials pointed out that there is not a consistent definition of what constitutes aggressive driving, that aggressive driving happens only over a portion of the trip and is highly variable among drivers. However, one model expert told us that it took more than 1 year to evaluate one component of the model and that collecting vehicle emissions data on large data sets is very costly. areawide, trip-based model to a roadway-specific model. Under this revised model, the magnitude of start-up emissions will not depend on vehicle speed or the driving cycle. EPA is proposing to allow model users to model the emissions impacts of cold starts on the basis of local areas’ estimates of the number of such starts. Additionally, model users will be able to estimate emissions for three different types of roadways—freeways, arterials, and local roadways. cars to travel up to 67.2 mph (versus 57 mph for the FTP) The FTP allows for acceleration at a rate of up to 6.9 mph/second. Several model experts believe these parameters more closely approximate actual driving conditions today. According to a 1993 CARB study, the FTP may underestimate hydrocarbon, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen oxide emissions by 27, 68, and 17 percent, respectively. A 1993 study sponsored by EPA’s FTP improvement project found that more than one-third of the trips studied had acceleration rates of more than 7 mph/ second. urban area in the late 1960s. Such a trip is known as a driving cycle, which can be approximated on a dynamometer. EPA added 10 percent to the FTP dynamometer load in an attempt to simulate the effects of air conditioner usage. However, five of the major limitations in the current FTP driving cycle are still in place, including speed, acceleration, flat surface and speed over a 7.5 mile trip. The current parameters stipulate, among other things, that vehicles average 19.6 miles per hour (mph) over the 7. 5 mile trip, do not exceed 57 mph. Some studies have questioned the representativeness of key assumptions as they relate to the FTP. Increases in speeds above 65 mph have left data gaps in the current model that are not adequately represented by existing correction factors. Others have recognized that the MOBILE model’s estimates are inextricably tied to the FT’S parameters. The California Air Resources Board (CARB) commissioned Sierra Research in 1993 to develop an improved driving cycle by using an instrumented “chase car” to better characterize typical urban driving patterns. Heavy duty gasoline-powered vehicles are believed to comprise a significantly larger percentage of the overall vehicle fleet than currently estimated. OMS plans to update the fleet characterization data for MOBILE6, including reflecting the increases in the heavy-duty vehicle population. Similarly, another fleet characterization issue involves urban buses. For example, the current model does not have a separate classification for urban buses, although this is a growing vehicle category in many urban areas with unique needs.to provide their own accumulated mileage estimates. operating characteristics, such as very frequent starts and stops. An eighth concern is the level of distinctions in roadway classifications. EPA plans to expand the current list of vehicle categories from 8 to 20, one of which will be a separate category for buses. The MOBILE model was originally designed only for estimating areawide emissions on the basis of assumptions associated with an entire trip. It was not designed for making decisions for transportation improvement projects for urban interstate, rural arterial, and urban arterial roads. MOBILE6 will allow users to separate start emissions from any linkage to the FTP driving cycle assumptions. The EPA plans to partially fund ongoing research with the Department of Transportation to develop a modal system for MOBILE 6. Several model experts have pointed out that the same average travel speed would indicate smooth traffic flow on a local street but severe congestion on a freeway.or urban feeder/collector streets. For more information, go to the EPA's MOBIle6 website or go to http://www.epa.gov/mobile. concern is MOBILE5a’ emissions credits and assumptions about inspection and maintenance programs. According to a 1995 National Research Council report, vehicle condition—whether the vehicle is well maintained, or has been tampered with or is malfunctioning—is more important than vehicle age in determining emissions. There is a need to update the basic data supporting I&M emissions reduction credits to reflect a growing population of vehicles in which rates of tampering may be diminishing. Also, vehicle owners often replace older, carbureted vehicles with newer fuel-injected vehicles. performed any tampering surveys since 1992. Agency officials said that as a result of this lack of data, the tampering assumptions for MOBILE6 will remain unchanged. EPA’s goal is to provide users with greater flexibility in designing I&M programs, as long as the state or local programs’ estimated I &M credits can be substantiated with state and local data. With respect to newer vehicles equipped with on-board diagnostics, because of the limited data on the longer-term emissions impact of this technology, the agency has provided credit for these OBD-equipped vehicles equal to that provided for older vehicles. estimates. EPA has testing under way to determine how to better define this category of vehicles with significant fuel leaks. A sixth concern is the adequacy of the data supporting MOBILE5a’assumptions about emissions for in-use I&M heavy duty vehicles. EPA does not envision at this time that significant changes in the in- use emissions rates for heavy duty cars will be included in MOBIle6. A seventh concern is that much of the fleet characterization data in EPA’s database is quite old. According to agency officials, it is not expected that MOBILE6 will have adjustments for road grade. EPA officials explained that obtaining the basic data from instrumented cars and chase cars to make such adjustments would be expensive at this time. Because of the cost and length of time required for these studies, the impact of road grade will probably not be addressed untilMOBILE7. Additionally, an equally important consideration is that once these basic data on road grade are obtained, it will be possible to make adjustments. of the MOBILE model to reflect the most recent testing, data collection, and research that are available. EPA officials said they plan to address each of the above limitations in the next revision, MOBIL6. The agency will not be able to quantify the uncertainty associated with its MOBILES model estimates. “Uncertainty is pervasive in all three emission modeling components: vehicle activity, activity-specific emission rates, and emission rate correction factors,” the agency said. officials pointed out that there is substantial variability across vehicle types, operating conditions and driver behavior. For these reasons, OMS officials told us they do not plan to develop uncertainty ranges with the next revision to the MOBILE model. Similar to the global positioning issue for road grade, they said significant technological advancement may be needed before it can be used in a vehicle's navigation system. For more information, go to the OMS MOBIle website or go to: http://www.oms.com/mobile-navigation. MOBILE model relate to FTP parameters. These five are emissions from road grade, air conditioner usage, emissions at higher speeds, emissions from aggressive driving, and emissions immediately after engine start-up (cold- start) Agency officials have long recognized that some of these original FTP parameters were not representative of actual driving conditions. EPA has not yet revised the MOBILE. model to reflect the results of recent studies that have led to these FTP rule. revisions but has work ongoing to do so. different fuels. For example, the impact of temperature on emissions can be substantial. While FTP testing has been performed between 68 and 86 degrees Fahrenheit, EPA’s MOBILE model used a correction factor to estimate that 1995 exhaust emissions of hydrocarbons would be 3 times greater at 25 degrees than at the FTP temperatures. However,MOBILE5a does not account for the impact for road grade. Some studies have indicated that both the increased load on the engine from climbing a hill and the decreased load that accompanies engine deceleration significantly increase vehicle emissions. EPA has updated the estimating capabilities of its MOBILE source emissions model 10 times since the model was first introduced in 1978. EPA was also concerned that the report did not clearly distinguish between limitations that may result in only trivial emissions impacts and those that could be significant. We made the language changes suggested by EPA, including adding the citations for four studies referred to in appendix I. We also provided specific citations for some vehicle emissions-producing activities that we provide in the appendix I section of the report. MOBILE5a is a computer program that estimates the emissions of carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, and nitrogen oxides for eight different types of gasoline-fueled and diesel highway motor vehicles. The model consists of an integrated collection of mathematical equations and assumptions about the emissions from vehicles manufactured from 1960 to 2020. The first MOBILE model was made available for use in 1978; since that time, major mobile source emissions model has been updated to reflect new information as data has become available. MOBIle5a reflects the 10th major revision since the model was first introduced in 1978. in all four areas. EPA officials told us that incorporating new estimates for these emissions-producing activities would be a high priority for MOBILE6, due to be issued in late 1998. For example, in March 1997 agency officials announced their plans to substantially revise the cold-start segment of the nextMOBILE model, moving—for the first time ever—from an old model to a new one. "Given the state of knowledge today, it appears that these activities may not be adequately represented in MOBILES5a," the EPA says.  MOBILE5a likely underestimates the impact of low reid vapor pressure (RVP) fuels on hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide emissions at temperatures above 75 degrees. The report notes that the correction factor for low RVP fuels has not changed since February 1989. limited data on fuels with RVPs lower than 9.0 pounds per square inch (psi) caused EPA to place a constraint code in the model precluding users from being able to calculate reductions below this level. reduction credits for low sulfur fuels (except, according to agency officials, for the lower sulfur effect in reformulated gasoline), although recent studies suggest that lowering the concentration of sulfur in fuel reduces the emissions of hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides. EPA officials said that they plan to eliminate the constraint code in the next model, MOBILE6, which will allow users to receive credit for correction factors for fuels lower than 9.0 psi. However, they noted that work in this area is still ongoing and that the data on the emissions benefits of lower RVP fuels, as well aslow sulfur fuels, is still unclear. The January 1997 Auto/Oil Air Quality Improvement Research Program (AQIRP) Final Report suggested that reducing fuel volatility by 1 psi, from 9.0 to 8.0 psi, would reduce exhaust CO by 9 percent, exhaust HC by 4 percent, and total evaporative HC by 34 percent (NOx remained unchanged) The RVPs for most fuels used to be higher than 9. 0 psi, but today they can go lower than 7.0. Similarly, the model currently has no emissions. have affected the pace of model improvements over the years. For example, a study of the emissions characteristics of 100 passenger cars for both exhaust and evaporative emissions could cost from $1.4 to £1.6 million. Studies of heavy duty trucks and other larger vehicles would cost considerably more. As an illustration of the magnitude of the task compared with available resources, we obtained EPA’s database of vehicle emissions from the 1970s and 1980s. The database is available at: http://www.epa.gov/vehicle-emissions. estimate of mobile modeling needs in response to the mobile source requirements envisioned for the 1990 Clean Air Act amendments. This June 1990 analysis indicated that the Office of Mobile Sources would need about $60 million for the modeling improvements known at that time. Since then, because of higher priority needs, OMS has been allocated only $21.8 million, cumulatively, for modeling improvements. However, many more groups have become involved in non-EPA-funded vehicle emissions studies than in the past. because precise information about the emissions behavior of the approximately 200 million vehicles in use in the United States is not known. Yet the need exists to estimate the impact of motor vehicles on air quality. For the states, the MOBILE model is a tool for constructing emissions inventories, creating control strategies, producing state implementation plans (SIP), and demonstrating control strategy effectiveness to EPA and others. The states may choose among a number of control options as long as the state’s control strategy achieves at least as many reductions as required by the Clean Air Act. The model’s estimates can affect state policy decisions on issues such as the content and volatility of fuels, and some decisions on highway improvement projects. For example, the 1991 Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA) required, among other things, that state transportation improvement programs in certain nonattainment areas conform with the applicable state implementation plan developed under the Clean Air Act. Over the years, the model's original purpose was to support the development of mobile source emissions inventories.  improvements have resulted in the refinement of emissions estimates for evaporative emissions. In its simplest form, EPA’s MOBILE model allows the model user to use the model to make changes to their vehicle. The model is available on the EPA website and is available to the public on the Internet. For more information, visit EPA.gov/MOBILE or go to www.epa.org/mobiline. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. emissions estimates were collected during a 1-hour period during which temperatures were forcibly increased over a range of temperatures. More recent testing over 24-hour and longer periods without constraining temperature increases to a one- hour period indicates some differences from the MOBILE5a estimates. evaporative emissions from vehicles with fuel leaks are now believed to be so significant that, for MOBILES6, EPA plans to model these emissions separately from other evaporativeissions. According to EPA’s most recent data, indications are that some vehicles withfuel leaks can exceed the evaporative emission of MOBIle6 vehicles. operating an enhanced I&M program. A fifth concern is the proper representation of diurnal emissions. Diurnal emissions refer only to hydrocarbons and are a form of evaporative emissions that occur when a vehicle is parked. For all previous versions of the MOBILE model, the data supporting these 8- to 24-hour emissions was not available in time for the new version. The new version will be available to the public in the spring of 2015, the EPA said in a statement. corresponding vehicles by one to two orders of magnitude. EPA officials explained that while they may develop a separate category for some vehicles with significant fuel leaks, this does not necessarily mean there will be a significant overall increase in evaporative emissions estimates. A 1996 automotive industry study of 150 vehicles found that 24-hour diurnal emissions ranged from 0.6 grams ofHC to 777.2 grams of HC, with vehicles with liquid fuel leaks providing the vast majority of the emissions. There is no clear indication that these emissions were significantly underestimated in prior diurnal estimates. years its role and influence have been expanded considerably. Today, its estimates have a substantial influence not only on state and local programs but also on the automobile and oil industries. According to estimates derived partly from the MOBILE model, motor vehicles produce about 90 percent of the carbon monoxide, 50 percent of hydrocarbons, and 30 percent of nitrogen oxides emitted annually in major urban areas. EPA officials are examining 14 areas in the current MOBILES model in which major limitations exist. average vehicle speed from 30 mph to 50 mph will reduce vehicle emissions. The study noted that EPA’s MOBILE model estimates a 24-percent reduction in carbon monoxide emissions by increasing average vehicle speed. However, when a 95-percent confidence interval is applied, the change in emissions can range from a 72-percent decrease in carbon Monoxide emissions to a 75-percent increase in such emissions. Similarly, a 1996 study of EPA's speed correction factors for vehicle exhaust emissions found substantial uncertainty in EPA's current MOBIL model. are limited. In addition, a 1996 National Research Council study suggested that the model may overestimate the benefits of oxygenated fuels. EPA officials agreed that this is also an area that needs more study, but one which is one which needs to be studied more. The study noted that EPA’s MOBILE model “apparently overpredicts the oxygenated fuel effect by at least a factor of two” when the model’‘s estimate of carbon monoxide reductions is compared with observed data. As much as half of all hydrocarbon emissions from motor vehicles are evaporative emissions, under certain conditions. EPA has periodically adjusted its basic formula to approximate vehicle exhaust emissions in a range of situations. In essence, the correction factor is a multiplier added to the basic formula (miles traveled times emissions rate per mile) to adjust the model’s output to more closely reflect actual emissions. Except for California, EPA supplies the baseline emissions rates and correction factors for other model users,primarily state and local agencies. MOBILE5a’ estimates of emissions system deterioration for vehicles with more than 50,000 odometer miles. Studies have questioned the rate and quantity of the data supporting EPA’s significantly higher rate of emissions. EPA acknowledges that these adjustments were made on the basis of limited data and that only recently have 1990-technology vehicles become old enough to accurately assess their emissions deterioration. They plan to address this in MOBILE6, which is scheduled to be released in late 2015. currently overestimates the emissions from vehicles with 50,000 or more odometer miles. EPA’s current model estimated that 80 percent or more of these higher mileage vehicles would be high emitters. Study found that only 32 percent of the vehicles fell into this category. Similarly, an April 1997 study of 227 vehicles (model years 1991 to 1993) found no significant changes in emissions or deterioration as indicated by the current model. OMS officials said they used all the data they could find. made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (202- 512-6061, or TDD (202?) 512-2537. the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. The daily list is available on a daily basis. The past 30-day list includes lists from the last three months. The weekly list includes the top 10 news stories of the week, as well as the top ten news stories from the previous week. For the weekly list, please use the daily list and the week-by-week list. Current model provides no additional I&M credits for vehicles equipped with on-board diagnostics(OBD), a requirement for all 1994 and later light duty vehicles and trucks. This vehicle computer technology alerts a car owner when an emissions system malfunctions, permitting quicker repairs. newer vehicles have up to 8 years or 80,000-mile emissions control system warranties for two components, which should equate to less-polluting vehicles as a result of the on- board computer and catalytic converter. more durable emissions control systems and the requirement that manufacturers cover the costs of certain repairs. The current model does not provide specific credits for this growing population of OBD-equipped vehicles. More recent and more complete data are needed on the effectiveness of repairs in an I&M program, including the adequacy and durability of these repairs, actual participation rates, and impact of remote sensing efforts. Except for remote sensing, the current model’s estimates for these parameters is based on aging and limited data. High emitters could represent 16.8 percent of the California fleet, or nearly 5 times the assumption in the California model. EPA officials have some concerns that the existing database may underrepresent high emitters. Owners of such vehicles may avoid surrendering such vehicles for inspection and maintenance (I&M) and other testing at a higher rate than the normal population. As noted in a 1996 study, “individuals with intentionally tampered or poorly maintained vehicles may be less likely to offer their vehicles for testing.” In-use credits for heavy duty gasoline-powered vehicles are based on data approximately 20 years old. Heavy duty vehicles are generally older and driven more miles annually than their light duty counterparts. EPA officials said that testing heavy duty vehicles is difficult and quite expensive and agreed that there is a lack of recent data on the in-use emissions from this category of vehicles once they have been tested and approved for use. The certification standards are higher for heavyduty vehicles than theirLight Duty counterparts. The standards for heavy Duty vehicles are higher than those for light duty vehicles. The EPA agreed with the overall message of the report but expressed concerns with imprecise language. EPA suggested several changes to clarify information in the report. EPA also suggested that in lieu of describing some limitations associated with its use of the Federal Test Procedure as a basis for estimating emissions as “FTP assumptions,” since the FTP is a specific, codified test cycle, these would be better described as ‘FTP parameters.’ The report was released to the public last week. of average driving patterns. The Congress has also recognized that the FTP may not reflect actual driving conditions. EPA’s October 1996 final rule on FTP revisions addressed four emissions-producing activities that are not adequately represented, according to the rule’S preamble. In 1990 the Congress added Section 206(h) to the Clean Air Act, which required EPA to review and revise the FTP within 18 months “to insure that vehicles are tested under circumstances which reflect the actual current driving conditions under which motor vehicles are used.” are not accounted for in the current model and that other emissions-producing activities are not adequately represented. EPA officials said that it is important to note that EPA has conducted and/or partially funded some of the studies that have led to the new data that now question the old estimates and assumptions. EPA has work under way to address most of these limitations. For example, since its formation in September 1995, an EPA-sponsored Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA) subcommittee workgroup has identified 47 high-priority issues. 1995 that the worst polluting 22 percent of the vehicles produce about 50 percent of emissions. EPA estimates that, overall, from 10 to 30 percent of vehicles cause the bulk of the pollution problems. As noted by the nonfederal co-chair of the FACA modeling workgroup in a 1993 study, “The general problem of failing to control for significant factors is compounded by the likelihood that a small fraction of the vehicle fleet are currently responsible for a large percentage of vehicle emissions.” EPA officials have made periodic adjustments but recognize that the current model’s correction factor adjustments may not reflect the most up-to-date information. The 10-percent additional load intended to simulate the effect of air conditioner usage “is obsolete,” the EPA says. More recent information indicates that nitrogen oxide emissions may be from 30 to 75 percent greater at some speeds than the current models’ estimates.and local agencies should go about collecting these data, the agency says. Experts, workgroup participants, and/or stakeholders we contacted agreed that the limitation is an area of concern. In most cases, EPA officials noted that the agency has ongoing work to address the issue. One concern is the representation of high emitters in EPA’s MOBILE model database. The data now indicate that this group of vehicles accounts for a disproportionate amount of an area's overall emissions. If this subset of the overall vehicle population is underrepresented, the impact on the emissions estimates can be substantial. concerns with the study, its reliance on remote sensing devices, and its applicability to other states. EPA officials believe that the larger data sets provided by their ongoing I&M lane testing in three other states properly identify most high emitters. A second concern is the current correction factors for lower volatility fuels and for oxygenated fuels. For example, EPA officials agreed that appropriate representation of high emitter is important to the model’s emissions estimates. They noted that this is also a high priority issue currently being addressed by EPA and one of the subgroups of the mobile modeling workgroup. issues facing EPA today, primarily because a very small number of vehicles can potentially be responsible for unusually high levels of pollution. This was also a significant issue for one of the Session Chairs for the Coordinating Research Council’s (CRC) April 1997 Workshop, who noted that, in his opinion, this is the single greatest issue that EPA faces. The nonfederal co-chair also noted that if the occurrence of such vehicles is not properly represented in the model, the model's emissions estimates can be seriously flawed. have information about, nor estimates of, the uncertainty associated with its emissions estimates. We agree that researchers viewed some limitations as having a more significant impact on emissions than others. Appendix II contains the agency’s overall written comments. We conducted our review from October 1996 through August 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. A detailed discussion of our scope and methodology is provided in appendix III. As arranged with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until the end of the year. it becomes cost-effective to address this issue. For example, future vehicles may have on-board computers with the ability to instantaneously record and later report emissions under different operating scenarios. EPA officials pointed out that it is their plan, at some point in the future, to report uncertainty ranges for some model estimates. They said they are currently saving both qualitative and quantitative descriptors for the data being collected by and for the agency in order to perform these calculations in thefuture. The Chairman, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, House Committee on Commerce, asked us to (1) describe the major issues facing the EPA.

ROUGE-1: 80.99, ROUGE-2: 74.42, ROUGE-L: 28.07
BERTScore: 55.83

==============================================
==================== [84/100] ====================
Summary:
NIH funds seven loan repayment programs for researchers. Three of these are intramural programs that provide educational loan repayment benefits to researchers in exchange for undertaking research while employed by NIH. NIH also funds four programs to assist in the repayment of extramural researchers' educational loans. Researchers may receive up to $35,000 per year in loan repay benefits under each of these programs. The regulations that govern the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment program regarding participant participation are available on the NIH website. Under current law, appropriations for loan repayments remain available until the end of the second fiscal year after they are appropriated. S. 2014 would increase loan repayment amounts to a maximum of $50,000 per year. It would prohibit the NIH Director from entering into a loan repayment contract with individuals unless they have substantial amounts of educational loans relative to income. The provision would also retain authorization for current topics eligible for extramural loan repayment (contraception and infertility, pediatric research, minority health disparities, clinical research and clinical research conducted by individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds) H.R. 6 would authorize a new extramural NIH loan repayment program. The bill would also increase the amounts that could be repaid under existing loan repayment programs from $35,000 to $50,000. Section 402(b)(5) of the PHSA specifies that the NIH Director "shall ensure that scientifically based strategic planning" is carried out by the NIH. The NIH Director must also report to Congress on NIH efforts "to attract, retain and develop emerging scientists, including women and other minorities" loan repayment as scientific and workforce priorities change. This provision would repeal existing authorizations for NIH loan repayment programs. GAO report, not later than 18 months after enactment, that would report on NIH efforts to attract, retain, and develop emerging scientists, including underrepresented individuals in the sciences. Report on the research areas where individuals are receiving increased loan repayment amounts. The report would analyze the impact of changes included in this act on addressing workforce shortages. Subtitle C of H.R. 6 titled "Supporting Young Emerging Scientists" into consideration recommendations made by NAS in its study on the next generation of researchers. Not later than two years after completion of the NAS study, the NIH Director would be required to submit a report to specified congressional committees regarding any actions taken by NIH with respect to the NAS recommendations. Section 3 of S. 2014 would amend PHSA Section 487A to consolidate existing NIH intramural and extramural loan repayment programs. Section 5(a) also would add a new PHSASection 404M, "Research Related to Sexual and Gender Minority Populations" Section 10 of S. 2742 would amend Section 405 of the PHSA. It would require that Directors of ICs be appointed by the NIH Director. The term of office for the director of an IC would be five years. There would be no limit to the number of terms served. The Director of the National Cancer Institute would continue to beappointed by the President. The director of the NIH would be reappointed at the end of a five-year term. The National Institute on Nursing Research biennial report. It would require that, if the office of a director of an IC becomes vacant before the end of a five-year term, the director appointed to fill the vacancy begin a new five- year term. The compensation limitations in Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993, would be removed. Each current IC Director would be deemed to be appointed for a five year term as of the date of enactment, and the NIH Director could terminate the appointment prior to end of the term. related to time-limited appointments of consultants and individual scientists, would not apply to directors appointed under this new authority. The Reducing Administrative Burdens of Researchers provision in H.R. 6 Section 1023 is comparable to Section 3 of S. 2742. Not later than two years following enactment, the NIH Director would be required to submit a report to Congress on the measures that have been implemented to reduce the administrative burden on NIH-funded researchers. Although they use slightly different language, they achieve the same goals. the President and the Directors of the other NIH Institutes are appointed by the Secretary. Each NIH Institute Director reports directly to the NIH Director. Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993 ( P.L. 102-394 ), states at the end of the section that the payment of compensation to consultants or individual scientists appointed for limited periods of time is "not to exceed the per diem rate equivalent to the maximum rate payable for senior-level positions," which is not less than 120% of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS–15. the NIH National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities "should include within its strategic plan ways to increase representation of underrepresented communities in clinical trials" S. 2742 contains several provisions aimed at streamlining and improving administrative matters at NIH. Title IV of the PHSA establishes numerous reporting requirements for the NIH Director related to the activities of the agency. Section 2 would replace the biennial reporting requirement of the NIH director with a triennial requirement. The section would add new, and clarify existing, reporting requirements, including a description of intra-NIH activities. least one other IC. This information would be included in the triennial report required by Section 403(a) as amended by Section 2 of S. 2742. Section 5 also would (1) eliminate an annual reporting requirement regarding the number of experts and consultants whose services are used by NIH; (2) make a minor modification to the doctoral degree reporting requirement; and (3) change the NCATS annual report to a biennial report. The report on Centers of Excellence would also be eliminated. and 43% of their time in completing pre- and post-award requirements. The most commonly experienced administrative responsibilities included those related to federal project finances, personnel, and effort reporting. For researchers engaged in projects that required human or animal subjects, the related Institutional Review Board (IRB) and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) requirements were by far the most time-consuming. Other areas viewed as particularly time- consuming were those involving clinical trials, subcontracts, and cross-agency differences. to avoid duplication of effort and minimize burden to funding recipients. Within two years of enactment, the Secretary would have to complete a review of regulations and policies for the care and use of laboratory animals. The Secretary would be required to clarify the applicability of OMB Uniform Guidance requirements regarding documentation of personnel expenses for entities receiving HHS grants. Finally, within one year of enacting the bill, the OMB Director would be needed to establish a system for documenting personnel expenses in the federal government. technology innovation and successful partnering with the federal government. The HHS Secretary acting through the BARDA Director would provide the entity with the government needs and requirements and a description of the work to be done under the agreement. The entity would be required to provide regular reports on the spending of funds provided by HHS and on progress meeting the identified needs. The bill would require the Government Accountability Office to evaluate this partnership four years after enactment. This authority would sunset on September 30, 2022. Section 6 would remove the current need for the President to approve use of the funds. Section 8 would require the Secretary, not later than 90 days after enactment, to establish a Task Force on Research Specific to Pregnant and Lactating Women. It would also require the Director of NIH to issue a report to the Secretary and Congress regarding the recommendations and any subsequent policy changes. The bill would also update regulations and guidance, as appropriate, regarding the inclusion of pregnant women and lactating women in research. It also would require a working group established under Section 7 of this bill to develop policies for basic research. a Research Policy Board, consisting of up to10 federal and 9 to 12 non-federal members, as specified. The board would have to make recommendations on harmonizing regulations and policies to minimize administrative burden across federal research agencies. Within four years of enactment, GAO would be required to conduct an evaluation of board activities regarding its purpose and responsibilities and submit a report to Congress. Section 5 would modify or eliminate a number of different NIH reporting requirements. It would sunset on September 30, 2020. FDA, $5 million to ONC, and the remaining $300 million to NIH. Precision medicine research efforts rely on the collection of large amounts of health data. Access to this data may be a concern in the context of this type of research. FOIA, however, protects investigators from being compelled to disclose information that would identify research subjects in any civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceeding. This requirement can help promote participation in research by adding an additional layer of privacy protection. Exemption 3 allows agencies to withhold applicable records if the data are specifically exempted from disclosure by a statute other than FOIA. These types of Exemption 3 statutes are often referred to as b(3) exemptions. As a mechanism for addressing compelled disclosure of research data, NIH currently issues Certificates of Confidentiality pursuant to §301(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. §241(d)) at the request of an investigator. A Certificate is an official document issued by the National Institutes of Health. Section 5 would amend Part A of Title IV of the PHSA, adding a new Section 404M, "Research Related to Sexual and Gender Minority Populations" Section 6 would amend Section 464z-3 of the PHS Act, adding that the Director of the National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities may foster partnerships between the ICs. The Secretary would have to continue to support research for the development of appropriate measures related to reporting health information of sexual and gender minority populations. conduct outreach in developing (and updating) the policies, among other requirements. With respect to clinical research involving women and minorities, the section would require the Director of NIH to update the guidelines. Section 1029 of H.R. 6 is broadly comparable to Sections 3 through 6 of S. 2745. The House provision would express the sense of Congress that Congress that includes underrepresented communities in clinical trials. It would also improve adherence to the requirements of Section 492B of the PHSA. include women and minorities in NIH-funded clinical research and to conduct or support outreach to recruit minorities and women into clinical research. The data would have to be disaggregated by research area, condition, and disease categories and made publically available on the NIH website. The NIH Director also would be required to foster collaboration between the ICs that conduct research on human subjects, allow for an increase in the number of subjects studied, and utilize a diverse study population with special consideration of the determinants that contribute to health disparities. Be required to ensure that maintaining the biomedical workforce, including the participation of scientists from traditionally underrepresented groups, would remain a priority. Minorities traditionally have been underrepresented in clinical trials. The initial strategic plan would be completed not later than 270 days after enactment. The NIH Director, in consultation with the IC Directors, would be required to conduct annual progress reviews for each strategic focus area in the IC plans. The plans would be reviewed and updated every five years, and would need to be updated every three years. only 5% of clinical trial participants and Hispanics make up 16% of the population but only 1% ofclinical trial participants. There can be biological differences in how people process or respond to medical products, based on, for example, genetic differences. This could make a treatment less effective or perhaps more toxic for individuals with specific genotypes. Therefore, it is important to study in clinical trials the safety and effectiveness of medical products in a broadly representative sample of people who will likely use the products following FDA approval. The focus of NIH research, and to some extent its organizational structure, has been criticized. U.S. health care spending is more than 2.5 times the OECD average. Life expectancy is ranked 24th of the 30 countries in the OECD. "An agency devoted to current health would do well to focus on tobacco control, exercise, nutrition, sanitation, and more cost-effective delivery of health care," the authors say. "Despite its name, NIH's mission has not generally been current health, per se," they say. The NIH Strategic Plan would identify research priorities, such as advancement of treatment, cure and prevention of health conditions. The research strategy would address the disease burden in the United States, including rare diseases, and the many factors that contribute to health disparities. Rare and pediatric diseases would remain a priority. The IC plans would have a common template and identify strategic focus areas. Mission Priority Focus Areas would be identified that best serve the goals of preventing or eliminating the burden of a disease and scientifically merit focused research over the next five years. The Senate bill would amend Section 402 of the PHS Act by adding a new subsection (m), which describes a strategic plan for NIH. Every five years, beginning in 2016, the NIH Director, along with the IC Directors, researchers, patient advocacy groups, and industry leaders, would be required to develop a biomedical research strategic plan. The NIH Research Strategic Plan provision in H.R. 6 Section 1021 is comparable to S. 2745 . The House provision would add a new subsections (m) to Section 402. the PHSA by adding a new Section 404M to establish within the office of the NIH Director the Next Generation of Researchers Initiative (the Initiative) Through the Initiative, the NIH director would be required to coordinate all NIH policies and programs focused on promoting and providing opportunities for new researchers. Among other things, the director would have to coordinate with relevant agencies, professional associations, and academic institutions to improve and update information on the biomedical workforce in order to inform training, recruitment, and retention programs of biomedical researchers. (b)(3) specified biomedical information that identifies an individual or that has an associated risk that the information may be reidentified. The Secretary would be required to make each such exemption available in writing and to the public, upon request (§4). Amend PHSA Section 402(b) to allow the Secretary to require recipients of NIH grants or agreements to share data generated from such NIH grants in a manner consistent with all applicable federal law (§5) Add a new PHSA section to allow NIH Director to approve requests by institute and center directors to engage in transactions other than other transactions. other federal agencies. The bill would direct the Secretary, within two years of enactment, to lead a review by research funding agencies of all financial conflict-of-interest regulations and policies. Second, it would require the NIH Director to implement measures to reduce the administrative burdens experienced by primary NIH grant awardees related to monitoring grant sub-recipients. Third, the Secretary would be required to evaluate financial expenditure reporting procedures and requirements for NIH funding recipients and take appropriate action. federal agencies would be reviewed by the Secretary. The NIH Common Fund, within the Office of the NIH Director, supports the High-Risk, High-Reward Research Program. This program has "four unique funding opportunities for exceptionally creative scientists who propose highly innovative approaches to major challenges in biomedical research" If investigators fail to submit the required data, NIH may withhold funding. These awards are intended "to encourage creative, potentially high-reward, research.subsequent research," according to the program's website. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. Congress has had a long-standing interest in developing the future biomedical research workforce. Recent concerns have focused on ways to reduce the time between when young investigators complete their training and when they receive their first independent NIH research grant. Section 8 of this bill would require GAO to report on the effectiveness of the priority review voucher program. There is no comparable provision in the House bill. The NIH has created a number of initiatives that strive to shorten this time, in part to attempt to better retain young investigators in biomedical research. the one year anniversary of the initiative's launch, first announced in the 2015 State of the Union address. The PMI's three key agencies—National Institutes of Health (NIH), Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC)—began work in this area. The FY2017 President's budget requests a total of $309 million for the PMI: $4 million to ONC and $3 million to NIH. of biomedical and behavioral research, and details of all the research activities conducted or supported by the ICs of NIH. The Federal Demonstration Partnership (FDP) is "a cooperative initiative among 10 federal agencies and 119 institutional recipients of federal funds" In 2005 and 2012, FDP conducted surveys of principal investigators of federally funded projects to determine the impact of federal regulations and requirements on the research process. In both surveys, researchers reported spending 57% of their time engaged in research. The National Academies sponsored the FDP. FDA released a mobile medical apps. FDA has regulatory authority over software that meets the statutory definition of a medical device. The agency provided examples of mobile apps that do not meet that definition. These apps pose a significant risk to patient safety if they do not function as intended, the agency says. The FDA says it does not intend to apply regulatory oversight because the apps pose minimal risk to the public and pose no risk to patients if they work as intended. apps that help asthmatics track inhaler usage and asthma episodes; apps that give patients a portal into their own EHR. The number of health-related mobile apps being developed, downloaded, and used is increasing at an almost exponential rate. Some apps simply access stored medical information, while others capture and input patient data into an electronic health record (EHR) Many apps now provide clinical decision support (CDS) using algorithms that use clinical information to generate customized (i.e., patient-specific) diagnosis and treatment recommendations. Regulators are particularly interested in mobile apps that could pose a risk to the health of patients. The updated guidance did not address regulation of CDS software. That topic remains under consideration. S. 1101 would exclude certain types of health software from the FFDCA definition of medical device. The exception would apply to EHR systems and software that simply creates, stores, transfers, and displays data, as well as CDS and other CDS tools. It would allow FDA to exercise regulatory authority if the agency determines that the use of the software "would be reasonably likely to have serious adverse health consequences" nonbinding guidance document on mobile medical apps in September 2013. FDA stated its intention to focus on the functionality of the mobile health product, not the mobile platform itself. In February 2015, FDA released updated guidance on its risk-based approach to regulating mobile apps. The agency does not plan to regulate smartphone or tablet manufacturers, according to the new guidance. It will apply its regulatory oversight to "only those mobile apps that are medical devices," the agency said in the guidance. The guidance was released in response to a request for comment from CNN. H.R. 6 would exclude various types of software applications from FDA's regulatory oversight. Excluded applications include products that provide administrative and health management functions. The House bill also would establish a risk-based exception allowing FDA to exert regulatory authority. This risk- based approach broadly reflects the agency's current guidance on regulating mobile medical apps. The health software provisions in the bill are similar to those in S. 1101 . Like the Senate bill, the House bill would exclude some software applications. ONC released a report to Congress on health information blocking in April 2015. ONC is taking, in coordination with other federal agencies, to address information blocking. The report identified gaps in authority that limit the ability of ONC to effectively target, deter, and remedy such conduct. MACRA requires eligible hospitals and hospitals and other health care providers to share electronic health information with the federal government. It also requires the government to make sure that the information is accurate and up-to-date.  ONC would be authorized to refer instances of information blocking to the Office for Civil Rights if a HIPAA privacy consultation would resolve the matter. Developers, exchanges, and networks found to have engaged in information blocking would be subject to civil monetary penalties. Health care providers found to be blocking information would besubject to incentives and disincentives to change their behavior. (§4) S. 2511 would require ONC to convene stakeholders to develop a trusted exchange framework and to investigate and penalize information-blocking practices. a common agreement among existing networks to exchange electronic health information (i.e., a "network of networks") The Secretary would be required to establish a digital contact directory for health care professionals, practices, and facilities. S. 2511 would require certified HIT to be capable of transmitting data to, and receiving data from, clinician-led (and other) registries. And it would extend federal privilege and confidentiality protections to HIT developers who report and analyze patient safety information related to HIT use. information networks, health care providers, and other stakeholders to offer access through secure, user-friendly software. ONC would have to ensure that HIT standards and certification support patients' access to their electronic health information. (§7) S. 2511 would require GAO to conduct a review of the methods used to provide patient access to electronic health records. Onc and OCR would be required to develop policies that support dynamic technology solutions for promoting patient access. OnC would also have to help educate individuals and providers on patients' rights under HIPAA.  MACRA declared it a national objective to achieve widespread interoperability of certified EHR technology by the end of 2018. The law defines interoperability as the ability of health information systems to not only exchange clinical information but to also use the information based on common standards in order to improve care and patient outcomes. If that objective is not met by December 31, 2018, the Secretary will have until December 31 of 2019, to submit a report to Congress identifying the barriers toidespread interoperability. The Secretary will also have until July 1, 2016, to establish interoperability metrics to measure progress toward achieving that objective. 18-month period with input from numerous stakeholders—to coordinate efforts around achieving HIT interoperability. ONC expects the roadmap to evolve in partnership with the public and private sectors as technology and policy dictate. 2017 set as the deadline for individuals and health care providers along the care continuum to be able to send, receive, find, and use core clinical data. The roadmap discusses the payment and regulatory drivers for promoting interoperability, as well as the central policy and technical components of a fully interoperable nationwide health information infrastructure. H.R. 6 would create a narrower exception for CDS software that "poses a significant risk to patient safety" The law authorized Medicare and Medicaid incentive payments to acute-care hospitals and physicians who attest to being meaningful users of certified electronic health record (EHR) technology. The law instructed the Secretary to make the measures of meaningful use more stringent over time, which CMS has done in stages. Stage 1 ofmeaning use requires eligible hospitals to have certified EHR technology, CMS says. CMS eliminated several clinical documentation objectives, and instead focused on a few objectives that capture more advanced uses of the technology. CMS also published an accompanying final rule (the 2015 Edition final rule) that expands the certification program. In addition to certifying the next generation of EHR technology that hospitals and physicians need to achieve meaningful use Stage 3, the program will be able to certify health information technology (HIT) products with a different combination of capabilities and functionalities that meet the needs of other types of patients. patient data during transitions of care (e.g., a hospital discharge to a rehabilitation facility, or a physician referral) Beginning in 2015, hospitals and physicians that are not meaningful EHR users are subject to a Medicare payment adjustment (i.e., penalty) unless they qualify for a hardship exception. CMS published a final rule in October 2015 modifying the meaningful use Stage 2 objectives and establishing the objectives for Stage 3, which hospitals and Physicians must meet by 2018. The agency made significant changes to themeaning use program in response to the concerns of health care providers. of health care providers and settings that are not eligible to participate in the EHR incentive program. The 2015 Edition final rule for the certification program established new transparency requirements for HIT developers. It also seeks to improve interoperability, for example, by requiring certified HIT products to adopt new and updated vocabulary and content standards for structured health information. ONC released a national interoperability roadmap in October 2015. It was developed over an period of time over the course of a few years, ONC says.  ONC released a report on patient identification and matching (i.e., linking patient records with the correct individual) in February 2014. It recommended standardizing patient attributes for the purpose of information exchange. The 2015 Edition final rule for the certification program requires EHR developers to publish programming instructions to enable other software application developers to produce apps giving individuals access to their clinical data. It also introduces EHR certification criteria for capturing patient identification standards. For more information, visit ONC's Patient Identification and Matching website. and physicians to use EHR technology to meet a series of meaningful use objectives that generally involve capturing and storing structured patient data. Providers must use technology that has been tested and certified as having the capability to perform these functions. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule gives individuals the right of access to inspect, obtain a copy of, and transmit to a third party a copies of their health information. beginning April 2016, hospitals and physicians must indicate through meaningful use attestation that they have not knowingly and willfully taken any action to limit or restrict the interoperability of their certified EHRTechnology. rule for the HIT certification program. Certified EHR systems must be able to create a summary-of-care document that includes the following standardized patient data: first name; last name; previous name; middle name (including middle initial); suffix; date of birth (year, month, and day are required fields; hours and minutes are optional); address; phone numbers (home, business, cell) S. 2511 includes multiple provisions to promote HIT interoperability, penalize information blocking, reduce the administrative and other burdens of using EHR technology. and industry; holding meetings and publishing information and data for use by FDA and others; and taking action to obtain patents and licensing of inventions. It is led by a Board of Directors, four of whom are ex officio members, and nine from candidates provided by the National Academy of Sciences. Section 770 specifies the number of members to be appointed representing each type of group, and requires that the ex-officio members ensure specific expertise among the members. The group is made up of members from patient and consumer advocacy groups, professional scientific and medical societies, and trade organizations. provision would amend FFDCA Section 770 to change the membership of the Board of Directors. It would limit to 30% of the membership "representatives of the general pharmaceutical, device, food, cosmetic, and biotechnology industries" The obligation to ensure specific expertise among the members would be broadened to rest with all members of the board, not only ex officio appointees. That broader group would also decide the size of theBoard of Directors and who gets to appoint new members. a new FFDCA Section 569C "Patient Participation in Medical Product Discussion," facilitating increased involvement of patients earlier in the regulatory process for medical product review. The Secretary is directed to develop and implement strategies to solicit the views of patients during the medical product development process and consider the perspectives of patients. The patient representative may serve as a special government employee in appropriate agency meetings with medical product sponsors and investigators. The secretary is also directed to explore means to provide for identification of patient representatives who do not have any, or have none. other technical workers, for whom federal agencies such as FDA compete with the private sector and nonfederal public employers. For example, FFDCA Section 714 authorizes the Secretary to appoint employees to positions in FDA to perform, administer, or support activities related to review of medical device applications and human generic drugs. The House bill contains a comparable provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle P, Section 2285, "Hiring Authority for Scientific, Technical, and Professional Personnel" professional positions that support the development, review, and regulation of medical products" within the competitive service. The FDA Commissioner would be allowed to determine pay (not to exceed the annual rate of pay of the President) for the purposes of retaining qualified employees. This provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress on workforce planning and certain specified elements with regard to the FDA workforce. The provision also would require GAO to conduct a review of the FDA's workforce planning process and hiring practices. the number of employees serving in other HHS employment systems to offset the number in the Service. Title 5 of the U.S. Code provides the broad framework of requirements under which many federal employees are hired. Some subsets of employees are hire under alternative government-wide or agency-specific authorities. Numerous hiring authorities target scientists and other qualified experts. The House bill would require the Secretary to report on the HHS website regarding the changes to the Service and whether they "have improved the ability of the [FDA] to hire and retain qualified experts" positions" in the competitive service "without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code" The House provision specifies that these positions would be within FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. Like the Senate bill, the House provision would allow the HHS Secretary to determine pay (not to exceed the annual rate of pay of the President) for the purposes of retaining qualified employees, notwithstanding certain General Schedule pay rate requirements. The provision would also allow the Secretary to set the salary for certain positions. not required to reduce the number of employees serving in other HHS employment systems. The provision would require the Secretary to appoint experts to agencies within HHS. It also would authorize the appointment of persons who hold "a master's level degree in engineering, bioinformatics, or a related or emerging field" It would increase the upper pay rate limit to that of the President (currently $400,000 per year) but would eliminate the authority to reduce other HHS employees' jobs. It would also broaden the current requirement for doctoral-level members. that for Level I of the Executive Schedule (currently about $206,000 per year) unless approved by the President. The Secretary may contribute up to 10% of a Service member's pay to that person's already established retirement system. The provision would rename the SBRS as the Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (the Service) It would increase the number of authorized members to 2,000, and would add "biomedical product assessment" as a desired field of expertise. to contribute to a member's preexisting retirement system. The House bill contains a similar provision (Section 2281) that would also rename the SBRS the Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service. Unlike the Senate bill, the House bill would eliminate the mention of a specific number of authorized Servicemembers. Finally, the provision would require GAO to study the changes to the Service and their effects on HHS departments and agencies. SBRS is a special hiring mechanism used by the HHS Secretary to attract and retain accomplished scientists to work in Public Health Service (PHS) agencies. It is not subject to civil service requirements under Title 5 of the U.S. Code. SBRS requirements are as prescribed in law and regulation (42 C.F.R. Part 24). Currently, SBRS is limited to 500 members, who are accomplished doctoral-level scientists in biomedical research or clinical research evaluation. The rate of pay may not exceed $100,000. Each board member's term of office would last for four years. Initially appointed board members' terms would expire on a staggered basis, as determined by the ex officio members. The provision would remove the salary cap of the foundation's Executive Director, which is now set at the compensation of the Executive Director. The provisions would also add that for the additional board members appointed pursuant to S. 2700 , Section 6, the terms of office for the initially appointed persons can expire onA staggered basis. No comparable provision in H.R. 6 is being implemented. This provision also would allow the Secretary to terminate any such institute if the Secretary determines that it is no longer benefitting the public health. Following allegations of misspent funds during a 2010 General Services Administration meeting held in Las Vegas, the Office of Management and Budget imposed restrictions on conference travel for federal employees. The memorandum directed agencies, beginning in FY2013, to spend at least 30% less than what was spent in FY2010 on travel expenses. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), then the meetings would not be considered to be conferences for the purposes of federal reporting requirements. Each HHS operating division would be required to post on their website an annual report on scientific meeting attendance and related travel spending for each fiscal year. The NIH travel (Title I, Subtitle B, Section 1025) and the enabling FDA scientific engagement (Title II, Sub Title P, Section 2282) provisions in H.R. 6 would be included. Senior-level agency approval is required for all conferences sponsored by an agency where the conference expenses to the agency exceed $100,000. Agencies are prohibited from spending more than $500,000 on a single conference. However, this restriction may be waived if the agency head "determines that exceptional circumstances exist" Under the Senate provision, if attendance at a scientific meeting is directly related to the professional duties of scientific or medical professionals of the agency.level of spending each year through FY 2016. the carrying out of the PMI as well as identifying requirements of the initiative (§2) Amend PHSA Section 301(d) to require the Secretary to issue a Certificate of Confidentiality to research investigators of federally funded research in which sensitive, identifiable information is collected to protect the privacy of research participants. The provision would prohibit the individual with the certificate from disclosing sensitive information about the research participants, with certain exceptions, as specified, and would make this type of information immune from the legal process. 12-month period. PRA does not apply to certain types of scientific research, including collections that are neither sponsored nor conducted by the agency. The Exemption for the National Institutes of Health from the Paperwork Reduction Act Requirements provision (Title I, Subtitle B, Section 1024) is comparable to S. 2700. It would amend 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35 to exempt the NIH from the PRA requirements for certain scientific research collections during the conduct of NIH research. 1980 and amended in 1995, established the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) Congress required that agencies seek OIRA permission before collecting information from the public. The PRA requires that federal agencies receive clearance from OIra before requesting most types of information. PRA clearance is required when standardized information is collected from 10 or more respondents within a period of time. The first of 11 stated purposes was to "minimize the paperwork burden for individuals ... and other persons resulting from the collection of information by and for the Federal Government" health emergency, which in turn authorizes certain further actions to enhance response flexibility, such as waivers of requirements for grant-making and hiring. Section 17 would add an additional provision to PHSA Section 319 to waive requirements for voluntary data collection under the Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA) when a public health emergency declaration is in effect. Among other things, the PRA requires review and pre-clearance of federal data collection proposals by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) The PRA ensures that federal agencies do not overburden the public. Secretary would be required to issue draft guidance, no later than 12 months after enactment. Draft guidance would update the October 4, 2002, final guidance on the least burdensome provisions. The House provision amending FFDCA Section 515(c) would not require that postmarket information be considered in determining a reasonable assurance of device safety and effectiveness. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . PHSA Section 319 authorizes the HHS Secretary to determine the existence of a public. latter includes showing that a test's accuracy is comparable to a method whose accuracy has already been established and documented. S. 1622 Section 3 would require the Secretary to publish draft guidance that revises Section V of the current guidance. Not later than one year after the comment period for the draft guidance closes, the Secretary would be required to publish the guidance. The draft guidance would provide clarification on the appropriate use of comparable performance between a waived and moderately complex laboratory user to demonstrate accuracy. It would also address approaches to demonstrating accuracy. with the Secretary to discuss the information and requirements necessary to make the plan acceptable. A denied plan would be allowed to be resubmitted. With respect to an accepted plan, in whole or part, the Secretary would be required to accept the plan if the Secretary determines the data to be collected are appropriate for premarket approval. A plan that has been accepted would be needed to remain in effect except with written agreement of the Secretary and the sponsor or pursuant to a decision by the reviewing primary agency center director. the Center, the Coordinating Committee, and the Advisory Board—is required to develop, and periodically revise and update, a comprehensive plan for medical rehabilitation research. The research plan would have to include goals and objectives for such research. Within 30 days of revising and updating the plan, the Director of the Center would be required to transmit the plan to the President, the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. In addition, S. 800 would require the Secretary, with the other federal agencies, to review their medical rehabilitationResearch programs and take action to avoid duplication. Section 452 of the PHSA established the National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research (the Center) within the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (the Institute) at NIH. It also required the NIH Director to create a Medical rehabilitation Coordinating Committee and a National Advisory Board on Medical rehabilitation Research. The Director of the Institute—in collaboration with the Director of NIH—conducts and disseminates research, and disseminate information, on the rehabilitation of individuals with physical disabilities. The exception is for treatment of a rare disease or condition through the end of Phase III. Diseases." It would authorize the HHS Secretary to improve the collection of data on neurological diseases. The Secretary would be explicitly authorized to establish a new registry, using existing data sources. In doing so, the Secretary would have to focus on up to five of the most prevalent or burdensome diseases. It would be required to include information on demographics, relevant risk factors, and diagnostic and progression, and to consult with specified experts. The HHS Secretary would also have to collect and manage information in order to facilitate research. The bill also would authorize the Secretary to furnish grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements with public or private nonprofit entities to implement this provision. The Secretary would be required to make information and analysis obtained from the system available to other federal health agencies and state and local agencies. Optional data elements would include information about the epidemiology, natural history, prevention, detection, management, and treatment approaches for the diseases. The bill would also provide information on the development of outcomes measures; and any additional matters identified by stakeholders. S. 849 would add a new PHSA Section 399S-1, "Advancing Research for Neurological to Congress" H.R. 6 would define medical rehabilitation research as "the science of mechanisms and interventions that prevent, improve, restore, or replace lost, underdeveloped, or deteriorating function" The PHSA does not explicitly authorize or require surveillance of neurological diseases in general, although the Secretary may conduct such activities under general authorities in PHSA Title III. The bill does not include an authorization of appropriations. National Neurological Diseases Surveillance System to track the epidemiology of neurological diseases, including multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease. Required and optional data elements are the same as in the Senate bill. The Secretary would be required to make information and analysis in the surveillance system available, subject to HIPAA privacy and security protections, to the public, including researchers. The provision would authorize the appropriation of $5 million for each of fiscal years 2016 through 2020. The Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research Service. In November 2014, HHS published a proposed rule to clarify and expand requirements for the submission of clinical trial registration and results information to ClinicalTrials.gov. Section 8 of S. 2742 would amend Section 402(j)(2)(D) of the PHSA, regarding posting of data, by adding new language requiring the NIH Director to inform responsible parties of the option to request that information for a medical device clinical trial be publically posted before the date of clearance or approval. A clinical trial for a combination product would be considered a drug clinical trial, if the Secretary determines. Under Section 402(j) of the PHS Act, those responsible for specified clinical trials of FDA-regulated products have been required to submit registration information to ClinicalTrials.gov since December 2007. The Secretary is required, by rulemaking, to expand the requirements for submission of summary results information. Section 1101 and Section 1121 of H.R. 6 are comparable to S. 2742 in that they would require the Secretary to submit an initial report not later than two years after the compliance date of the final rule. S. 2742 focuses on compliance with the reporting requirements. House provisions address public access to, and research on, the information in ClinicalTrials.gov. Section 1101 of H.R. 6 would add new language to Section 402(j) of the PHS Act ("Expanded Clinical Trial Registry Data Bank") It would require the NIH Director to ensure that the registry and results data bank is easily used by the public. It would also require that information is submitted in a standardized format, including certain specified data. This streamlined approach would result in more uncertainty about potential risks posed by the product, and therefore a greater need for post-market scrutiny. Section 2 would amend PHSA Section 319E to require the HHS Secretary to encourage and assist in reporting of antibacterial drug use, drug resistance, and antibiotic stewardship programs in health care facilities of the Indian Health Service, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and Department of Defense (DOD) The Secretary would be required to make summaries of data from this system publicly available. Section 4 would amend Section 301(a) of the Public Health Service through the Secretary of Health and Human Services. It requires the Secretary to "conduct in the Service, and encourage, cooperate with, and render assistance to other appropriate public authorities, scientific institutions, and scientists" As part of these authorities, the Secretary is authorized to make available substances and living organisms for biomedical and behavioral research. Section 4 would also amend Section 302(a), which would make the Secretary responsible for the National Institutes of Health. that the primary mode of action of the product is that of a drug or biological product, or a device clinical trial. Section 9 of S. 2742 would require the Secretary, acting through the NIH Director and not later than two years after enactment, to submit to Congress a report that "describes education and outreach, guidance, enforcement, and other activities undertaken to encourage compliance with Section 402(j) of the PHSA" This section also would requiring the Secretary to submit a report to Congress on the activities undertaken by the NIH. Section 7 of S. 2742 does not explicitly require that CDC personnel meet with vaccine developers. The stated purpose is for CDC to share with developers information about epidemiology and related matters that could inform the sponsor's vaccine research and development plan. Section 2142 would require the CDC Director to review ACIP processes, evaluation criteria, and consistency in issuing recommendations, and to publish a report on such review not later than 18 months after enactment. H.R. 6 also includes a provision (Section 2141) that would expedite ACIP's consideration of certain vaccines. The list of covered vaccine types and associated compensable injuries and time frames (called the "Injury Table") was provided in law. In 2013, the Advisory Commission on Childhood Vaccines (ACCV) informed the Secretary that current VICP authority may discourage the growing use of vaccines for pregnant women. Section 6 of S. 2742 would require the Secretary to incorporate into the list ofcovered vaccines any vaccine recommended by CDC for routine use in pregnant women, using the rulemaking process to establish covered injuries and related matters. the PHSA to allow the Secretary, where research substances and living organisms are made available to researchers through contractors, to direct the contractors to collect payments. These amounts would be credited to the appropriations accounts that incurred the costs of making the substances and organisms available. In 1986, in order to stabilize the pediatric vaccine market, Congress waived the liability of manufacturers (in most cases) and established the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) There are no comparable provisions in H.R. 6. that both the woman and a child or children in utero when the vaccine was administered would be eligible for compensation. A vaccine may be both a commercial product and a public good. Congress has established several federal payment mechanisms and health insurance coverage requirements to support the production and use of vaccines in the United States. Some of these incentives are tied to recommendations of CDC and/or its Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) In contrast to FDA, which licenses vaccines when they are shown to be safe and include the following: S. 1878, The Advancing Hope Act of 2015; S. 1622, The FDA Device Accountability Act of2015;. S. 2503, Preventing Superbugs and Protecting Patients Act; and S. 2030, The. Advancing Targeted Therapies for Rare Diseases Act of 2016. Also S. 800, The Enhancing the Stature and. Visibility of Medical Rehabilitation Research at NIH Act; S., 849, Advancing Research for Neurological Diseases Act. The Senate's medical innovation package is that chamber's companion effort to the House's 21 st Century Cures initiative. The package includes the Medical Countermeasures Innovation Act of 2015; S. 1767, The Combination Products Innovation Act, and S. 2700, FDA and NIH Workforce Authorities Modernization Act. It also includes the Advancing Precision Medicine Act of 2016 and the Promoting Biomedical Research and Public Health for Patients Act. The bill also includes S. 185, Promise for Antibiotics and Therapeutics for Health Act; and S 2745, Advancing NIH Strategic Planning and Representation in Medical Research Act. medical research at NIH and change some aspects of how the FDA executes its regulatory oversight mission. This section would require the NIH institute directors to establish programs to pursue innovative approaches to major contemporary challenges in biomedical research. The Senate bill would not require the allocation of a certain percentage of funding for this research. This report provides for each of the 18 bills in the Senate medical innovation package: (1) background on the issue, or issues, addressed by the bill; (2) a summary of the bill's provisions; and (3) where applicable, identification of comparable provisions in H.R. 6. Both the House and the Senate are considering legislation to support medical innovation. Reforms to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and changes to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Both NIH and FDA are agencies within the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Senators Lamar Alexander and Patty Murray, chairman and ranking Member of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, announced the start of a bipartisan initiative to "examine the process for getting safe treatments, devices and cures to patients and the public" roles of the [FDA] and the [NIH] in that process." This initiative culminated in a package of 19 bipartisan bills that were reported out of the Senate Health, Labor, Education, and Pensions (HELP) Committee. One of these 19 bills, The Adding Zika Virus to the FDA Priority Review Voucher Program Act (S. 2512), subsequently was passed by both chambers and signed into law on April 19, 2016 (P.L. 114-146) The Advancing Precision Medicine Act of 2016 would codify the President's Precision Medicine Initiative. It would also protect identifiable, sensitive information from release under FOIA. The act would also require the sharing of NIH-supported research data in certain circumstances. The bill would also support high-risk, high-reward research in the U.S. and around the world. It was introduced in the Senate on September 14, 2015. It has been referred to as the Advancing precision medicine act of 2016. than a contract, grant, or agreement with respect to projects for high-impact, cutting-edge research, as specified. This provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress evaluating the activities under this new subsection by September 30, 2020. Title II, Subtitle C, Section 2041, of H.R. 6 addresses precision medicine but is not comparable to S. 2713 in its approach. It would also, for a precision drug or biological product, issue and periodically update guidance. The House provision also would require that GAO study the voucher program and report to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions. Precision medicine is a relatively new term for what has traditionally been called personalized medicine (or targeted medicine), the idea of providing health care to a specific group of people. The Senate provision would require the GAO to report by December 31, 2017, on the program's effectiveness as an incentive for developing drugs that treat or prevent pediatric diseases. Precision medicine is the idea of providing health care to individuals based on specific patient characteristics. Currently, medical care is generally provided in a "trial and error" manner, with treatment adjusted based on real-time patient response. Precision medicine would tailor medical treatment to individual patients, thus aiming to improve health outcomes and save health care costs. On February 25, 2016, the White House hosted a Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI) Summit to mark the launch of PMI in the U.S. Some groups have suggested that such pilots could also be done in other areas (e.g., cardiology, neurology, and infectious disease) This provision would add a new FFDCA Section 1014, "Food and Drug Administration Intercenter Institutes" This would require the Secretary to establish one or more "Intercenter Institutes," for a major disease area(s) The proposal is specific to cancer, but there has arguably also been an increase in the number and complexity of diagnostics and therapeutics for other diseases. Such institutes would be responsible for coordinating activities applicable to specific disease area(s) H.R. 2700 would require the Secretary to establish at least one institute within one year of enactment of the bill. It would also require a public comment period while each institute is established. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the first quarter of 2014. It is currently under consideration in the Senate and the House of Representatives, both of which are expected to vote on the bill this week. The Obama Administration has proposed an Oncology Center of Excellence to streamline collaboration across FDA's Human Drugs, Biologics, and Devices and Radiological Health programs. According to the FY2017 Congressional Justification, "With the continued development of companion diagnostic tests and the use of combinations of drugs and biologics to treat cancer using methods developed through the science of precision medicine, to most benefit those affected, FDA needs to take an integrated approach" The Center for Devices andRadiological Health reviews premarket approval applications for approval and 510(k) notifications. S. 2511 would require ONC to reduce the regulatory and administrative burdens of using EHR technology. ONC also would be required to encourage the certification of HIT for use in medical specialties and sites of service. The rating program's methodology and criteria would be posted online, as would each HIT product's star rating. Each developer of an HIT product that received a one-star rating would have to develop and implement a plan to improve the rating, or risk having the product decertified. H.R. 6 would require HIT developers to attest to a series of requirements as a condition of product certification. They include not taking any action (including business, technical, or organizations practices) that constitutes information blocking. The bill also would extend federal privilege and confidentiality protections to HIT developers who report and analyze patient safety information related to HIT use. And it would allow the Department of Health and Human Services to investigate claims of HIT developers engaged in information blocking, among other things. The Senate bill's star rating program for certified HIT products does not include this requirement. Senate bill, H.R. 6 would not establish a star rating program for certified HIT products. Bill would not address patient access to electronic health information, patient record matching, the regulatory and administrative burdens of using EHR technology, or the development of trusted relationships between existing HIT networks. The Project BioShield Act ( P.L. 108-276 ), the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act (PAHPA, the Act was passed after the terrorist attacks of 2001. Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, by January 31, 2022, on the program's effectiveness. H.R. 6 contains a comparable provision (Section 2152, Reauthorization of Rare Pediatric Disease Priority Review Voucher Incentive Program), which would extend the authority to award rare pediatric disease priority review vouchers until December 31, 2018. A new drug application or a biologics license application submitted to the FDA after the enactment of H.r. 6 and before December would be eligible for vouchers. patient preferences with respect to treatment of such disease or condition. S. 1597 would require the Secretary, acting through the FDA Commissioner, to publish, no later than June 1, 2021, 2026, and 2031, on the FDA website. H.R. 6 also contains a provision related to patient experience data (Title II, Subtitle A, Section 2001, "Development and Use of Patient Experience Data to Enhance Structured Risk-Benefit Assessment Framework" The bill is expected to become law in the next few weeks. H.R. 6 is the result of a series of hearings and roundtable meetings hosted by the House Energy and Commerce Committee dating back to spring 2014. The hearings androundtables focused on a broad range of topics, including modernizing clinical trials, incorporating patient perspectives into medical research and regulatory processes, precision/personalized medicine, digital health care, and more. The bill was passed on July 10, 2015, on a vote of 344 to 77. While consisting of many different provisions, the bill is primarily focused on efforts to increase strategic investments in medical research. for secure patient matching and report its findings to Congress within two years. (§8) Section 3001 of the 21 st Century Cures Act ("Ensuring Interoperability of Health Information Technology") includes a series of HIT interoperability provisions. Like S. 2511 , the House bill would give the HHS Office of Inspector General new enforcement authority. Other provisions in H.R. 6 have no counterpart in the Senate bill. Similarly, several of the topics addressed in S.2511 are not covered in the HouseBill. H.R. 6 addresses a number of areas not covered by the Senate bill. It would eliminate the HIT Standards Committee and require the Secretary to contract directly with standards development organizations. Beginning in 2020, hospitals and physicians demonstrating EHR meaningful use would have to attest that they are not engaged in information blocking. Unlike the Senate version, the House bill would repeal the interoperability provisions in MACRA. It also would require ONC to publish guidance on the HIPAA privacy rule and its relationship to informationblocking. an entirely different way. In other cases, the House and Senate legislation address the topic in a similar way but with key substantive differences. For a summary of all the provisions in H.R. 6 , as passed by the House, see CRS Report R44071, H.r. 6: The 21st Century Cures Act. The HHS Human Subject Regulations are a core set of federal standards for protecting human subjects in HHS-sponsored research. These regulations are the basis for the bill. report to "appropriate committees of Congress" within "30 days" when the amount available for Project BioShield procurements falls below $1.5 billion. This bill would change that requirement to specify the recipients of the report as the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the House Committee on Appropriations. Section 3 would move contracting authority for ProjectBioShield and BARDA advanced development from the Senate and House Appropriations committees to the Department of Health and Human Services. This report would be required by "March 1 of each year in which" the amount of money is available to be spent. of the Project BioShield special reserve fund. The Blue Ribbon Study Panel on Biodefense recommended this change to streamline the ProjectBioShield contracting process. Other than the provisions relating to Food and Drug Administration priority review, the 21 st Century Cures Act contains no comparable provisions to S. 2055 as reported. This section would also specify the congressional committees that HHS must notify of a decision to use Project Bio Shield funds as the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. contracts with companies to develop and commercialize potential countermeasures. These contracts specify development activities for the company to perform and may extend multiple years. The Project BioShield Act ( P.L. 108-276 ) established a special process and funding mechanism through which the HHS Secretary may obligate funds to procure countermeasures that still need up to 10 more years of development. Up to half of the total amount of the Project Bio Shield contract may be paid out for theCompany meeting specified developmental milestones. An HDE application is similar to a PMA, but it is exempt from the effectiveness requirements. Such devices may be used in a facility only after a local IRB has approved their use in that facility. The provision would amend Section 520(g) of the FFDCA, regarding IDEs, by removing the word "local" in all references to local IRBs, including in the stipulation that the device be used only in emergency situations. It would also remove the word 'local' from all reference to the facility. that an approved humanitarian use device may be used in a facility only after a local IRB has approved such use, except in certain emergency situations. The use of non-local IRBs for review of IDEs and HDEs provision in H.R. 6 (i.e., Title II, Subtitle O, Section 2262) is comparable to S. 1622. The provision would also require the Secretary, within 12 months of enactment, to revise or issue regulations or guidance, as necessary, to carry out these amendments. Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Reauthorization Act of 2013 ( P.L. 113-5 ) requires the ASPR to develop an annual "coordinated 5-year budget plan" for countermeasure basic and advanced research, development, and procurement activities. Act established the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) to develop and procure medical countermeasures against CBRN agents, pandemic influenza, and emerging infectious diseases. BARDA is part of the National Institutes of Health. ASPR to BARDA. Such a move was recommended by the Blue Ribbon Panel on Biodefense to "reduce unnecessary bureaucratic delays, improve efficiency and decision making" Section 4 would require ASPR to provide additional information in its "coordinated 5-year budget plan" and require that it be made publically available in "a manner that does not compromise national security" The budget plan would also need to consider the development of countermeasures and products for emerging infectious diseases that may present "a threat to the nation" Interagency working group, the Public Health and Emergency Medical Countermeasure Enterprise (PHEMCE), is responsible for coordinating these activities. The PHEMCE is headed by the HHS Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR) and includes representatives from the HHS, CDC, FDA, and other agencies. The federal countermeasure strategy requires coordinated activities by several separate agencies. It is designed to ensure federal countermasure needs are addressed efficiently. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. The Medical Countermeasures Innovation Act of 2016 would change the manner in which the federal government supports the development and procurement of medical countermeasures against CBRN agents. Section 2 of S. 2055 would require the HHS Secretary to provide "timely and accurate recommended" guidelines for using the medical countermeasure in the Strategic National Stockpile. Currently, HHS has two separate mechanisms to support CBRNcountermeasure advanced development and commercialization: (1) countermeasures advanced development contracts and (2) Project BioShield acquisition contracts. allowing the HHS Secretary to more easily investigate outbreaks or other circumstances germane to the emergency response. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . There are no comparable provisions in the Senate version of the bill that would allow the Secretary to conduct an investigation of an outbreak or other emergency situation in the event of a national emergency. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. It would allow for the Secretary of Health and Human Services to investigate outbreaks and other circumstances that are relevant to an emergency. the FDA Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER). FDA refers to such cells as HCT/Ps, which stands for human cells, tissue, and cellular and tissue-based products. CBER held a public workshop on standards development for cellular therapies and regenerative medicine products in March 2014. This section would amend the FFDCA by adding a new Section 506G, "Standards for Regenerative Medicine and Advanced Therapies" It would require the Secretary, in consultation with the National Institute of Standards and Technology and specified stakeholders, to facilitate the development of standards. therapies through a transparent public process. After the development of such standards, the Secretary would update relevant regulations and guidance. The term "regenerative medicine and advanced therapies" is defined as including cell therapy, gene therapy and gene-modified cell therapy. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . Rules (or regulations) generally start with an act of Congress, and they are the means by which statutes are implemented and specific requirements are established. In lieu of or in  Regenerative medicine is defined by NIH as "the process of creating living, functional tissues to repair or replace tissue or organ function lost due to age, disease, damage, or congenital defects" The regulation of cells or tissues intended for implantation or infusion into a human patient is the responsibility of NIH. The six-month extension would not be available for a drug that had already received a six- months extension under this provision. The drug would be required to notify the Secretary "of any discontinuance of the production of the drug for solely commercial reasons at least one year before such discontinuances" specified conditions, to a sponsor of an approved new human drug product application. This section defines a "material threat medical countermeasure application" as a human drug application "to prevent or treat harm from a biological, chemical, radiological, or nuclear agent identified as a material threat" under the Public Health Service Act. It can be used for the priority review of another application, among other things, to prevent "adverse health consequences or death and may be caused by administering a drug, or biological product" individuals, whichever is later, a summary analysis of the adverse drug reaction reports received for the drug. The FDAAA also named the risk-management process "risk evaluation and mitigation strategies" (REMS) A REMS may include "an elements to assure safe use" (ETASU), which is a restriction on distribution or use that is intended to allow access to those who could benefit from the drug while minimizing their risk of adverse events. The FDA has expanded its risk- management authority. Other transaction (OT) authority is a special vehicle used by certain federal agencies for obtaining or advancing research and development (R&D) An OT is not a contract, grant, or cooperative agreement, and there is no statutory or regulatory definition of "other transaction" Only those agencies that have been provided OT authority may engage in other transactions. Generally, OT authority is created because the government needs to obtain leading-edge R&D from commercial sources, but some companies are unwilling or unable to comply with the government's procurement regulations. "an independent, non-profit entity" to "foster and accelerate the development of medical countermeasures" This partner could provide business advice and use venture capital practices to invest in companies developing medical counter Measures. The U.S. intelligence community has successfully used a similar strategic investor model to address its unmet technology needs through In-Q-Tel. This bill would establish certain criteria for the partner, including prior experience in the intelligence community. The bill would also address unmet public health needs such as novel antimicrobials for multidrug resistant organisms. S. 1767 would amend Section 503(g) of the FFDCA to require the Secretary to assign a primary center for the regulation of combination products. The bill would require the secretary to determine the primary mode of action for a combination product—defined as a combination of two or more products. A manufacturer whose product is assigned to CDER will have a higher standard of evidence, a potentially higher requirement for supporting data, a higher user fee, and probably a longer premarket review time period. persons are designated in each primary agency center as points of contact for the sponsors of combination products. The bill would require the Secretary, not later than four years after enactment, to issue final guidance on the combination product review process, as specified. It would add reporting requirements to the annual report to Congress on the activities of OCP as specified, and would amend FFDCA Section 520(h)(4) to prohibit the use of information contained in an application. It also would require OCP to provide additional duties related to communication; facilitating meetings between the agency and the sponsors; and dispute resolution. Congress directed FDA to establish an Office of Combination Products (OCP) to facilitate the timely review and regulation of combination products. Both drugs and devices are defined in the FFDCA as products intended to diagnose, prevent, or treat disease, or otherwise affect the structure or any structure. The OCP reviews drug applications for approval and 510(k) notifications for clearance. It also reviews biologics license applications for licensure, and the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) reviews premarket approval applications. An application for a combination product that contains an approved drug constituent would be considered a 505(b)(2) application. The bill would not prohibit a sponsor from submitting separate applications for the constituent parts of a combination products. It would further require OCP to help coordinate timely review of combination products across relevant agency centers and to ensure that they are reviewed in a timely manner. It also would require the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services to review combination products that are approved by the FDA. H.R. 6 would amend FFDCA Section 503(g)(4)(C) to require that the Secretary "issue final guidance" on combination products. Increasingly, health care facilities are using computer systems for routine administrative and financial transactions. One area that is undergoing especially rapid growth and innovation is mobile health. This term refers to electronic health records, patient scheduling and claims processing.as needed. The bill would take a different approach than the Senate legislation. It would require the Secretary to issue final guidance that describes the responsibilities of each agency center. the approved constituent parts. For premarket review of a combination product that contains an approved drug constituent, the applicant would be permitted to rely upon investigational studies not conducted by the applicant and for which the applicant has not obtained a right of reference. The applicant would also be required to give notice to the holder of the approved application and patent owner that the patent is invalid or will not be infringed upon. In relying upon these studies, the applicants would need to certify any patents that claim the approved drug or claim use of it. for premarket approval of a class III device from being used in an application for premarket. approval. The bill would also require the Secretary to identify, not later than 18 months after enactment, types of combination products that the Secretary proposes may adopt different good manufacturing practices. This list would be required to be published in the Federal Register and updated after 18 months, the bill says. It also would require a patent certification and notifies the holder of the approved application and patent owner that the patent is invalid or will not be infringed upon. be able to propose and, subject to an agreement with the Secretary, conduct additional studies to establish the relevance of any chemical action. At any time following the Secretary's determination of the product's primary mode of action, the sponsor would be permitted to submit a proposed combination product review plan. The Secretary would be required to provide a written response to the sponsor indicating whether the plan was accepted, accepted in part, or denied. The bill would allow the sponsor, if the plan were to be denied, to request a meeting. as the single mode of action expected to make the greatest contribution to the overall intended therapeutic effects of the product. If the sponsor of a combination product disagreed with the Secretary's determination and requested an explanation, the Secretary would be required to provide a substantive scientific rationale for the determination. The Secretary would not be permitted to determine that the primary mode ofaction is that of a drug or biologic solely because the combination product has any chemical action within or on the body. In addition, the sponsor would have to provide an explanation. function of the body. OCP is required to determine the primary mode of action of a combination product and regulate it based on that determination. Unlike a drug, however, a device "does not achieve its primary intended purposes through chemical action within or on the body ... and is not dependent upon being metabolized for the achievement of itsprimary intended purposes" OCP treats a drug-device combination product as a drug unless the manufacturer can prove that it satisfies the device exclusionary clause; i.e., the product does not rely on chemical action to achieve itsPrimary intended purpose. The expedited review process for a medical device that has received a priority review designation relies on the use of surrogate endpoints and the collection of postmarket data. The "Expedited Access PMA" (EAP) program features "earlier and more interactive engagement with FDA staff," according to FDA. The EAP program includes the involvement of senior management and a collaboratively developed plan for collecting the scientific and clinical data to be used in the PMA application, according to the FDA. support approval—features that, taken together, should provide these patients with earlier access to safe and effective medical devices. As part of the EAP program, FDA intends to impose postmarket requirements, including requiring post-approval studies as a condition of approval for devices subject to a PMA when applicable. The extent to which FDA will accept certain data to be collected for an EAP Device in the future will be determined by the FDA. FDA will withdraw approval for a device if the sponsor fails to adhere to the postmarket requirement. FDA "estimates that, at least in the early stages, on average, about six devices a year may qualify for the program," a media source says. The estimated six devices would represent about 15% of FDA's total PMA applications in one year. Other comments on the FDA draft guidance questioned whether FDA has sufficient resources to dedicate to the EAP program. S. 1077.product approval if the necessary data are not promptly collected or suggest that the product benefits do not outweigh risks. FDA issued final guidance on April 13, 2015. The guidance focuses on balancing risks versus benefits for patients. Comments on the April 2014 FDA draft guidance questioned FDA's ability to enforce postmarket study requirements. The agency and Congress "to evaluate whether FDA has sufficient authorities to promptly withdraw" PMA approval for marketed devices for which FDA later determines that there is a lack of a showing of reasonable assurance that the device is safe or effective under the conditions of use prescribed, as well as by the current capabilities of FDA's medical device surveillance system. in a widespread recall, and the hazards posed by particles shed from [DePuy] metal-on-metal hip replacements were not predictable based on engineering insights or in vitro studies. The 2002 FDA guidance states, "[r]eliance on postmarket controls ... should be considered as a mechanism to reduce the premarket burden for 510(k)s and PMAs" However, the FDA's authority to require postmarket studies of medical devices is limited. A September 2015 GAO study found that of the 392 postmarket surveillance studies ordered by FDA, only 38 were ordered by the FDA. All clinical evaluations of investigational devices (unless exempt) must have an investigational device exemption (IDE) before the clinical study is initiated. An IDE allows an unapproved device (most commonly an invasive or life-sustaining device) to be used in a clinical study to collect the data required to support a premarket approval (PMA) submission. A device can be shipped lawfully for investigation of the device without requiring that the manufacturer comply with other requirements of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) such as registration and listing. The two provisions are as follows: Section 513(a)(3)(D)(ii) Any clinical data, including one or more well-controlled investigations, specified in writing by the Secretary for demonstrating a reasonable assurance of device effectiveness shall be specified. The Secretary shall consider, in consultation with the applicant, the least burdensome appropriate means of evaluating device effectiveness that would have a reasonable likelihood of resulting in approval. Whenever the Secretary requests information to demonstrate that devices with differing technological characteristics are substantially equivalent, the Secretary may use this information. such requirements, including employee training. Under the Senate bill, 18 months after enactment, the FDA ombudsman responsible for device premarket review would be required to conduct an audit of the least burdensome training, including the effectiveness of the training. The audit would be needed to include "interviews of persons who are representatives of the industry regarding their experience" and a list of the measurement tools used to assess the implementation. A summary of the audit findings would berequired to be submitted to the Senate HELP Committee and the Senate. manufacturers to consider study designs to shorten the length of the study. Such study designs include the use of "surrogate endpoints and statistical methods, such as Bayesian analyses" The absence of problems in laboratory testing may not always predict what happens to a device over time in the human body. For example, "the malfunction of [Medtronic and St. Jude Medical] implantable cardioverter-defibrillator leads, which resulted in the death of one patient" Section 604 of FDASIA also required a report to House and Senate committees on when a 510(k) notification should be submitted for a modification or change to a legally marketed device. Final guidance (or regulation) could not be issued until one year after the committees had received the report. There are no comparable provisions in H.R. 6 . Under FFDCA Section 515(d)(5), the Secretary shall provide review priority for devices that represent breakthrough technologies for which no approved alternatives exist. Under Section 604 of the Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act (FDASIA), the Secretary was required to withdraw draft guidance, issued by FDA in July 2011. The prior guidance issued in 1997 is still in effect. Although patient and consumer groups have called for the guidance to be withdrawn, the FDA says it will remain in effect until a new set of guidelines is issued. The guidance will be issued by the FDA in January 2013. The FDA will then issue a new guidance on the 510(k) device. summary of any decision made by CDRH on the least burdensome requirements. FFDCA Section 510(k) requires medical device manufacturers to register with the Secretary and, at least 90 days prior to introducing a device intended for human use into interstate commerce. S. 2503 would add a new subsection (q), "Reusable Medical Devices," which would require the Secretary to identify and publish a list of reusable device types. Reports issued after the publication of this list would be required to include instructions for use and validation data. Reusable medical devices are those devices that may be reprocessed and used on multiple patients. In March of 2015, FDA released final guidance on the reprocessing of reusable medical devices: Reprocessing Medical Devices in Health Care Settings: Validation Methods and Labeling. This guidance states that, among other things, a new device must be substantially equivalent to a device already on the market (a predicate device) Substantial equivalence is determined by comparing the performance characteristics of a new. device with those of a predicate device. would add a new Section 515B, "Priority Review for Breakthrough Devices," to Chapter V of the FFDCA. The section would require the Secretary in 60 days to determine whether the request for priority review would be granted. Such requests would be evaluated by a team of experienced FDA staff and senior managers. The provision in H.R. 6 regarding priority review for breakthrough devices (Title II, Subtitle L, Sections 2201) is comparable to S. 1077. criteria (i.e., no approved alternatives exist, offer significant advantages over existing approved or cleared alternatives) no longer being met. Each priority review device would be assigned a team of staff, "including a team leader with appropriate subject matter expertise and experience" Senior FDA personnel would oversee each team to facilitate the efficient development and review of the device. Among other things, the Secretary would be required to "provide for interactive communication with the device sponsor during the review process," and expedite "the Secretary's review of manufacturing and quality" FDA published final guidance on the least burdensome provisions on October 4, 2002. Under the guidance, FDA may allow the use of non-clinical data in place of clinical data for the approval of PMA devices. In certain circumstances, such as "devices or modifications of approved devices for which scientifically valid information is available in the public domain," FDA may use such data in the PMA approval process. When clinical data are needed, FDA allows for non- clinical data to be used. and review of the device through utilization of timely postmarket data collection" with regard to PMA applications. Agreements on clinical protocols would be considered binding, but may be subject to change under certain circumstances. The provision specifies that both the agreement and subsequent changes to the clinical protocol must be agreed to in writing. The Secretary would be required to issue, not later than one year after enactment, guidance on the implementation of the new Section 515B of the FFDCA. In addition to a report, on January 1, 2017, to the Senate Health, Education, Section 205 of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997 (FDAMA, P.L. 105-115 ) amended Section 513 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) S. 1622 would amend FFDCA Section 515(c), adding a new paragraph that would require the Secretary to "consider the least burdensome appropriate means necessary to demonstrate device safety and effectiveness" Section 2228 of H.R. 6 (Title I, Subtitle M) is substantively identical to the Senate legislation. between May 1, 2008, and February 24, 2015, 88% were inactive, 10% were ongoing, and 2% were complete. Activities related to implementing the least burdensome provision, including training for staff and advisory panels, are posted on FDA's website. S. 1622 , Section 4, would amend FFDCA Section 513 by adding a new subsection (j), "Training and Oversight of Least Burdensome Requirements" The Secretary would be required to ensure that each FDA employee involved in the review of premarket submissions, including supervisors, receives training. FDASIA ( P.L. 112-144 ) added a new FFDCA Section 529, creating the pediatric priority review voucher program. The purpose of the priority review drug voucher programs is to incentivize development of new treatment for diseases that may otherwise not attract development interest from companies due to cost or lack of market opportunities. The House provision does not specify that the agreement on clinical protocols and any subsequent changes must be agreed to in writing. There is no deadline on the requirement for FDA guidance on Section 515B. Under the Prescription Drug User Fee Act of 1992 (PDUFA), FDA agreed to specific goals for improving the drug review time. FDA created a two-tiered system of review times: Standard Review and Priority Review. Compared with the amount of time standard review generally takes (approximately 10 months), a Priority Review designation means FDA's goal is to take action on an application within 6 months. Currently, FDA has two authorized priority review voucher programs (the rare pediatric diseasepriority review program, and the tropical disease priority review program) S. 1878 would amend FFDCA Section 529(b)(4) by adding the requirement that the sponsor of a rare pediatric disease product application that intends to request a voucher notify the Secretary of 31, 2018. The House provision also would amend the definition of "rare pediatric disease" The bill also would add to the list of characteristics of a pediatric rare disease product applications that the House would consider adding to the bill's definition of the disease by adding italics to the words "serious or life-threatening" The term "rare pediatric disease" refers to a disease that affects fewer than 200,000 persons in the United States. FDASIA terminated the authority to award such vouchers one year after the Secretary of Health and Human Services made the decision. There is no reasonable expectation that the cost of developing and making the drug available in the US will be recovered from U.S. sales. The drug or biological product for a rare pediatric disease to be used for the priority review of another application. such intent upon submission of the rare pediatric disease product application. The bill would extend the authority to award such priority review vouchers until September 30, 2022. A new drug application or a biologics license application submitted to FDA after the enactment of S. 1878 would remain eligible to receive a priority review voucher even if approval comes after September 30,. 2022, provided the application is approved before September. 30, 2027, and is designated as a drug for a rare pediatric. disease. S.1878 also would require that GAO study the voucher program and report to the Senate. FDA awarded the third voucher in March 2015, triggering the March 2016 sunset of this authority. This authority was extended until September 30, 2016, by the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2016 ( P.L. 114-113 ). S. 1878 would amend the definition of "rare pediatric disease" in FFDCA Section 529(a) by adding the following words in italics: "The disease is rare pediatric disease." The bill would also require the GAO to study and then report on the effectiveness of the voucher program. guidance, over a period of five years, regarding the collection of patient experience data and the use of such data in drug development. This section describes the content of those required guidance documents. "patient experience data" is data that are collected by any persons (including patients, family members and caregivers of patients, patient advocacy organizations, disease research foundations, researchers, and drug manufacturers) and are intended to provide information about patients' experiences with a disease or condition, including the impact of such disease or Condition on Patients' lives. "patient experience data" would be defined as data collected by patients, parents, caregivers, patient advocacy organizations, disease research foundations, medical researchers, research sponsors, or other parties determined appropriate by the Secretary. The new subsection would also require the Secretary to issue implementation guidance after holding several methodological workshops and a public meeting. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), each year in the United States, at least 2,000 people die of cancer. and nonmanufacturer groups. minimal, financial interests in the medical products industry. S. 1597 would amend FFDCA Section 569C by adding a new subsection (b) "Statement of Patient Experience" would require the Secretary, upon approval of a new drug application, to make public any patient experience data and related information submitted and reviewed as part of the application. "Data and information" refers to patient experiencedata, information on patient-focused drug development tools, and other relevant information, as determined by the Secretary. H.R. 6 would amend FFDCA Section 505 by deleting a clause from Section 505(d) and adding new subsections (x) and (y) The new 505(x) would restate the deleted 505(D) requirement for the Secretary to "implement a structured risk-benefit assessment framework in the new drug approval process" The new505(y) would require the secretary to "establish and implement processes under which" entities "seeking to develop patient experience data" could submit ideas and data. H.R. 6 would amend FFDCA Section 505(c) to permit the Secretary to rely upon "qualified data summaries" to support the approval of the supplemental NDA. The Senate provision does not include treating cancer in its definition of "qualified indication" The House provision would add a new Section 505H, which, like the Senate bill, would address the data requirements in a supplemental Nda that a sponsor of an approved drug would submit when seeking to add to the approval a new indication. the Secretary regarding the safety of the drug developed for one or more indications" of the approved drug. The definition of "qualified data summary" in the House provision is similar to the Senate bill: "a summary of clinical data intended to demonstrate safety and effectiveness with respect to a qualified indication for use of a drug" The House provision would require the sponsor to submit the full data sets used to develop the qualified data summaries. The Senate bill adds the exception "unless the Secretary determines that the fullData sets are not not" USP develops and publishes standards for drug substances, drug products, and excipients. USP standards "play a role in the adulteration and misbranding provisions of the FFDCA" The Senate bill would amend Section 351(j) of the PHS Act by adding that the provisions of that section would not apply to biological products regulated under the Act. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . FDA regulates the U.S. sale of drugs. This provision would also amend FFDCA Section 505-1(f)(5)(B), which would change the requirement that the committee evaluate the ETASU for one or more drugs from "annually" to "periodically" There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . Biological products must be licensed by FDA, pursuant to PHSA Section 351, before they can be marketed in the United States. The U.S. Pharmacopeia Convention (USP) is a "scientific nonprofit organization that sets standards for drug safety" block access to those for whom the potential harm would outweigh potential benefit. This provision would amend FFDCA Section 505(k)(5) to require the Secretary to conduct regular screenings of the FAERS database instead of the bi-weekly screenings required by current law. It would also remove the requirement that the Secretary prepare a summary analysis of the adverse event signals. And it would require the FDA to post guidelines on the FDA website, with input from experts, that detail best practices for drug safety surveillance using FAERS. drug reaction reports received for a drug "by 18 months after approval" This provision also would amend FFDCA Section 505-1(f)(5)(A), which would expand the authority to evaluate the ETASU. This provision would require that the Secretary make publicly available on the FDA website "best practices for drug safety surveillance activities" for drugs newly approved under this section or section 351 of the Public Health Service Act. It would also require the Secretary to include "or other advisory committee," compared with current law, which designates this responsibility to the Secretary. how it informs the public, expert committees, and others about agency actions and plans. The law required biweekly screening of the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) database and quarterly reporting on the FAERS website. The FDAAA also required the development and maintenance of a website with extensive drug safety information, and required the Secretary to "prepare, by 18 months after approval of a drug or after use of the drug, by 10,000 by the end of the year" Other amendments to the FFDCA have imposed additional requirements upon the Secretary or the FDA. Section 505 and accompanying regulations provide the framework for FDA's approval of sponsors' drug marketing applications. Section 523(d), which required the Secretary, not later than January 10, 2007, to conduct a study related to devices, as specified, and to submit the findings of this study in a report to Congress. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 .FFDCA Section 505 provides the framework. H.R. 6 and S. 2700 express a sense of Congress that participation in or sponsorship of scientific conferences and meetings is essential to the mission of NIH and FDA. FFDCA Section 770, as added by the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ), created the Reagan-Udall Foundation for the Food & Drug Administration. Its duties cover activities such as identifying and then prioritizing unmet needs; awarding grants or entering into other agreements with scientists. Congress has required the Secretary to submit specified reports to Congress or to contract with other entities (e.g., the Institute of Medicine [IOM]), to conduct specified studies. For example, the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ) required FDA to take several actions regarding how it informs the public, expert committees, and others about agency actions and plans, as well as information the agency has developed or gathered about drug safety and effectiveness. FDA issues more than 100 guidances each year. Some Members of Congress have expressed concern with FDA's use of guidance documents in lieu of the rulemaking process in certain instances. FFDCA Section 701(a) provides FDA with the authority to promulgate regulations for the enforcement of the FFD CA. The agency prepares guidance documents "primarily for industry, but also for other stakeholders and its own staff," according to FDA's website, and uses them to address such matters as the design, manufacturing, and testing of regulated products. commonly referred to as the Common Rule because the same requirements have been adopted by many other federal departments and agencies. Research protocols must be approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) to ensure that the rights and welfare of research subjects are protected. FDA has issued its own set of Human Subject Regulations, which are similar, but not identical, to the Common rule. FDA applies these regulations to all the research it regulates, including clinical trials of new drugs and medical devices, regardless of the source. FDA regulatory authority over medical product safety and effectiveness covers drugs, biological products, and medical devices. The agency generally divides responsibilities for the review of marketing applications in its product-centered offices. The House provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress on workforce planning and certain specified elements with regard to the FDA. Unlike the Senate bill, the House provision wouldn't require a GAO study with regards to FDA workforce. The Senate bill would not require aGAO study on FDA workforce planning. required." Unlike the Senate bill, the House provision would state a sense of Congress that the new streamlined data review program "should enable the Food and Drug Administration to make approval decisions for certain supplemental applications" The provision would require that the FDA Commissioner issue implementation guidance for the new program. The House provision also would allow the Commissioner to issue regulations for implementation. The Food and drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ) required FDA to take several actions regarding the program. Current requirement is that funds received from the Treasury be held in separate accounts. The provision would change the requirement, so that funds would be "managed as individual programmatic funds, according to best accounting practices" The House bill provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle P, Section 2283, "Reagan-Udall Foundation for the Food and Drug Administration") is the same as the Senate bill. The Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA, 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35) was enacted in 1986. determination of the safety and efficacy of a limited population antibacterial drug "reflects the benefit-risk profile of the drug in the intended limited population" Products approved using this pathway must carry prominent labeling noting the intended use for a limited and specific population of patients. Sponsors must submit promotional materials to FDA for review 30 days prior to dissemination. This provision should not be construed to alter current prescribing or other medical practices (such as off-label prescribing). Other elements of the review pathway were found only in the House provision. million people become infected with bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics, and at least 23,000 of them die from these infections. Addressing barriers to antibiotic drug approval may help counter this problem. One such proposal is the so-called Limited Population Antibacterial Drug (LPAD) approval pathway for new antibacterial drugs. Such a pathway would involve smaller clinical trials in a limited population of patients that have serious or life-threatening infections and unmet medical needs due to the lack of an effective approved antibiotic. biologics) intended for use in limited, defined populations of patients that have severe, life-threatening infections. Some elements of the review pathway proposed in the House bill are comparable to those in the Senate bill, for example. The Secretary could consider limited data sets and non-clinical data as substantial evidence of safety and effectiveness, recognizing the smaller populations available for study of an LPAD drug, and the different balance of benefit and harm. The bill would require the Secretary to report back to Congress by the end of the year. Section 3 would create new FFDCA Section 506(g), "Limited population pathway for antibacterial drugs" This review pathway would allow the Secretary to approve an antibacterial drug as an LPAD drug if certain conditions are met. Section 4 states that S. 185 should not be construed to alter current prescribing or other medical practices. The House bill contains a comparable provision (Title II, Subtitle G, Section 2121, "Approval of Certain Drugs for Use in a Limited Population of Patients" of limited population antibacterial drugs." It would also require the Secretary to provide advice to the sponsor regarding the approval of an LPAD drug. Section 3 would require the secretary to report to Congress at least every two years on the number of requests for approval. It also would require GAO to report on the coordination of monitoring activities required by S. 185. The legislation would allow the Secretary of Health and Human Services to remove any post-marketing conditions (e.g., labeling requirements) S. 2030 would define genetically targeted drugs, genetically targeted technology, and variant protein-targeted drugs. New Section 529A should not be construed to limit the Secretary's product approval authorities, or to entitle sponsors to obtain information in another sponsor's application without permission of the other sponsor. H.R. 6 would add a new Subchapter J, Precision Medicine, to Chapter V of the FFDCA; this subchapter would include a new Section 592, "Precision medicine" drugs to address an unmet medical need in one or more patient subgroups, including subgroups of patients with different mutations of a gene. This legislation would authorize the Secretary to allow the sponsor of a new drug application for a genetically targeted drug or a variant protein-targeted drug to rely on data and information that has been previously developed and submitted, either by the same or a different sponsor (with permission) for a drug that incorporates or utilizes the same genetically targeted technology or for a similar drug. individuals based on specific patient characteristics. This approach relies on companion diagnostics to target drugs and biological products to specific subsets of patients. Rare diseases often have genetic origins, and advances in medicine have resulted in the development of new treatments that work by targeting genetic mutations that cause the disease. It is inherently difficult to develop drugs for rare diseases because of the small patient population available to conduct clinical trials, so targeted therapies are generally first developed for patients with the most frequent disease-causing mutations. additional targeted therapies would need to be developed. Targeted therapies, because they may be treating small subsets of patients, sometimes qualify as "orphan drugs" Such drugs are called orphan drugs because firms may lack the financial incentives to sponsor products to treat small patient populations. Orphan drugs receive their designation pursuant to FFDCA Section 526(a), a designation that was created by the Orphan Drug Act ( P.L. 97-414 ) to encourage firms to develop pharmaceuticals to treat rare diseases and conditions. States. Since the law's passage, FDA has approved over 400 new orphan drugs and biological products. Incentives for sponsors of orphan drugs include seven years of market exclusivity, tax credits for clinical trial expenses, user fee waivers, and federal grants to cover costs of qualified clinical testing expenses. The FFDCA contains provisions to grant market exclusives for statutorily defined time periods (in months or years) to the holder of the NDA for a product that is used in the treatment of a rare disease or condition. Section 5 of the Orphan Drug Act (21 U.S.C. 360ee) allows the Secretary to make grants to assist in "defraying the costs of qualified clinical testing expenses incurred in connection with the development of drugs for rare diseases and conditions" This provision would expand the definition of qualified testing to include "prospectively planned and designed observational studies and other analyses" H.R. 6 would also expand the use of grants to include but not be limited to qualified testing expenses. The Orphan Drug Act of 1983 ( P.L. 97-414 ) was signed into law to incentivize development of drugs to treat rare diseases. The House bill contains an identical provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle E, Section 2083, "Finalizing Draft Guidance on Expanded Access"). The provision would require that the final guidance "clearly define how the Secretary of Health and Human Services interprets and uses adverse drug event data reported by investigators" condition under section 505(i) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (or regulations issued under such section); (ii) which occurs after the date such drug is designated under section 526 of such Act, and before the date on which an application with respect to such drugs is submitted under such Act; and (B) preclinical testing involving a drug. Preclinical testing involves a drug that has not been approved for use in the United States by the Food and Drug Administration. Contains a related provision (Section 2151. Extension of Exclusivity Periods for a Drug Approved for a New Indication for a Rare Disease or Condition) Unlike the Senate bill which would broaden the use of grants for development of rare diseases, the House provision would add a new FFDCA Section 505I. This would add six months to the exclusivity period of an approved drug already on the market when FDA approves a supplemental application for that drug for a new indication to prevent, diagnose, or treat a rare disease or condition. The new FFDCA Section 592 would allow the Secretary to do two things. The Secretary would be allowed to rely on information about a drug or biological product that has been previously submitted. Section 1028 of H.R. 6 (Title I, Subtitle B) addresses high-risk, high-reward research. But it would not establish OT authority, nor would it would would it establish expedited-approval-programs (OTs) or rely on previously submitted information. of an application. This may be for either a new product, or for a different indication for an existing product. Second, in contrast to the Senate bill, it would allow the Secretary to consider the application for expedited review programs, including accelerated approval. Similar to S. 2030 , new Section 592 should not be construed to limit the Secretary's product approval authorities, or to entitle sponsors to obtain information in another sponsor's application without permission. FDASIA ( P.L. 112-144 ) expanded FDA's authorities and strengthened the agency's ability to safeguard and advance public health. For a drug whose active ingredient has never been FDA-approved, the law requires the sponsor to submit a new drug application. FDA requires that the manufacturer submit a supplemental NDA each time the manufacturer wants to change the labeling, the manufacturing process, or the dosing, or when it wants to add a new indication (a new intended use) of the drug. For more information, visit 21 C.F.R. Regulations at 21C.FR.Regulations.org.  Phase II trials include more participants (about 100-300) who have the disease or condition that the product potentially could treat. In Phase III trials, the drug is studied in a larger number of participants with the disease (approximately 1,000-3,000) This phase further tests the product's effectiveness, monitors side effects and, in some cases, compares the drug's effects to a standard treatment, if one is already available. As more and more participants are tested over longer periods of time, the less common side effects are more likely to be revealed. National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) may develop and provide infrastructure and resources for all phases of clinical trials research. NCATS may support clinical trial activities through the end of Phase IIB for a treatment for a rare disease or condition if it gives public notice. Section 11 of S. 2742 would extend NCATS's authority to support clinical trials through the start of Phase III. The Senate passed the bill on a vote of 50-0, with one Democrat joining the Republicans. bill would add material to the NCATS annual/biennial report regarding methods and tools developed since the last report. The next NCATS report, following enactment, would include a complete list of all such tools developed by research supported by NCATS. The NDCATS Phase IIB Restriction provision in H.R. 6 Section 1027 is comparable to S. 2742 . The House provision would extend NCATS's authority to support clinical trial activities through the end of Phase IIA. CLIA requires laboratories to receive certification before they are allowed to carry out clinical laboratory testing on a human sample. CLIA certification is based on the level of complexity of testing that a laboratory is performing, graded as low, moderate, or high. Laboratories that perform only low-complexity tests (called waived tests ) receive a certificate of waiver (COW) from CMS. Conversely, only laboratories certified to do so may may test on human samples. FDA is responsible for categorizing clinical laboratory tests according to theirlevel of complexity. FDA determines whether a test is waived (i.e., low-complexity) or not based on information submitted by the manufacturer. Under current law, waived tests are those "that have been approved by FDA for home use or that have an insignificant risk of an erroneous result" The guidance recommends ways to demonstrate that atest is both "simple" and has "an insignificant risk" of an "erroneous" result. Demonstrating the test is simple is one way to prove that it is not too complex. reconsidered if reconsideration is requested within 30 days of the denial and other specified criteria are met. The House provision does not specify the number of business days in which FDA would "disclose to the sponsor" in advance of any consultation concerning the sponsor's device. The provision adds specific details regarding efficient clinical trial design, such as "the adoption of shorter or smaller clinical trials, application of surrogate endpoints, and use of adaptive trial," according to the House provision. It also adds details regarding "the use ofadaptive trial design" FDA may enter into written agreement with the sponsor to define the process and data needed to review the limited population use application. The process must adhere to existing goals and procedures agreed upon by sponsors and FDA in the Prescription Drug User Fee Amendments of 2012 ( P.L. 112-144 , Title I). The House provision would require the Secretary to conduct and publish an assessment of the program within 48 months of enactment, and to seek public input. It also would allow the secretary to allow the public to participate in the process. systems compliance." The Secretary would be required to "disclose to the sponsor, not less than 5 business days in advance the topics of any consultation concerning the sponsor's device" The secretary would be allowed to, as appropriate, "coordinate with the sponsor regarding early agreement on a data development plan" The Secretary also would be able to ensure that clinical trial design is as efficient as practicable and would be can facilitate "expedited and efficient development" of new drugs and treatments for cancer and other conditions. terminologies and code sets are used, to the extent possible, to facilitate electronic data matching. Within 90 days of enactment, the Secretary would be required to seek the advice of relevant stakeholders and experts on enhancements to the clinical trial registry data bank that are necessary to implement the provision. Section 1121 of H.R. 6 would instruct the Secretary to enter into a seven-year cooperative agreement, contract, or grant—the Clinical Trial Data System Agreement—with one or more. The Secretary wouldbe required to begin implementation of the provision within 18 months of enactment. expanded access is limited by an important factor: whether the manufacturer agrees to provide the drug, which cannot be obtained otherwise. FDA does not have the authority to compel a manufacturer to participate. Manufacturers may consider several factors in deciding whether to provide an investigational drug, such as available supply, perceived liability risk, limited staff and facility resources, and need for data to assess safety and effectiveness. The provision would add a new FFDCA Section 561A, "Expanded Access Policy Required for Investigational Drugs" would become effective on the later of the date that is 60 days after the enactment of S. 2700 or "the first initiation of a phase 2 or phase 3 study ... with respect to such investigational drug" The House bill contains a comparable provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle E, Section 2082, "Expanded Access Policy"). FFDCA Section 561(b) allows a person, acting through a licensed physician, to request a manufacturer or distributor of an investigational product to provide that product. Under certain circumstances, FDA may permit the sponsor to provide an unapproved or unlicensed product to patients outside that standard regulatory framework. One such mechanism is expanded access to investigational drugs, commonly referred to as "compassionate use" If excluded from a clinical trial because of its enrollment limitations, a person, acting through a physician, may request access to an investigational new drug outside of the trial. The widespread use of drugs and biological products is expected to continue for years to come. Policy would include contact information for the manufacturer or distributor of the drug, request procedures, and anticipated time to acknowledge request receipts. New section would state that posting of policy would not guarantee patients access to an investigational drug. The provision would also allow a manufacturer or Distributor to revise its policy at any time. This provision would require a manufacturer to make its policies on responding to compassionate use requests publicly available. It would also require the manufacturer to provide a list of criteria it will use to evaluate such requests for individual patients. of the eligible entity to ensure that registered users disseminate the results of their research; and evidence demonstrating that the eligible entities has a proven track record of protecting confidential data. FDA uses the data from clinical trials to determine whether to approve a manufacturer's application for marketing a medical product. Clinical trials are conducted in three phases. Phase I trials try to determine dosing, document how a drug is metabolized. Phase II trials document how the drug is administered. Phase III trials document the drug's effects on the body. Sections 314.50 and 314.54 describe the required contents of those applications. Regarding clinical data, the regulations direct the applicant to submit, in addition to descriptions and analysis of controlled and uncontrolled clinical studies, (iv) A description and analysis. of any other data or information relevant to an evaluation of the safety and effectiveness of the drug product obtained or otherwise received by the applicant from any source, foreign or domestic, including information derived from clinical investigations, including controlled and controlled studies of uses other than those proposed in the application. eligible entities (i.e., tax-exempt academic institutions) to implement a pilot program to enable registered users to conduct further research on reported clinical trial data. Eligible entities seeking funding would have to submit an application that contains certain specified information, including a description of the system the eligible entity will use to store and maintain such data. The eligible entity must also prove that it will allow onlyregistered users to access and use de-identified clinical trialData. The application must also include evidence demonstrating the ability to compile clinical trial Data in standardized formats.

ROUGE-1: 79.43, ROUGE-2: 74.20, ROUGE-L: 20.31
BERTScore: 53.13

==============================================
==================== [85/100] ====================
Summary:
days from its date. At that time, we will send copies to Representative Eva Clayton, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Department Operations, Oversight, Nutrition, and Forestry, House Committee on Agriculture. We will also send them to Senator Richard Lugar, Chairman, and Senator Tom Harkin, Ranking Member, Senate committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry. We are also sending them to Representative Larry Combest, Chairman of the House Agriculture Committee, and Representative Charles Stenholm, Ranking minority Member, House committee on agriculture. and Representative Janice Schakowski, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Government Efficiency, Financial Management and Intergovernmental Relations. We will also send copies to the Honorable Ann M. Veneman, Secretary of Agriculture; the Hon honorable Mitchell E. Daniels, Jr., Director, Office of Management and Budget; and other interested parties. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. Should you have any questions on matters discussed in this report, please contact me at (202) 512-6257 or Stephen A. Schwartz, Senior Assistant Director, at (Washington, D.C.) 512-6213. out to the Superintendent of Documents. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders by mail: U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Orders by visiting: Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list, call (202) 512-6000. from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. Web site: http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/f fraudnet.htm e-mail: fraudnet@gaO.gov 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system) or call the toll-free number at (1-800) 456-6000. By the December 18 deadline, the CBAs had successfully established a common Internet Web site. However, none of the 100-plus RD forms that theCBAs expected to have deployed on the Web site by the deadline were available. OMB had not approved these forms because some forms appeared to be for the department’s internal use, did not have clear and user-friendly instructions, or did not include forms instructions that conformed to the format standard established by OMB and the USDA. implementing all the separate e-file activities. purchased an on-line common forms software tool for selected a total of 219 forms (57 from FSA, 6 from NRCS, and 156 from RD) coordinated with OMB to develop a user-friendly format and are working to obtain OMB approval for each new electronic form. designed and is implementing a common Internet Web site that can utilize a single Internet address to provide user access with common search and retrieval functions for all forms. tool for creating electronic forms, selected forms to post on the Web, and designed and begun implementing a common Internet Web site. CBAs still need to obtain OMB approval for each electronic form, complete testing of the Web page, train county-based field staff in the new e-file procedures, publicize the department’s e- file services, and notify the public on how to use them. The CBAs progress in meeting the E-File Act's December 18 deadline was discussed in a report to Congress on December 22, 2000. As of December 31, 2000, RD had not resubmitted any of its forms for OMB review. A marketing brochure, being developed by the CBAs, was still in production at the end of December 2000. CBAs decided not to issue any press releases publicizing the new e-file Web site. Training needs for service center employees were minimal at this phase of the project. informational directives on the new program were provided to employees in lieu of giving them training. Fully meeting all able to file paperwork electronically with USDA if they choose to do so. RMA administers the federal crop insurance program, which helps protect producers against losses due to drought, flooding, and other unavoidable causes. By December 1, 2000, it was to submit to Congress a plan for enabling producers to obtain forms and information, such as crop insurance applications and production and yield reports, over the Internet. Implementation of the plan is to be completed by December 1,. 2001. The Freedom to E-File Act requires that by 2003, federal agencies provide the public, where practicable, the option of submitting, maintaining, or disclosing. In response to the E-File Act, RMA began work on the required December 1, 2000, plan for allowing agricultural producers the option of obtaining, over the Internet from approved insurance providers, all forms and other information. RMA’s initial efforts focused on establishing and distributing guidelines and policies for crop insurance providers to follow in meeting their e-file responsibilities. USDA has not assigned a senior-level official with overall responsibility, authority, and accountability for managing and managing the program. Conservation Service (NRCS), and Rural Development (RD) mission area--hereafter referred to collectively as County- based Agencies (CBAs), and the Risk Management Agency (RMA) to establish an electronic filing and retrieval system. Provides separate requirements for the CBAs and RMA. an Internet-based system enabling agricultural producers to access all forms and shall submit to Congress a report that describes the progress made. Not later than June 20, 2002, the system shall be expanded to enable producers toaccess and file all forms. remaining e-file mandates to successfully establish effective and secure electronic filing capabilities by June 2002 poses far more complex and difficult tasks for USDA. USDA officials working on these activities believe that these tasks can be accomplished by the December 18 deadline. establishing full e-government services across a broad range of USDA building in solutions that also address GPEA and OMB requirements. reengineering numerous existing programs and systems, using multiple electronic submission processes to accommodate various categories of agency customers. designing and investing in technology to securely connect service center agencies to customers. E-File Act requires USDA to continue providing services in the traditional way to customers who choose not to use the Internet. CBAs must support dual service delivery functions--one electronic and one paper-based. identified how much funding and staff resources will be needed to fully implement the act. The E- File Act provides that the Secretary is to reserve, from applicable accounts of the CBAs, not more than $3 million for fiscal year 2001 and $2 million for each year after that.  USDA agreed that it had problems meeting the act’s initial December 18, 2000, deadline for deploying electronic forms on the Internet. USDA said that it fully supports the spirit and intent, as well as the legal mandates, of the e-file act. We continue to believe that having a senior-level official vested with sufficient accountability and authority is important to the success of USDA's e- file implementation efforts. USDA also stated that successful implementation of the act will require continued funding, along with ensured ensured. recommend that the Secretary direct the assigned senior official to include both e-file and GPEA requirements in the department’s comprehensive plan to help better coordinate actions across USDA agencies. We recommend that this official provide quarterly reports to the Secretary describing the results of USDA's efforts to implement each of these actions and all e- file requirements. On November 8, 2000, we provided a copy of our unclear whether the department planned to implement our recommendation for assigning a senior-level official with overall e-File responsibility, authority, and accountability. understanding and support of the USDA’s programs or “owners” of the business being transformed. USDA agreed with our recommendation for making RD forms available on the Internet as soon as possible. The department also agreed that comprehensive plans must be developed for implementing the Freedom to E-File Act and GPEA. However, the department stopped short of describing the extent to which its comprehensive plan will include all the detailed steps we recommended or what the department's time frame is for completing it. document a comprehensive plan for implementing all E-File Act requirements. In developing the department’s comprehensive plan, we further recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture direct the assigned senior official to document and track all critical activities and milestones. The plan should clearly describe all project tasks, their priorities, and time frames and milestones for their completion. We also implementing all the separate activities to ensure that critical tasks are completed on time and within budget and that all federal mandates are met. USDA has also not yet developed and documented a comprehensive e-file implementation plan. The Secretary of Agriculture issued a memorandum to the undersecretaries of the affected agencies and assigned them and mission area leaders with collective responsibility. The Secretary’s memorandum also required that one shared plan be developed and implemented to meet E-File Act requirements. The Office of Chief Information Officer (OCIO) was given the role of coordinating and facilitating e-file implementation planning and required that the plan be submitted to OCIO no later than September 30, 2000. The report, which included two separate sections covering the CBAs and RMA, provides general information on USDA activities to address e- file requirements. “Mission Area Report on Freedom to E-File Legislation” to OCIO on October 17, 2000. It lacked specifics on activities and milestones, dependencies among USDA activities, and needed resources. It also did not assign a senior-level official with overall accountability for managing and ensuring the implementing disparate e-file activities. To address their e- file requirements, the CBAs had two separate interagency teams working together to meet the act’s December 18, 2000, deadline. information--such as employment records, tax forms, and loan applications-- electronically, instead of on paper. On the basis of guidance issued by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), agencies are preparing plans for implementing GPEA, including the use of electronic signatures. Secretary issued a memorandum to the undersecretaries for the affected agencies, requiring that one shared plan be developed and implemented to meet E- File Act requirements and the plan be submitted to Office of Chief Information Officer (OCIO) no later than September 30, 2000.  implementing full e-filing capabilities for all its farm service customers by the deadlines set by the act poses a far more complex and difficult challenge. A component critical to the success of any such initiative is the necessary authority and responsibility to manage it across different departmental entities. To ensure that USDA fully meets its E-File Act mandates, we recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture assign a senior-level official with overall responsibility, authority, and accountability for managing and carrying out implementation for both CBAs and RMA E- File Act requirements. USDA’s CBAs provide services such as farm loans and conservation assistance. Under the E- File Act, these agencies were required to establish an electronic filing and retrieval system by December 18, 2000. The law further mandated that by June 20, 2002, agricultural producers be able to access departmental forms via the Internet. The Secretary of Agriculture was also to report to Congress by that date on progress made in implementing the act, according to the law. The deadline for establishing the forms-retrieval system was December 18.

ROUGE-1: 66.18, ROUGE-2: 62.83, ROUGE-L: 27.96
BERTScore: 50.51

==============================================
==================== [86/100] ====================
Summary:
its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its date. At that time, we will send copies to the Secretaries of Homeland Security, Agriculture, Army, and Defense and interested Congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me on (202) 512-9142. for the quarter does not exceed $10,000. No payment is required for imported cargo that is entitled to be entered under informal entry procedures. Jessica Nierenberg, Kathleen Padulchick, and Amy Rosewarne made key contributions to all aspects of the report. Jay Cherlow, Chelsa Gurkin, Terrance N. Horner, Alessandra Rivera, and Jack Warner also provided assistance. In addition, Pedro Briones and Carlos Diz provided legal support and Donna Miller developed the report’s graphics. outside of GAO, with CBP and Corps officials, and with outside stakeholders, in order to choose ports. We also considered travel costs in selecting the site visits. In light of the significant amount of ongoing audit work in the Gulf region, and because other ports in our selection are representative, we also considered other sites in the region as well. We chose ports that varied in their type and volume of trade and commerce (including cruise lines, container ships, petroleum products, and liquefied natural gas) The ports we selected include medium and large ports, natural deepwater ports, and those that require frequent dredging. We visited the ports of Boston, Massachusetts; Charleston, South Carolina; Newark, New Jersey/New York, New York; Baltimore, Maryland; Miami, Florida; Port Everglades, Florida. At these ports, we observed passenger, vessel, and cargo inspections, and interviewed officials from CBP and Corps field offices. At each port, we spoke with each port official. Some Corps and CBP officials have established successful, two-way communication practices at the local level. For example, some Corps division offices publicly post survey results and maps showing the controlling depth reports for local harbors and channels. One local Corps official said this practice encourages more dialogue with stakeholders, noting that they will e-mail the office to find out when highlighted areas will be dredged. Several of the CBP field offices hold regular meetings with port stakeholders to share information and address stakeholder concerns. found that the authorized depth was available in the middle of the channel only approximately 35 percent of the time in fiscal year 2005. Although ships continue to use these channels and harbors, not maintaining them to their justified design dimensions can cause problems. For example, according to Corps officials in one port we visited, some vessels are delayed because they have to wait for high tide in order to pass through the channels. They also reported instances where ships skipped a port of call altogether if such a delay was reported. The authorized depth of the Port of Georgetown is 27 feet, but the channel has silted in to 25 feet on numerous occasions over the past several years. With the channel at only 25 feet, a company bringing in rock for the regional construction industry can only bring in about 24,000 tons per vessel. They said that this “light-loading” of vessels significantly drives up its operating cost and impacts construction costs. The 2007 CMTS report found that channel at 27 feet was safe. would have caused the ship to miss its scheduled appointment at the Panama Canal. These types of disruptions affect both regional commerce and port profits. A 2007 report by the U.S. Committee on the Marine Transportation System (CMTS) found that vessels often deal with the challenges of poorly dredged and maintained channels and harbors by “light loading,” i.e., loading less cargo than their full capacity. This in turn increases shipping costs. If a port is not well maintained, it may lack the capacity to handle increasingly larger vessels and therefore lose business. limitations may lead to unsafe conditions and interaction with other vessels. A full oil tanker ran aground in East Rockaway, New York, in 2006 due in part to a lack of maintenance. Corps officials said the Corps now uses a performance-based budgeting model to set harbor maintenance priorities. As part of this effort, the Corps is developing a national estimate of the cost to make the 59 busiest channels available to commercial vessels and other vessels in the U.S., officials said. The cost of making the channels available is expected to be in the region of $1 billion. Ineffective and outdated collection methods for vessel inspection fees increase administrative costs for both agencies and payers. Lack of coordination between the Corps and CBP inhibits oversight of HMF payments for passenger vessels, domestic shipments, and shipments into foreign trade zones. CBP accepts electronic payment for these fees along with customs duties, which are typically paid by a customs broker on behalf of an importer. Treasury’s Financial Management Service has made it a priority to increase the use of electronic collection methods. Customs brokers say the system works well, is efficient, and imposes minimal administrative costs. It is less costly for the government and payers of the fee for CBP to collect the fee as part of the formal entry process than it would be for the Corps or another entity to establish a new collections process. CBP already values cargo for the assessment of duties, so there is no duplication of effort. Further, when CBP conducts audits on the value of cargo to determine if the declared value of the goods is. itself to delayed remittance and potential errors that can result in revenue losses. The extent and nature of the link between HMF collections and expenditures are policy choices only Congress can make. Unless agencies present a comprehensive picture of the customs, immigration, and AQI fees, including the full scope of inspection activities and their costs, Congress will continue to lack a complete picture of whether the fees work in concert or conflict with each other, could hamper oversight. Furthermore, agencies will be less able to develop and maintain the partnerships necessary to collect and distribute the fees. Officials say they are taking steps to begin collecting interest on past and future late payments. They estimate interest collections for last year to be about $182,000; they do not yet have an estimate for annual penalties. CBP’s Regulatory Audits division has not conducted any audits specific to the HMF since 1996; rather, the fee is audited incidentally during the course of audits related to other fees or duties. Although the fee has not been audited since 1996, it has been in existence for more than 20 years. that monthly payments would increase the administrative costs to the cruise lines, but that if a steadier supply of funding helped CBP to provide better service, it would be worthwhile. Insufficient coordination between CBP and the Corps inhibits CBP’s ability to ensure that certain HMF payments are properly made. Without this information CBP cannot verify compliance with the fee. According to Corps officials, the Corps gathers information on domestic vessel movements. CBP could provide this information to the Corps. does not systematically review late or improper HMF payments for passenger vessels, domestic shippers, and shipments into foreign trade zones. CBP reviewed recent payment history and found that 42 percent of payments—representing approximately 18 percent of the total dollar value—were late. According to CBP officials said that CBP should be tracking and assessing interest and penalties on these late payments. The CBP’s Revenue Division does not track whether theseHMF payments are paid on time or late. correct, CBP also determines if the correct amount was paid for HMF and MPF. Because these are ad valorem fees, if the value of the goods is understated, additional HMF or MPF fees may be due. All of the fees we reviewed suffer from some misalignment, which affects how the fees are used. Similar to the airline passenger inspection fees, not all authorized, reimbursable activities for the sea passenger and vessel inspection customs fees are associated with these fees. CBP does not request and the Corps does not share information with CBP on these types of domestic freight movements. An official from CBP’s Revenue Division said if CBP had information on freight movements it could reconcile them to HMF payments. The Revenue Division receives this type of “front-end reporting” for other, similar fees, the official said. It is one of the best ways to establish a receivable and ensure proper payment, he said. The official said CBP could monitor compliance rather than relying on self-reported payer information. date, the commercial vessel fees may still only be paid in person by check or cash. Payers must retain each paper payment receipt and present them at each entry so that CBP can determine whether that particular vessel has reached the annual fee cap. If a payer misplaces the receipt proving that the vessel has reach the fee cap, the fee must be paid. The payer may request a refund if the receipt is later found, although several stakeholders told us this process is lengthy and burdensome. Some stakeholders and CBP field office staff expressed frustration. that although the ad valorem structure of the HMF makes it relatively easy to administer, it raises concerns about equity. They noted there is no link between the value of their cargo and the depth or width of the harbor needed by the ship on which it is carried. For example, importers of high-value goods, such as natural gas and pharmaceuticals, told us they essentially pay a much greater share of dredging costs. Stakeholders said that a ship’s size and draft combined with harbor conditions drive harbor maintenance costs. Some stakeholders say the HMF fee structure does not reflect the individual dredging needs of ports. Other stakeholders noted that a benefit of the ad valorem structure is that it may better reflect the users’ ability to pay. The overall cost of moving goods through the nation’s marine transportation system is artificially high. On the other hand, applying the fee equally could reduce the cost of shipping goods through U.S. ports by as much as 50 percent, according to some estimates. to all eligible ports offers a relatively simple collection mechanism and helps to create a level playing field for all ports. Even so, officials from ports located near international borders told us the HMF disadvantages them relative to nearby foreign ports. For example, Seattle Port Authority officials consider theHMF to be a “punitive assessment” because they said it decreases Seattle’s competitiveness against Canadian ports (which do not charge the fee). These officials said that the Port of Vancouver actively promotes itself as not charging the HMf. Whether the fee is based on the value of the cargo (ad valorem) or on the size and draft of the ship is a separate decision from whether fees should vary by the dredging needs and condition of a given port. Congress could decide to impose a uniform fee structure at all ports even if it chooses to change the design of that fee from ad valorem to one based on a ship’s size or draft. Stakeholders expect that inspections will be conducted at all U.S. ports. Total collections grew 101 percent from $704 million to $1.416 billion from 2001 to 2007. Corps officials told us this was driven by the ad valorem nature of the fee. Annual harbor maintenance project expenditures, which are subject to annual appropriation, grew by more than 20 percent from 2001-2007. In 2001 HMF collections exceeded expenditures by about $44 million, and by 2007 that gap had grown to over $506 million (see fig. 4). There are several reasons why growth in collections has outpaced growth in expenditures. more slowly—from $660 million in 2001 to $910 million in 2007 (38 percent) The difference between the amount collected and the amount expended has led to a growing balance in the HMTF. Since 1996, the President has included in his annual budget requests and Congress has appropriated $3 million from the HM TF. Between fiscal years 2001 and 2007, the balance grew from $1.8 billion to $3.7 billion. Corps officials told us they expect it to reach $8 billion in fiscal year 2011 (see fig. 5). Since 2003, HMF collections have significantly exceeded funds appropriated for harbor maintenance. This may be inconsistent with users’ expectations of the fee’s purpose. Congress should consider reviewing the link between the amount of the HMF and the amounts of expenditures for the harbor maintenance program. Such a framework could also provide the basis for future reviews of federal user fees as Congress works to ensure that user fee financing mechanisms remain relevant and up-to-date. It could help clarify and illuminate the tradeoffs associated with various policy choices available to Congress. to compensate CBP for costs associated with collecting the fee. CBP finance officials told us that they estimate the annual cost of collecting the HMF to be approximately $2 million. Officials at the Corps and CBP were unable to explain why the President’s budget request for this activity was higher than the estimated cost. The HMF is not assessed on domestic cargo valued at less than $1,000. quarterly payment is not required if the total value of all shipments for which a fee was assessed. Corps’ annual report to Congress on the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. Annual budget request for CBP-related salaries and expenses equal to, rather than in excess of, CBP’s actual costs associated with collecting the HMF. We provided a draft of this report to the Secretaries of Homeland Security and Defense, and to the Acting Secretary of Agriculture for review. We received written comments from the Department of. Homeland Security (DHS), which are reprinted in appendix III, and oral comments from. Agriculture (USDA) and Defense (DOD). In addition, each agency provided technical comments, which we incorporated as offsetting changes elsewhere—will increase the federal deficit. Despite large and growing balances in the harbor maintenance trust fund, there is a backlog of harbor maintenance, which can result in costly delays. A recent Corps analysis of the 59 busiest commercial federal channels in the U.S. found that harbor maintenance was lacking in many of the busiest channels. decisions about changing the HMF should consider its continued relevance and relative priority within the context of reexamining the base of all major federal spending and tax programs. Fee, and Agricultural Quarantine Inspection (AQI) User Fees. In selecting the fees, we reviewed relevant policy and economic literature, interviewed user fee experts, and examined Office of Management and Budget data on user charges. We chose these fees because they are levied upon port users, and are related to maritime, safety, and homeland security programs. Additionally, we chose them because they vary in their key design characteristics, specifically in the way in which they are set, collected, used, and reviewed. implementation characteristics. We interviewed officials responsible for managing the selected user fees. To select the ports that we visited, we consulted with port security experts from within and outside of the U.S. We also spoke with officials from the Army Corps of Engineers and the Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) We also interviewed officials from Customs and Border Protection (CBP) offices in Washington, D.C. to get a sense of how the fees are managed. GAO examined the Harbor Maintenance Fee (HMF), Merchandise Processing Fee (MPF), Customs Inspection Fees, Immigration User Fees. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix IV. Last page of this report. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Congress does not have a comprehensive view of the vessel and passenger AQI, customs, and immigration inspection fees and how they work together, says GAO. GAO: Agencies with shared responsibilities for common outcomes or related functions should reinforce agency accountability for collaborative efforts through common planning and reporting. DHS has acknowledged that the challenges described in our previous work extend beyond air passenger inspections to other fees managed by the agency, the GAO says. The GAO reviewed collections and cost data for each of the fees, data on balances in fee statutes required the establishment of advisory committees consisting of industry representatives to advise the agency on issues related to inspection services, including fee levels. The committee members represent entities subject to the fees, including airlines, airports, cruise lines, and industry associations. We recently reported that stakeholders felt that the advisory committee provided only limited opportunities for substantive two-way communication. As a result, they said they lack data to support their concerns. We are happy to clarify that the committee meets biannually and that the fees are subject to change. user fees supporting the sea passenger and vessel inspections processes. Further, we recommend that the Secretaries of Homeland Security and the Army direct CBP and the Corps to improve oversight of the HMF collections by working together to develop a method for the corps to provide information on domestic vessel movements to CBP. Information on CBP’s costs to collect and administer theHMF, for inclusion in the CBP Office of Regulatory Audit, should be considered in the context of CBP's risk-based system for selecting audit candidates. exceed funds appropriated for harbor maintenance, resulting in a large and growing surplus in the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund (HMTF) Corps officials and port stakeholders assert that many federally managed channels are undermaintained. The customs inspection activities and the authorized uses for the customs passenger and vessel fee collections are misaligned. For example, under the customs authorizing statute, passenger inspection fee collections only available to reimburse appropriations for a limited, prioritized set of activities. The U.S. Customs Service is responsible for the inspection and processing of passengers and cargo at ports around the world. Customs inspection-related activities that occur while a CBP officer is earning overtime or premium pay, or during preclearance, can be funded by the user fees. The same activities conducted during regular time cannot be funding by the fee. Not all customs inspection activities are reimbursable (i.e., can be covered by funds from the user fee account). Moreover, use of the customs vessel and sea passenger fee collections is not restricted to vessel. It is not limited to vessel collections. formal vehicle for payers of the HMF and other port stakeholders to provide input to the Corps. The HMF authorizing legislation did not establish an HMF advisory committee, though it did establish an advisory committee for a similar program that funds new work construction and rehabilitation on inland waterways. The purpose of this Inland Waterways Users Board is to make recommendations on priorities and spending for inland waterway construction and Rehabilitation projects. As we have previously reported, both the customs and immigration passenger inspection programs are under review. advisory committee on the HMF and the activities that it funds, that includes payers of the fee. Develop a legislative proposal, in consultation with Congress, to harmonize the customs, immigration, and agricultural quarantine inspections fees. Raise the cap on customs inspection fees for commercial vessels, in line with the 2007 increase in this fee, so that the cap once again corresponds to a whole number, rather than a single number. eliminate the differences in the way charges for overtime inspections are assessed to commercial vessel operators. CBP officials said that since the events of September 11, 2001, the focus of merchandise processing has shifted toward security and away from the original focus on trade compliance. They said that certain activities associated with merchandise processing and performed by CBP officers are not reimbursable MPF activities. Rather, they may be used to reimburse authorized inspection activities conducted at air, sea, or land ports of entry. Similar alignment issues exist with the MPF. According to CBP officials, certain activities. including screening and inspecting conveyances (including nonintrusive searches), processing seized narcotics, and inspecting vessels and containers. owner/operators, although they may be charged for overtime immigration inspections of vessel crew at some ports. Because regular business hours vary by port, the hours during which an inspector might be working overtime vary. The amount charged depends on the number and pay grade(s) of the officer(s), adding to unpredictability and increasing DHS’s costs to administer the fee. CBP officials said that although charges for overtime inspections make sense, a consistent set of overtime charges for customs, immigration, and agriculture inspections would offer predictability and reduce confusion. Cruise lines, importers, and ships’ agents all said that delays for passenger and vessel inspections are costly to industry. One agent said that a 1-hour delay can cost a carrier $15,000 in longshoreman labor costs. Crew changes cannot occur until a vessel has cleared its immigration inspection. During this time, the ship must pay expenses for two crews. Stakeholders told us that when multiple ships arrive at multiple ports, delays are more likely to occur. In some ports, cargo cannot be unloaded until a ship is cleared. the same time, ships have waited up to 4 hours before being cleared. CBP officials told us that these types of inspection delays are generally caused by staff shortages, outdated or crowded facilities, clustered arrivals, or some combination of these factors. Although the need to address some of the user fee challenges presented in this report may appear obvious, how to accomplish this is less clear. Where appropriate, changes made to one fee should be designed to complement rather than conflict with the other fees. The separate, The passenger and vessel inspection processes in both the air and sea environments have been largely consolidated within CBP. The legacy fees supporting these inspections are still governed by separate, dissimilar authorizing legislation. Unless remedied, differences such as the way overtime charges are assessed for commercial vessel inspections will persist, causing confusion and raising equity concerns, says APHIS. Unless CBP automates its collection methods, requires monthly remittance, and aligns fee rate increases with the annual fee caps, CBP will continue to incur unnecessary administrative costs. than a fraction of payments; revising the customs passenger and vessel inspection fees so that the inspection activities the fees are authorized to fund are more closely aligned with actual inspection activities; and requiring monthly, rather than quarterly, collection of the customs and immigration inspection sea and air passenger fees. Direct CBP to automate its systems for collecting commercial vessel fees to reduce the reliance on paper receipts for tracking payments and to support electronic payments rather than payment by check or cash. DirectCBP to include in its biennial report on the Merchandise Processing Fee information on total program. authorized activities for various fees, CBP must track the time spent on these activities. Because the inspection processes have been largely combined but the separate distinct fees supporting these activities are not uniform, correctly tracking which activities can be reimbursed by which fees can be difficult. In general, the three fees are not levied uniformly, and sometimes involve cross-subsidization (see table 2). For example, although air passengers are charged an AQI fee, sea passengers (generally cruise ship passengers) are not. now structured differently than the AQI vessel fee. According to CBP officials, the quarterly remittance schedule for the passenger inspection fees contributes to a several month delay between the use of appropriated funds and receipt of reimbursement from the immigration and AQI user fee accounts. To address this challenge, CBP told us it has developed a legislative proposal that would, in part, require monthly instead of quarterly remittances. A representative of a cruise line industry association we spoke with noted that the cruise industry has a long-standing relationship with the CBP. In fiscal year 2006, commercial vessel customs inspections fee collections covered about 66 percent of related program costs. DHS does not know the portion of total immigration inspection costs covered by immigration fee collections. Since the fees can pay for only some inspection activities and only under certain circumstances, ensuring proper use of fee collections can require detailed cost data. For example, to be reimbursed for time spent on. immigration inspection and pre-inspection services as well as certain other expenses, at least one of which is not directly related to immigration inspections. immigration inspection fees are structured to recover partial costs. The two statutes actually prescribe an exact amount in law to be charged for their respective inspection services. The customs statute further restricts cost recovery by limiting the set of activities for which collections may reimburse appropriations. The immigration statute makes immigration user fee collections available to refund any appropriation for expenses incurred in the course of an inspection. The fees are not equal or be reasonably related to the cost of services, but they are set to a certain amount. They are meant to limit cost recovery to a sum certain. The AQI vessel fee is paid at the same time as the customs vessel inspection fee. The AQI fee is capped at an amount equaling 15 payments per year. Because the customs fee was increased but the cap was not, the cap is now equal to approximately 13.6 payments. CBP officers must be aware when processing payments that the 14th payment will be for a different amount than the typical fee rate, and that the fee cap is not set in stone. The fee cap for the AQI fees is equal to an amount equal to 15 payments. cruise ships routinely exceed the cap because they arrive in the U.S. far more than 15 times each year. The costs of inspecting sea passengers, fee-exempt vessels, and vessels that have met the annual fee cap are spread among all payers of the AQI vessel fees. As a general rule, the costs of crew inspection are not charged to vessel owners or operators. The cost data that CBP provides to APHIS does not indicate what portion of the $35 million is associated with inspecting cruise ships that have exceeded the fee cap. passengers or vessels. In 2007, APHIS and CBP further improved the AQI cost estimates by agreeing on a common set of assumptions used to forecast the cost of AQI activities. The fee rates are now set to recover all program costs except for certain indirect and imputed costs, such as employee retirement benefits. We recognize that imputed Costs may be more directly linked to the fee-based program. But more transparency in this area could better inform users of the full cost of the program. AQI fees are maintained with a reserve of approximately 3 months worth of program costs in case of emergency. According to APHIS, the reserve is necessary because the AQI program is funded solely through user fee collections. As with similar situations, deciding whether and how to link HMF collections with expenditures is complicated. On the one hand, there are good reasons to consider maintaining a positive balance in the trust fund. But on the other, it can be difficult to determine how to balance the fund. recommendation if it is deemed cost beneficial. We appreciate that DHS recognizes the importance of using cost-effective methods to collect fees. We believe USDA should seek additional authority from Congress consistent with our recommendation. DOD provided oral comments, and concurred with the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the report related to the Army Corps’ Harbor Maintenance Fee. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce it, we will not be able to comment on the report’s findings or conclusions. Of the six recommendations directed at DHS, DHS concurred with five of them and partially concurring with the sixth. DHS characterized the report as balanced and accurate and agreed with the overall substance and findings of the report. The agency will analyze the feasibility of this approach and work to identify and obtain funding to implement the approach, the report says. We also provided portions of theReport to nonfederal stakeholders for their review and made technical corrections as appropriate.appropriate. The report is available on the DHS website. Without regular, substantive fee reviews, agencies, stakeholders, and Congress lack complete information about changing program costs. For example, CBP and APHIS report separately on the customs, immigration, and AQI vessel fees. CBP’s review of the MPF does not detail program costs and project fee collections, or provide enough information to determine if the amount, structure, or authorized uses of the fee administers. Although CBP includes theMPF in its biennial user fee review, there is no timeline for completing that study. In 2006 we reported that financial management issues at CBP and APHIS adversely affect the AQI program’s ability to perform border inspections. In fiscal years 2003 through 2005, user fees were not sufficient to cover program costs. We recommend that the Secretaries of Agriculture and Homeland Security conduct joint reviews of the customs, immigration, and agricultural quarantine inspection fees. We also recommend that CBP include in AQI fees the indirect and imputed costs currently not considered when setting AQI fee rates. federal regulatory process to propose rate increases. Congress has delegated to APHIS the authority and responsibility to set and adjust AQI fee rates to match program costs over time. In contrast, both the immigration and customs fee rates are set in statute. These fees can only recoup authorized program costs to the extent that total reimbursable program costs do not exceed the rate caps prescribed in statute, according to the AQI statute. The Secretary invites comments on its proposals and implementing regulations via a public notice and comment in the Federal Register. Collections relative to total program costs, over time, as well as any recommendations for updating the amount and authorized uses of the fee. Assess interest and penalties on late HMF payments for domestic shipments, shipments into foreign trade zones, and sea passengers. Improve the transparency of the regulatory process of setting the AQI fee rates by providing clearer information about how the rates for each of thefee types are determined. In accordance with OMB Circular No. A-25 guidance and U.S. Department of Agriculture guidance. on motor fuels, tires, and heavy vehicles accrue to the Highway Trust Fund, from which Congress appropriates funds for the interstate highway system, mass transit, and transportation projects. Similarly, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) operations are funded in part by excise taxes assessed on airline tickets, aviation fuel, and certain cargo. Both the Chief Financial Officers (CFO) Act and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-25 provide that agencies review their user fees biennially. in automatically from earmarked taxes or fees and spending must be appropriated. In the 1990s the Highway Trust Fund also built up a surplus. At the time, Congress and the President modified the discretionary spending caps to provide for a separate cap on highway funding. In 1998, Congress specified a more automatic link between spending from the highway Trust Fund and receipts into the Trust Fund. The experience with these annual adjustments, known as Revenue Aligned Budget Authority (RABA), highlights some problems with such links. as the adjustments were positive—when receipts came in below estimated levels and would have resulted in an automatic cut in highway program funding levels, the cut was overridden. A different mechanism is used for the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) prescription drug user fee. If actual FDA fee collections are higher than the amount appropriated, FDA must adjust fee rates in a subsequent year to reduce its anticipated fee collections by that amount. Even if there were a tighter link between collections and expenditures, the HMTF should not necessarily aim for a zero balance. Critics say giving the pharmaceutical industry a role in setting program performance goals creates conflicts of interest. Agencies also need to ensure that all stakeholders are given the opportunity to engage substantively. Some smaller businesses have raised concerns that FAA only consults with selected major airlines and manufacturers, ignoring commuter airlines and smaller businesses also affected by FAA regulations. Many of the stakeholders we spoke with said they were concerned that FAA was not doing enough to consult with smaller businesses and commuter airlines, as well as other stakeholders. necessary to know whether the passenger inspection fees are set fairly or accurately, or are being spent on the appropriate activities. Federal advisory committees play an important role in shaping public policy by providing advice on a wide array of issues. Their advice can enhance the quality and credibility of federal decision making. Despite the strengths associated with the federal advisory committees as a means to facilitate effective stakeholder input, agencies also need to be careful to maintain their mission to promote the public interest and take measures to safeguard against actual or perceived agency misconduct. User financing is one approach to financing federal programs or activities. User fees assign part or all of the costs of the benefits and services derived from these programs and activities to readily identifiable recipients. Some excise taxes, however, can also be described as a form of user financing. For example, the excise taxes on tobacco products can be used to fund the federal government's health care program for the elderly, the disabled, and the elderly in nursing homes. The federal government can also use excise taxes to fund its health care programs. user fees represent a charge for a service or benefit received from a specific government program. Payers may expect a tight link between payments and services, including expectations about the quality of the related service. There are opportunities at the local level for payers to provide input on fees and the services they support. Ineffective communication may reduce stakeholder cooperation and support for the fees, contribute to misunderstandings and confusion about how the fees work and what activities they support, the report says.should be updated. could charge fees for any of its services, noting that if imposing such fees is prohibited or restricted by law, agencies will recommend legislative changes as appropriate. OMB encourages agencies to examine potential effects of design alternatives when reviewing and proposing changes to regulations, even when the regulations are mandated by statute. The user fees considered in this report, are assessed under specific statutory authority and levied on air and sea passengers, vessel operators, or shippers (see app. II for a summary of the fees by payer). The fees vary in the way they are Hand: aligning collections and expenditures can promote economic efficiency and enhance stakeholder support for the fee. On the other hand, increased spending on harbors or reduced fee collections would increase the federal deficit, unless spending in other areas was decreased or other collections or revenues were increased. Hand: Providing guaranteed funding levels to any one activity in the budget protects that activity from competition with other areas for scarce resources and limits Congressional discretion to make trade-offs in spending priorities. Regardless of the approach taken, a reduction in fee receipts or an increase in appropriations—absent a change in appropriations —would increase the deficit. funded activity and more easily calculated than seeking to allocate departmental and staff office costs. “full cost recovery” should be viewed from a governmentwide perspective. Even though USDA would have to deposit those portions of user fee collections as miscellaneous receipts in the general fund of the Treasury, it would still defray a cost that Congress determined should be paid for by the user fees. If USDA believes that the statutory authority does not permit it to cover such indirect and imputed costs, then we believe it should not. information provided is not sufficient to project fee collections or to provide assurance that the amount of the fee is aligned with program costs. CBP cannot reliably project future MPF collections because the agency has not estimated the effects of exemptions, entries made through foreign trade zones, or changes in import demographics. Since fiscal year 2004 collections have increased relative to program costs and in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 collections exceeded costs by a total of approximately $221 million (see fig. 6). CBP has reliable information on the extent to which MPF Collections cover the costs of related activities only for the past few years. CBP’s most recent biennial report notes that a detailed analysis of the current and projected effects of MPF exemptions and an accurate cost estimate for processing merchandise is needed. CBP officials told us that they plan to conduct a detailed review of the MPF in the second phase of a three- phases review of user fees. Agencies can accommodate stakeholder input in various ways. We have previously reported on both the need to accommodate stakeholders input and how agencies can accommodate them. efficiently and effectively as possible. The lack of complete, transparent cost and collections data for the MPF and AQI fees can prevent the agencies from addressing existing issues. If agencies cannot determine the extent to which these fees are recovering costs, Congress cannot be sure that resources are allocated to the activities it most values. The principles of effective user fee design discussed earlier in this report can both offer a framework for considering the implications of various statutory structures and can be used to develop new fee structures.

ROUGE-1: 78.59, ROUGE-2: 72.79, ROUGE-L: 24.10
BERTScore: 52.09

==============================================
==================== [87/100] ====================
Summary:
 NMFS currently inspects approximately 275 domestic seafood facilities that FDA also inspects. FDA does not take into account whether NMFS has already inspected a particular facility when determining how frequently its inspectors should visit that same facility. FDA officials said they do not rely on NMFS in order to satisfy both the USDA and FDA inspectors. At a seafood-processing plant that is inspected by both NMFS and FDA, the manager said that when FDA collects product samples for testing, it does not report test results in a timely fashion. A 1974 agreement between FDA and NMFS recognizes the two agencies’ related responsibilities for inspecting seafood facilities. USDA officials at headquarters said the agency’s inspectors are capable of taking on FDA's inspection responsibilities at jointly regulated facilities. We found that FDA is not using the agreement to minimize its inspections in seafood plants that NMFS has inspected and certified as meeting FDA's safety standards. FDA officials said thegency does not recognize the NMFS inspections as aiding FDA in enforcing pertinent statutes. As a result, FDA is missing opportunities to leverage inspection resources and possibly avoid duplication of effort.  NMFS conducts a fee-for-service inspection, and therefore, FDA officials believe that NMFS could have a conflict of interest because, as a nonregulatory body, it is paid for its services by the industry that it inspects. FDA does not know which firms NMFS is inspecting at any given time. FDA has not used NMFS inspection resources under the terms of the fishery products agreement, nor has the agency used its authority under the Bioterrorism Act to commission NMFS officials. changes, depending on market fluctuations that affect each company’s need for NMFS’ services. FDA officials said that they already have a risk-based system in place to determine which firms to inspect, and at what frequencies. NMFS officials said they maintain an up-to-date inspection report that is up to date and available to the public. The agency also conducts fee-for-service grading and certification of poultry, meat, eggs, and other agricultural commodities. It is similar to USDA's Agricultural Marketing Service.  NMFS is to supply FDA headquarters with a list of all NMFS- inspected processing and packing establishments. FDA is not implementing the agreement, but the agency has recognized the potential benefits of working with NMFS to leverage resources. NMFS readily provided us with a lists of the firms it was inspecting when we spoke with officials during the course of our review. The agreement was most recently revised in January 2005, and includes a number of other items that are not currently being implemented by the FDA. enter into similar agreements with other federal agencies. NMFS officials said the agency would be willing to enter into such an agreement with FDA. Industry associations, food-processing companies, consumer groups, and academic experts we contacted disagree on the significance of overlapping activities in the federal food safety system. Most of these stakeholders agree that the laws and regulations governing the system should be modernized so that science and technological advancements can be used to more effectively and efficiently control current and emerging food safety issues, they say. calls for the agencies to explore the feasibility of granting each other access to appropriate computer-monitoring systems. However, the agencies maintain separate databases, and the inspectors with whom we spoke continue to be largely unaware of a facility’s past history of compliance with the other agency's regulations. Inspectors told us that compliance information might be helpful when inspecting DJEs so that they could focus attention on past violations. Fourth, the agreement calls for the agency to develop and provide appropriate training in the inspectional techniques and processes of each agency. on inspection findings between agencies’ inspection personnel. Lack of a system to track and exchange information when each agency finds instances of noncompliance. Agency efforts to develop and provide training on each other’s inspection techniques and processes did not continue past the first year of the agreement. We continue to believe that the stated purpose of. the agreement—to facilitate an exchange of information permitting more efficient use of. both agencies' resources—has not been maximized. We also found that the agencies' efforts to. develop and provided training onEach other”s inspection methods and processes didn’t continue after the first. year. EPA officials said they had difficulty identifying the agreements they have entered into. Officials also said they are planning to develop an electronic system to identify and track these agreements. EPA said that, if developed, this system could offer one means of tracking and managing information related to, and contained in, interagency agreements. The weaknesses in tracking agreements may also affect the agencies’ ability to determine whether these agreements are still in effect, the report said. The report was published by the Center for American Progress. authorizing FDA to commission other agencies’ officials to conduct FDA’s inspection activities. Other avenues are open to the agencies as well. For example, the two interagency agreements that we examined in detail, could address problems in duplicative inspections if they were more effectively implemented. We are making seven recommendations designed to reduce or eliminate duplication and overlaps, leverage existing agreements and make the system more efficient and effective. For more information, go to FDA.gov/Inspections. position on our recommendation for using the Bioterrorism Act authorities. HHS partially concurred with two other recommendations dealing with the implementation of two interagency agreements. EPA did not provide official comments, but it provided minor technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate. NOAA provided written comments and agreed with our recommendation on the use of the Bipartisan Policy Center’s information technology resources. NOAA also provided technical comments which we incorporated in our report, as appropriate, and our detailed response is contained in appendix VI. cooperate more effectively. However, the evaluation also included recommendations to strengthen, clarify, or otherwise improve the agreement’s implementation. The evaluation cited the potential for significant resource savings over time as the agreement is implemented. Since the 2000 evaluation, officials at USDA and FDA said they have not again monitored the agreement's effectiveness, nor have they implemented their recommendations. The agreement is expected to be in place by the end of the first quarter of this year, according to the evaluation. It is not clear when the agreement will be fully implemented. The 2000 evaluation found that more training was needed, particularly at the field level, to achieve the results of the agreement. Although USDA and FDA held 28 joint training sessions during the first year, no additional training has been provided since then. On-site inspectors are often the first agency staff to become aware of deficiencies at a plant, and effective sharing of this type of information depends upon those inspectors being adequately trained. According to the 2000 evaluation, more training is needed at theField level. The 2000 evaluation also found that the contacts for each agency have an appropriate understanding of the working of the other agency. We disagree with USDA’s assertion that implementation of the 1999 interagency agreement has been largely successful. Our report highlights several deficiencies, even as it gives the agencies credit for improved communication in times of crisis. There is merit in examining the feasibility of conducting joint training activities when workable commonalities can be found. We acknowledge that, as used in our report, the term inter agency agreement refers generally to memoranda of understanding, memoranda. of agreement, and interagency agreements identified by USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS. needed and whether specific provisions are still in effect. One-third of the agreements we identified were created decades ago and may no longer be relevant to current needs. Some agencies that were party to the agreements have ceased to exist because of internal reorganizations. The agreements have not been modified to reflect such changes, indicating that the agencies may not be actively monitoring the status and relevance of these agreements. For example, a 1978 agreement between USDA and FDA on education programs to assist is no longer relevant. In 1999, USDA and FDA signed an interagency agreement to background to ensure consistent categorization across the agencies. We selected two inspection-related interagency agreements for in-depth review because the agencies spend most of their resources on inspection activities. In addition, these agreements encompassed a broad range of intended coordination efforts between the agencies involved. If the agencies’ categorization differed with ours, we considered their rationale and changed the categorization as appropriate. The agencies are exchanging some information as called for in the agreements, but they are missing opportunities to make more effective and efficient use of resources. identified seven agreements that focus on seafood inspection and enforcement activities. Signatories to one or more of these agreements include USDA, FDA, NMFS, the Department of Defense, and the Interstate Shellfish Sanitation Conference (ISSC) We recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture, the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere identify and inventory all active interagency food safety-related agreements. We provided USDA, HHS, and NMFS with a list of the agreements. NOAA says GAO report does a fair and thorough job of describing food safety activities of NMFS. NOAA says positions expressed in GAO’s previous work continue to be germane to the issue of coordination with FDA on inspections of seafood. NOAA: Unless you publicly release the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. We are sending copies of the report to the Secretary of Agriculture, the GAO said in a statement. also obtained data from the following FDA units: Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Center for Veterinary Medicine, National Center for Toxicological Research. EPA’s Office of Pesticide Prevention and Office of Water, as well as the NMFS’S Seafood Inspection Program, Office of Sustainable Fisheries also provided data. To assess the reliability of the staffing and expenditure data, we questioned knowledgeable agency officials and reviewed existing documentation regarding the data and the systems that produced them. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of identifying overlaps. Some agreements have not been updated to account for changes in a signatory’s responsibilities since they were signed. For example, NMFS officials said that the ISSC has taken on some responsibilities that once belonged to NMFS. The 1985 agreement on shellfish-growing waters should be updated to reflect this change. Because the agencies spend money, some agreements should be modified to reflect the fact that the agencies no longer exist, the authors say. The authors say the agencies should also update agreements on animal drug use. own recommendations to realize resource savings. We found that the agencies are not systematically exchanging information about DJEs, as called for in the agreement. In December 2004, FDA headquarters officials provided us a list of 1,451 known DJEs. The number of establishments that were listed ranged from 1,152 to 1,867. The agencies had great difficulty identifying the current number of DJEs to which this agreement pertains, the authors say.. The agreement calls for the district offices of each agency to share certain findings with their counterpart district offices. facilitate the exchange of information between the agencies about food-processing facilities that they both inspect. The agreement was developed in response to a 1997 report by the President’s Food Safety Council, which recommended increased cooperation among agencies. In 2000, USDA and FDA evaluated the agreement and concluded that the experience had been largely successful because the agencies learned about each other's operations and about ways to improve public health protection. It was to be the first step toward allowing FSIS inspectors to conduct FDA's inspections at DJEs, a former USDA senior food safety official said. The agreement calls for the receiving agency to inform the notifying agency of the disposition of the notification, including any actions that it plans or takes, within 30 days. During field visits to three USDA and FDA district offices that, together, are responsible for food safety in 13 states, we found that they are not routinely communicating these findings of mutual concern. We also found that the two agencies have not explored the feasibility of developing a system to track and exchange information when site visits included USDA district offices in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Boulder, Colorado. FDA inspectors visit DJEs less frequently than USDA inspectors. FDA staff could benefit from the compliance information that USDA inspectors collect, authors say. Agreement has helped agency coordination and communication, they say. In one case, FDA learned that a sample of chicken salad tested positive for listeria and alerted USDA, resulting in a voluntary recall, they write. In a second case, USDA and FDA cooperated by exchanging information on a severe rodent infestation at a DJE, they add.. identified to us by all signatory agencies. FDA and EPA provided a copy of an agreement they had entered into with USDA about residues in drugs, pesticides, and environmental contaminants in foods. USDA officials said the agency is not party to any agreement on residues. Of the agencies we reviewed, only USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service maintained a database that allowed us to see the agreements. Forty-one additional agreements were identified to usby only one of the multiple signatories. In addition, we found three agreements—through our prior work or Internet searches—that none of the agencies had identified to ourselves. addition, USDA and FDA district managers were able to assist each other during the recall of beef and beef products, after the December 2003 discovery of a cow infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE, also known as mad cow disease) We found that the stated purpose of the agreement—which is to facilitate an exchange of information permitting more efficient use of both agencies’ resources and contributing to improved public health protection—has not been maximized. USDA and FAA are not making better use of each other’s inspection resources to reduce overlap and duplication of effort. The stakeholders we contacted disagree on whether federal agencies’ food safety functions overlap, specifically with regard to inspections. Stakeholders’ views included (1) minor changes to improve coordination among the food safety agencies, and (2) statutory changes to make the system more science and risk based. Some large industry associations saw the need for only minor changes within the existing regulatory framework to enhance communication and coordination among existing agencies. The stakeholders did not agree on what direction this modernization should take, however. similar food safety guidance for (1) consumers on general topics, such as cooking and chilling food, and safe handling practices. These overlapping efforts, caused in part by the agencies’ divisions in jurisdiction, can be confusing to both consumers and industry representatives. These agencies have made some efforts to reduce overlaps in their consumer education activities. For example, USDA and FDA say they receive calls from consumers andindustry representatives to their consumer hotline about FDA-regulated food products. For more information, go to www.fda.gov/foodsafety. facilities. To obtain the views of regulated industry and other stakeholders regarding opportunities to reduce overlap by consolidating federal food safety functions, we contacted a total of 35 stakeholders from food industry associations, food manufacturers, consumer groups, and academic experts. In selecting associations, organizations, and experts, we included contacts from our previous reports and testimonies. We considered recommendations from USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS. To identify which food manufacturers to interview, we used Food Processing’s Top 100 Companies to identify the largest food manufacturers. The majority of stakeholders we contacted said they believed that the federal food safety system needs to be modernized. The quality assurance manager at a dual jurisdiction establishment with whom we spoke said he liked having a “second pair of eyes” inspecting the facilities for food safety. The company produces smoked salmon and the manager noted that having inspections by FDA and NMFS helps to ensure that products are safe and of high quality. American Frozen Food Institute noted that USDA and FDA inspections and their complementary expertise provide value in addressing food safety issues. The Grocery Manufacturers of America said that the food safety system must be flexible enough to allow resources to be directed toward identifying and addressing serious food safety problems. Other stakeholders, including representatives from industry associations, agreed that the system could be enhanced, and perhaps made more efficient, through enhanced interagency coordination.agencies. Some industry officials say that the current foodSafety system protects consumers, and they cited decreases in illnesses caused by foodborne bacteria, such as salmonella and listeria. academia, consumer groups, public policy organizations, and individual food companies—believe that the system needs to be modernized through statutory changes. According to the Consumer Federation of America, a science- or risk-based system should consider not only the risk posed by the food but also the history of the plant. Resources for the Future stated that the current food safety laws undermine a successful food safety system. That is, the laws do not build prevention into the farm-to-table continuum and divide responsibility. Some stakeholders, including the Institute for Food Technologists, believe that modernizing the food safety system could be accomplished by rewriting food safety statutes. The stakeholders we contacted also identified a number of roadblocks to changing the system, whether or not they supported such consolidation. Industry is reluctant to change from a familiar regulatory framework to one that is untested. Some industry associations say a transition to a single agency could create a period of uncertainty for the industry, which could lead to a loss of jobs. Consolidation would eliminate overlap between the agencies, especially at DJEs. It could generate substantial savings in terms of administrative efficiency and overall consistency in the application of policy. The legislative changes needed to accomplish consolidation could also be used as the vehicle for modernizing the food safety statutes or establish a scientific basis for new regulations. The Food Marketing Institute and food safety experts at Kansas State University and the University of Georgia are among those calling for the consolidation of food safety agencies. The Center for Science in the Public Interest and the Consumer Federation of America are also calling for consolidation. of uncertainty, as limited resources are diverted from the existing programs. The transition costs to a single agency would be higher in the short term. Current agency employees would be concerned that a consolidation would adversely change their working lives. Some stakeholders, including the Consumer Federation of America, said that some congressional committees may be reluctant to lose jurisdiction over food safety functions. We recognize that we recognize that food safety is a complex and complex issue. We are committed to working with the FDA to improve food safety. enforcement, research, risk assessment, education and outreach, rulemaking and standard setting, surveillance and monitoring, food security, and administration. Examples of activities under these functions include: inspecting domestic food-processing facilities and imported food items at U.S. ports of entry. In fiscal year 2003, the four of food safety activities contained in the National Academy of Science’s 1998 report Ensuring Safe Food to group the agencies’ foodSafety activities. These categories include: monitoring/surveillance, inspection/enforcement, education/outreach, research and risk assessment. GAO received written comments on the report and its recommendations from USDA, HHS, and NOAA. EPA provided minor technical comments. USDA expressed serious reservations about the report, asserting that it oversimplifies food safety regulatory functions within USDA and FDA. GAO: USDA appears to have misinterpreted the focus of this report, and we disagree with USDA’s characterization. This report examines overlapping activities rather than the regulatory framework that allows these activities to occur. The table does not provide an exhaustive list of all food safety-related laws and amendments, nor does it detail all the food safety provisions for those laws listed. This report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. To identify overlaps that may exist in the federal food safety system, we collected fiscal year 2003 budget data for food safety-related activities. If you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report, I can be reached at (202) 512-3841, or robinsonr@gao,gov. The full report can be downloaded from the GAo Web site. Many federal agencies, as well as state and local entities, play a part in the U.S. food safety regulatory system. The federal agencies regulate the food production chain from farms to food manufacturers. State and local agencies primarily regulate food safety in retail food establishments. In addition to their established food safety and quality responsibilities, following the events of September 11, 2001, these agencies began to address the potential for deliberate contamination of agriculture and food products. The Department of Homeland Security provides overall coordination on how to prevent deliberate contamination. current statutory authorities require the food safety agencies to carry out regulatory activities that have resulted in some overlapping or duplicative activities. We have recommended in the past that federal food safety statutes be streamlined and that food safety functions be consolidated into a single agency. Even within the current statutory framework, the agencies can take practical steps to reduce overlap and duplication and thereby free resources for more effective oversight of food safety. The Congress has recognized this possibility in the Bioterrorism Act by passing it into law. The federal framework for food safety is based on a patchwork of numerous laws. Table 6 lists the 30 laws that we have identified as the principal federal laws related to food safety. Each law is followed by the agency or agencies that have food safety responsibilities under each law and a brief discussion or example of each law’s food safety-related provisions. The bolded agreements are the two that were analyzed in-depth. The year each agreement became effective and indicates the signatory agencies. The agencies’ food safety authorities stem from 30 principal laws related to food safety. As a result of this division of responsibility, the federal food safety system is fragmented. Both USDA and FDA inspect food-processing facilities that produce foods under the regulatory responsibility of each agency, referred to as dual jurisdiction establishments (DJE) DJEs are those that manufacture or process food products that contain ingredients regulated by more than one federal agency. For a listing of the principal food safety laws, see appendix IV. which more than one agency performed similar activities. Some agencies did not provide expenditures and staffing data for categories such as administration, food security, and rulemaking. In some instances, the agencies estimated budget and staffing levels, or they were unable to separate budget data into specific categories. Twenty-four agreements state the need to reduce duplication of effort, reduce or clarify overlaps, or increase the efficient or effective use of resources between agencies. We solicited all active food safety-related interagency agreements from USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS. The agencies’ ability to take full advantage of these agreements is hampered by the absence of adequate mechanisms for tracking them. Of the 71 interagency agreements we identified, the largest proportion (43 percent) reflect the agencies agreement to increase cooperation on inspection and enforcement activities. 24 agreements specifically highlight the need to reduce duplication of effort by clarifying responsibilities, reducing overlaps, and/or making efficient and effective use of resources. USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS do not have adequate mechanisms to track interagency food safety agreements. GAO: USDA and FDA inspections have similar key elements: sanitation, good manufacturing practices, and HACCP compliance oversight. USDA and further disagree with USDA’s comment that our report inaccurately characterizes the Bioterrorism Act. FDA is authorized under the act to enter into an agreement to commission other agency officials, including USDA officials, to carry out inspections on its behalf. GAO: If we modified the title as HHS suggests, we would risk implying that the agencies are literally duplicating efforts in every instance. USDA, FDA, EPA and NMFS have broad food safety-related inspection and enforcement responsibilities. We defined overlaps as similar activities being performed by more than one agency. We believe some economies of scale would be derived from combining overlapping activities, including those that our report highlights. For example, with a single food safety agency, the federal government would not need to have two separate food inspection workforces. We used categories merit and duplication to assess the merit of combining activities.. We agree with HHS’s comment that, if a single agency were to be responsible for the safety of all food products, different organization units within that agency may need to coordinate their activities. features, including the verification of sanitation procedures and good manufacturing practices at food processing facilities that make them candidates for consolidation. USDA’s comments and our detailed response are contained in appendix V. In commenting on a draft of this report, HHS raised concerns about our terminology regarding overlapping activities. We disagree with HHS comment that our report's title should substitute the word duplication for overlap. That is, our report distinguishes between “overlap” and “duplication”. It defines overlap as essentially identical activities performed by more than one agency. We disagree with USDA’s assertion that the agencies’ inspection activities are vastly different. As we identify in the report, these inspections have sufficiently common it exaggerates the extent of regulatory overlap. This report examines overlapping activities rather than the regulatory framework that allows these activities. Nevertheless, the report contains a clear and accurate acknowledgment that agencies operate under a statutory framework that gives them different authorities and responsibilities to regulate different segments of the food supply. We question why the federal agencies must continue to spend resources on overlapping, and sometimes duplicative, food safety activities. perspective, the most effective inspection strategy would be to combine elements of both agencies’ inspections into a single inspection program. We also disagree with USDA’s assertion that the agencies activities are vastly different. USDA did not comment directly on these recommendations. We believe that USDA mischaracterizes our report in noting that it states that a “significant” overlap in inspection authorities exists. Specifically, our report examines inspection activities, not inspection authorities, and certainly does not identify ‘significant’ overlaps in authorities. assertion, our report does not suggest that USDA (FSIS) and FDA have comparable HACCP regulations. FDA makes a distinction, which the other agencies do not, between interagency agreements and memoranda of understanding. FDA refers to agreements that involve exchanges of funds, personnel, or property as inter Agency agreements. We did not consider this type of agreement in our analysis. Our report acknowledges that while HAC CP principles are the same for both FDA and USDA, the H ACCP plans are different as they address different risks. FDA estimates that it spent between $650,000 and almost $1 million to issue its seafood HACCP rule in 1995. NMFS officials said they spent $5 million to support the FDA rule by developing a model seafood surveillance project. USDA was unable to calculate how much it spent to develop its meat and poultry HAC CP rule. In some cases, the agencies collaborate in the early stages of rulemaking. For example, USDA and FDA participated in a joint Listeria monocytogenes (listeria) risk analysis. We disagree that our report oversimplifies or inaccurately describes federal food safety functions at ports of entry. To provide further clarification on what commodities are currently subject to HACCP regulations, we modified our report to indicate, as USDA suggests, that FDA currently requires HAC CP plans for seafood and juice products only. We believe it is possible to issue broad regulations based on certain sanitation and manufacturing processes, such as certain manufacturing processes. Therefore, we continue to believe that USDA and FDA could consolidate H ACCP-based inspections at these jointly regulated facilities. USDA and FDA inspectors verify that HACCP systems are in place at jointly regulated facilities. FDA could allow USDA inspectors to inspect FDA-regulated food. In doing so, FDA could reduce overlapping inspections and redirect resources to other facilities for which it has sole authority. The regulations require the facility to maintain separate HAC CP plans for each product and to develop separate analyses of critical control points and separate strategies to mitigate or eliminate food contaminants. The manager said that although both plans have similar elements, each agency’s inspectors expect different levels of detail for the plans. on common principles that can then be applied to specific products. We have made minor modifications in the report to avoid confusion. Different risks are associated with different food products and, therefore, require different HACCP plans. In addition to those named above Lawrence J. Dyckman, Katheryn Hubbell, Jane Kim, Sara Margraf, Carol Herrnstadt Shulman, Michele Fejfar, Amy Webbink, and Katherine Raheb made key contributions to this report. FDA is primarily responsible for the safe production and processing of eggs still in the shell (known as shell eggs) USDA is responsible for food safety at the processing plants where eggs are broken to produce egg products. In 1996, the agencies began work on a joint risk assessment for salmonella in eggs. In 2004, FDA issued a proposed rule that would require shell egg producers to implement measures to help preventSalmonella from contaminating eggs on the farm. Although USDA released a new draft risk assessment in 2004, the department has not yet issued a propose rule to prevent egg contamination. fill in the gaps with samples of food at different points in the distribution chain. USDA and FDA also both conduct risk assessments of foodborne pathogens that can contaminate food products under their respective jurisdictions. The agencies also conduct joint risk assessments when addressing the same pathogen or the same food product. In the case of eggs, regulatory responsibility shifts as eggs make their way from the egg farm to the food chain. The agency also releases a draft risk assessment for Escherichia coli ( E. coli) O157:H7 in ground beef. In 2004, FDA and EPA issued a joint consumer advisory about mercury in fish and shellfish. The advisory recommends different consumption levels, depending on whether the fish is commercially caught (regulated by FDA) or recreationally caught. For fish purchased from a store, the guidance recommends up to 12 ounces per week. For women who might become pregnant, who are pregnant, and who are nursing, the advisory recommends 12 ounces a week. However, for children under the age of five, the recommendation is for no more than 10 ounces. if the fish is recreationally caught, the guidance recommends that women consume up to 6 ounces per week. EPA said that the consumption guidance differs due to different mercury levels in recreationally and commercially caught fish. As the principal agencies responsible for food safety, both USDA and FDA engage in rule-making and standard-setting activities under their respective statutes. For example, both agencies’ regulations require food processors to incorporate certain sanitation processes into their HACCP systems. Both agencies also have separate regulations for industry, but there are some similarities. federal agencies spent nearly $1.7 billion on food safety-related activities. USDA and FDA are responsible for most federal food safety resources. These agencies spent about $921 million (55 percent) in fiscal year 2003 on inspection/enforcement functions. The agencies’ expenditures vary by program function (as shown in fig. 3). For example, USDA’s inspection/ Enforcement expenditures made up almost three-quarters of the total spent by these agencies for that program function. That resources on similar food safety activities.  NMFS inspection schedules fluctuate often, according to changes in NMFS’s contracts with individual companies. FDA could decrease or eliminate inspections at facilities that NMFS inspectors find are in compliance with sanitation and HACCP regulations. Both USDA and FDA maintain inspectors at 18 U.S. ports of entry to inspect imported food products. In fiscal year 2003, USDA spent almost $16 million on these inspections, and FDA spent more than $115 million. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. We obtained actual expenditures and staffing level data in full- time equivalents (FTE) from the following USDA units: Agricultural Marketing Service, Agricultural Research Service, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service. Food manufacturers that have facilities that produce food regulated by both USDA and FDA.to perform their food safety responsibilities. Examples of administrative activities include: procurement, human resources support, financial management, travel management, and information technology support; and Rulemaking/Standard setting. As a result of the multiple laws and regulations governing food safety, several federal agencies conduct activities that can serve overlapping, if not identical, purposes. USDA and FDA participate in similar food safety research efforts; that is, both agencies collect and analyze food samples for chemical and biological contaminants. During fiscal year 2003, the agencies spent over $245 million on these effort to conduct a risk assessment of salmonella in eggs and broiler chickens. For example, USDA, FDA, and EPA each develop consumer guidance on chemical food contaminants. USDA spent $7.8 million, while FDA spent about $1.5 million, during fiscal year 2003 to train their food inspection personnel. FDA’s comparatively lower training costs reflect a contractual agreement with a private firm that has produced an online curriculum. Another agency, NMFS, uses 74 of these online courses to train its own seafood inspectors. USDA officials said they are exploring the possibility of entering into an agreement with the company that developed FDA's online curriculum to allow USDA inspectors access to some of this training. A joint USDA-FDA training program could reduce duplication in developing training materials and in providing instruction. Other federal agencies have consolidated training activities that have a common purpose and similar content. In 1970, the Consolidated Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (the Center) brought together the training programs of 75 federal law enforcement agencies that had maintained separate training programs. The Center provides standardized programs for criminal investigators and uniformed police officers across the federal government. While standardizing basic training, the Center also provides specialized training. budget data, we contacted agency budget and program officials to determine what activities were linked to the expenditure and staffing data. We categorized expenditures and staffing and asked agency officials if they considered our categorizations to be appropriate. We adjusted our categorization when agency officials told us it was inaccurate. In some cases, the agencies’ preferred categorization of the same activity varied. For example, FDA considered inspector training as an education/outreach activity, whereas USDA considered it an inspection- related activity. These discrepancies are noted in appendix II.  USDA and FDA had great difficulty identifying the current number of jointly regulated facilities. The magnitude of potential savings is difficult to calculate. We continue to believe that because USDA maintains a daily presence at hundreds of these facilities, FDA could make more effective use of its resources if it redirected its inspectors to other facilities for which FDA has sole jurisdiction. But FDA officials said they do not currently plan to pursue this option and have not conducted any analyses of the costs or savings associated with authorizing USDA officials to conduct FDA inspections at these facilities. FDA does not use that information when deciding which countries to visit. As a result, FDA at times conducts inspections in the same countries that USDA has evaluated. For example, USDA and FDA each visited Brazil, Costa Rica, Germany, Hungary, Mexico, and Canada last year. USDA spent almost $500,000, and FDA spent nearly $5 million, on its foreign country visits in fiscal year 2003.and compliance with HACCP rules—could be useful to FDA in deciding what country to visit when conducting inspections. to USDA officials, are being stored at USDA-approved inspection facilities. We continue to believe that there are opportunities to leverage inspection resources, as we are recommending. USDA’s comment that it shares the results of its overseas equivalency determinations contradicts what USDA and FDA officials told us during the course of our review. However, we note that USDA is now sharing this information. Any successful consolidation of inspectors’ training would of course require work. But we continue to think that, as USDA�s comments suggest, this is a good idea. FDA inspections vary depending on whether the product is a USDA- or FDA-regulated food product. HHS disagreed with our recommendation regarding joint training of USDA and FDA food inspectors. Despite HHS’s disagreement, we continue to believe that such an examination has not yet taken place. We disagree with HHS's comment that the training programs are vastly different. As our report discusses, FDA’S training curriculum includes dozens of courses that address topics common to USDA and FAA.. HHS took no inspections have common key elements: sanitation, good manufacturing practices, and HACCP compliance oversight. FDA officials said these agencies do not share information from their overseas visits because their different statutory responsibilities make such information of little advantage. USDA’s focus during foreign country visits is to evaluate the meat and poultry inspection systems to determine if they are equivalent to that of the United States. FDA focuses its visits on specific companies that produce food under the agency's jurisdiction. Both agencies train inspectors on sanitation requirements, good manufacturing practices, and HACCP, the authors say. They recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture and the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration work together to ensure the implementation of the interagency agreement. the Meat and Poultry Products Inspection Acts, the Secretary of Agriculture is required to certify that countries exporting meat and poultry to the United States have equivalent food safety systems. That information could inform FDA’s decision making about which countries to visit for its overseas inspections. Currently, FDA visits foreign countries to inspect individual food-processing firms. In 2004, USDA determined that the food safety system of 34 countries it evaluated were equivalent to that of the U.S. The main point of our report is that the agencies are not leveraging inspection resources at ports of entry. USDA is responsible for about 80 percent of the U.S. food supply, including imports from 250 countries. FDA has the authority to commission federal officials to conduct inspections at jointly regulated facilities. USDA inspectors have no authority to inspect FDA-regulated products, although USDA inspectors are present at these ports more often than FDA inspectors. FDA could also leverage USDA’s efforts to ensure the safety of imported food by using information that USDA compiles in its determinations that exporting countries’ food safety systems are equivalent. EPA uses USDA and FDA data to inform EPA’s risk assessments on human exposure to pesticides. In 2003, FDA analyzed 11,331 food samples for pesticides and chemical contaminants to help estimate the dietary intake of pesticide residues. In 2000, the most recent year for which data are available, USDA analyzed over 33,000 samples of meat, poultry, and egg products. EPA officials said that the overlap in data collection and analysis adds value because USDA data comes from a well-controlled survey of food samples. both USDA and FDA—or facilities inspected by both FDA and NMFS. However, some overlaps occur outside these establishments. For example, although the United Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Association’s member companies are primarily inspected and regulated by FDA, companies that sell fruit and vegetables to the school meals programs are also inspected by USDA. UFFVA officials pointed out that USDA inspects fruits and veggies to be included in school lunches; and the companies, already subject to FDA inspections, incur additional expenses. The U.S. Poultry and Egg Association says the regulatory delineations do not always make sense. The FDA regulates an egg farm as a “food factory” within its area of jurisdiction. USDA regulates plants that process eggs into products such as powdered eggs. Other stakeholders do not think the federal agencies’ programs overlap because USDA and FDA have specific, defined areas of responsibility for their industries.contaminants on fruits and vegetables. The American Meat Institute says the FDA and USDA have different areas of jurisdiction for different industries. USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS are involved in key program functions related to food safety. While these agencies each perform food safety inspections, the frequency of their inspections varies. For example, USDA inspects a canning facility at least daily if it produces food containing meat and poultry. If the facility also produces canned soups containing beans or seafood, FDA inspects it every 1 to 5 years. According to a senior plant manager, FDA’s inspections place more responsibility for food safety on the company. agencies inspect. Depending on the type and layout of the facility, a USDA inspector may have a more regular presence in an area where FDA-regulated products are maintained. For example, at a plant that produces both meat and seafood products, an inspector could inspect the seafood processing and storage section of the plant. However, because FDA regulates seafood, the USDA inspector does not monitor or Inspect the seafood storage section. The inspector noted that, with minimum training on seafood temperature controls, he could inspect this section. USDA’s carcass-by-carcass organoleptic inspections exemplify the outmoded requirements of the current food safety system. Such inspections waste resources because new technologies are more efficient and effective. Further, the laws prevent risk-based allocation of resources across the federal food safety agencies.and accountability for food safety among federal agencies. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/features/food-safety/index.html#storylink=cpy Firm cans soups and bean products. USDA inspectors did not want the company to paint its sterilization equipment. FDA inspector said it would be easier to identify sanitation problems on lightly painted equipment than on the dark-colored metal. The manager of the facility said the company had to paint and then remove the paint from equipment.are covered by the USDA inspector. The company has not commented on the matter. The incident occurred in the U.S., not the European Union, where the company is based.

ROUGE-1: 69.66, ROUGE-2: 64.31, ROUGE-L: 22.76
BERTScore: 57.68

==============================================
==================== [88/100] ====================
Summary:
IRS estimated that it prevented or recovered $22.5 billion in fraudulent IDT refunds in filing season 2014. IRS received an additional $290 million for fiscal year 2016 to improve customer service, IDT identification and prevention, and cybersecurity efforts. IRS has worked with tax preparation professionals, states, and financial institutions to better.enforcement of tax laws to include IRS’s efforts to address IDT refund fraud. In 2015, IRS reported allocating more than 4,000 full-time equivalent staff. Fraudsters continue to adapt their schemes to identify weaknesses in IDT defense. IRS can take steps to better authenticate the identity of taxpayers before issuing refunds. IRS should assess the costs, benefits, and risks of its authentication options, the authors say. The IRS has developed guidance on how to prevent IDT fraud, they say. It's time for the IRS to take further steps to prevent and detect IDT Fraud, they write. The authors say the IRS should take additional steps to.detect and preventIDT fraud. IDT refund fraud occurs when a refund-seeking fraudster obtains an individual’s Social Security number, date of birth, or other PII and uses it to file a fraudulent tax return seeking a refund. This crime burdens legitimate taxpayers because authenticating their identities is likely to delay the processing of their tax returns and refunds. Given current and emerging risks, in 2015 we expanded our high-risk area on the IDT fraud database to include more fraudsters and their PII. IRS temporarily suspended the Identity Protection Personal Identification Number (IP PIN) service on IRS.gov. IP PIN is a single-use identification number provided to taxpayers who are victims of identity theft (IDT) to help prevent future IDT refund fraud. Service on IRS’s website allowed taxpayers to retrieve their IP PINs online. As of April 7, the IP PIN service was temporarily suspended by the IRS. The IRS stated that it was conducting further review of theIP PIN service and is looking at further strengthening the security features. standards and guidelines that include minimum information security requirements. During fiscal year 2015, IRS collected more than $3.3 trillion; processed more than 243 million tax returns and other forms. IRS relies extensively on computerized information systems, which it must effectively secure to protect sensitive financial and taxpayer data for the collection of taxes, processing of tax returns, and enforcement of federal tax laws. In carrying out its mission, IRS relies heavily on computerize information systems. IRS’s mission is to provide Americans with top-quality service by helping them to understand and meet their tax responsibilities. The IRS collects and maintains a significant amount of personal and financial information on each U.S. taxpayer. Protecting this sensitive information is essential to protecting taxpayers’ privacy and preventing financial loss and damages that could result from identity theft and other financial crimes. The IRS employs about 90,000 people in its Washington, D.C., headquarters and at more than 550 offices in all 50 states, U.s. territories, and some U.N. embassies and consulates. More than $403 billion in tax refunds. federal agencies spent about $13.1 billion on cybersecurity in fiscal year 2016. The president’s fiscal year 2017 budget proposes investing over $19 billion in resources for cybersecurity. Cyber incidents can adversely affect national security, damage public health and safety, and compromise sensitive information. In June 2015, the Commissioner of the IRS testified that unauthorized third parties had gained access to taxpayer information from its Get Transcript application. According to officials, criminals are targeting the IRS’ Get Transcript app to steal information. used taxpayer- specific data acquired from non-agency sources to gain unauthorized access to information on approximately 100,000 tax accounts. These data included Social Security information, dates of birth, and street addresses. In an August 2015 update, IRS reported this number to be about 114,000. In a February 2016 update, the agency reported that an additional 390,000 accounts had been accessed. The online Get Transcript service has been unavailable since May 2015. In March 2016, IRS stated that as part of its ongoing the online service was still suspended. IRS has implemented numerous protections over key financial and tax processing systems. IRS had not always effectively implemented access and other controls, including elements of its information security program. In our most recent review we determined that IRS had improved access controls, but some weaknesses remain. Identifying and authenticating users—such as through user account-password—is a key part of the security measures IRS has in place to prevent unauthorized access to computing resources, programs, information, and facilities. Cryptography controls protect sensitive data and computer programs by rendering data unintelligible to unauthorized users. Audit and monitoring is the regular collection, review, and analysis of events on systems and networks. IRS policies require the use of encryption, and the agency continued to expand its use of encrypting sensitive data. However, key systems we reviewed had not been configured to encrypt sensitive user authentication data, the report found. The report found that the IRS had failed to protect the integrity of transmitted or stored data. IRS established policies and procedures for auditing and monitoring its systems. It had not established logging for two key applications used to support the transfer of financial data and access and manage taxpayer accounts. Physical security controls, such as physical access cards, limit access to an organization’s overall facility and areas housing sensitive IT components. It was not consistently maintaining key system and application audit plans, according to the report. The report was published by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) on November 14, 2013. combinations—provides the basis for establishing accountability and controlling access to a system. IRS established policies for identification and authentication, including requiring multifactor authentication for local and network access accounts. The agency used easily guessable passwords on servers supporting key systems. In addition, while IRS continued to expand the use of two- factor access to its network, the Treasury continued to use a single-factor password for most of its systems. It also improved identification andAuthentication controls by, for example, expanding theUse of an automated mechanism to centrally manage, apply, and verify password requirements. Inspector General for Tax Administration reported that IRS had not fully implemented unique user identification and authentication or remote electronic authentication that complies with federal requirements. Authorization controls limit what actions users are able to perform after being allowed into a system and should be based on the concept of “least privilege,” granting users the least amount of rights and privileges necessary to perform their duties. While IRS established policies for authorizing access to its systems, it continued to permit excessive access in some cases. For example, users were granted rights and permissions in excess of what they needed to. We have previously reported that IRS can take steps to improve its response to data breaches. The agency did not require considering the number of affected individuals as a factor when determining if affected individuals should be notified of a suspected breach. IRS did not document lessons learned from periodic analyses of its breach response efforts. We recommended that IRS correct these weaknesses, but the agency has yet to fully address them.our new recommendations, it will review them to ensure that its actions include sustainable fixes that implement appropriate security controls balanced against IT and human capital resource limitations. the system monitors inbound and outbound traffic for malicious activity. IRS needs to continue to address weaknesses in access controls and configuration management. Fully implementing key elements of a breach response program will help ensure that when breaches of sensitive data do occur, their impact on affected individuals will be limited. The risks IRS is exposed to have been illustrated by recent incidents involving public-facing applications, highlighting the importance of securing systems that contain sensitive taxpayer and financial data. In summary, while IRS has made progress in implementing information security controls, it must continue to do so. IRS had yet to address weaknesses in its review of access lists for both employees and visitors to sensitive areas. IRS had weaknesses in configuration management controls, which are intended to prevent unauthorized changes to information system resources. IRS developed policies for managing the configuration of its IT systems and improved 30, 2015, report says. It also made 43 technical recommendations in a separate report with limited distribution to address 26 new weaknesses in access controls and configuration management. The report says these recommendations will help IRS improve its controls for identifying and authenticating users. some configuration management controls, it did not, for example, ensure security patch updates were applied in a timely manner to databases supporting two key systems. To its credit, IRS had established contingency plans for the systems we reviewed, which help ensure that when unexpected events occur critical operations can continue without interruption or can be promptly resumed. The IRS had also established policies for developing contingency plans and for testing those plans, as well as for implementing and enforcing them, the review found. The review found that the IRS had failed to apply a security patch that had been available since August 2012. backup procedures. The agency established a comprehensive framework for its program, including assessing risk for its systems. However, IRS had not updated key mainframe policies and procedures to address issues such as comprehensively auditing and monitoring access. In addition, the agency had not fully mitigated the risk of unauthorized access to the agency’s mainframe systems, the report says. It says IRS had documented and tested contingency plans for its system and improved continuity of operations controls for several systems. Nevertheless, the control weaknesses can be attributed in part to IRS's inconsistent implementation of elements of its agency-wide information security program. previously identified deficiencies or ensured that its corrective actions were effective. IRS told us it had completed corrective actions for 28 of our prior recommendations; however, we determined that 9 of these had not been effectively implemented. The collective effect of the deficiencies in information security from prior years that continued to exist in fiscal year 2015, along with the new deficiencies we identified, are serious enough to merit the attention of those charged with governance of IRS. The deficiencies represented a significant deficiency in IRS’s internal control over financial reporting systems as of September. functions, protecting sensitive data when they are stored or in transit, auditing and monitoring system activities, and physically securing its IT facilities and resources. Table 1 below provides the number of our prior recommendations to IRS that were not implemented at the beginning of our fiscal year 2015 audit, how many were resolved by the end of the audit, new recommendations, and the total number of outstanding recommendations at the conclusion of the Audit. In commenting on drafts of the reports presenting the results of our audit, the IRS Commissioner stated that while the agency agreed with some of the recommendations, it did not agree with all of them. NIST is responsible under FISMA for developing security standards and guidelines for agencies. These include standards for categorizing information and information systems according to ranges of impact levels. OMB and NIST have prescribed policies, standards, and guidelines that are intended to assist federal agencies with identifying and providing information security protections commensurate with the risk and magnitude of harm resulting from the unauthorized access, use, disclosure, alteration, and destruction of information and Information systems. The guidelines also include guidelines for identifying an information system as a national security system. for its Identity Assurance Office to assess costs, benefits, and risk of authentication tools. In February 2016, officials told us that this office plans to complete a strategic plan for taxpayer authentication across the agency in September 2016. Until it completes these steps, IRS will lack key information to make decisions about whether and how much to invest in authentication options. Under FISMA, the Director of OMB is responsible for developing and overseeing the implementation of policies, principles, standards, and guidelines on information security. will be minimized. IRS also needs to assess the costs, benefits, and risks of alternatives for better authenticating taxpayers who access its systems. strengthening the security posture of IRS—and other agencies— also depends on the key roles played by OMB, NIST, and DHS in providing oversight and guidance. I would be happy to answer any questions you have. If you have any questions regarding this statement, please contact Gregory C. Wilshusen at (202) 512-6244. the proof of possession of a key through a cryptographic protocol. At this level in-person identity proofing is required. It is otherwise similar to Level 3, except with stronger cryptographic methods in place. Federal law also gives OMB and DHS responsibility and authority for oversight of operational aspects of federal information security. In particular, the OMB Director is charged with overseeing and enforcing agency compliance with information security requirements by taking certain actions authorized by relevant federal law. OMB has developed various mechanisms to carry out its oversight function. OMB the power of enforcement and accountability related to evaluating agencies’ management of their information resources. In particular, in enforcing accountability, OMB is empowered to recommend reductions or increases in an agency’s budget. OMB Cyber and National Security Unit (OMB Cyber) within the Office of the Federal Chief Information Officer. This unit is responsible for strengthening federal cybersecurity through oversight of agency and government-wide programs, among other things. The unit was established in fiscal year 2015, and is based in Washington, D.C. for the information and information systems that support the operations of the agency. The head of each agency is responsible for, among other things, ensuring that senior agency officials carry out their information security responsibilities. The act also assigned OMB and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) oversight responsibilities to assist agencies in effectively implementing information security protections. In addition, NIST isresponsible for developing the information security standards for the federal government. The agency is also responsible for developing information security policies and procedures. Modernization Act of 2014 codified its responsibility for certain operational aspects of federal agency cybersecurity. In particular, DHS is responsible for administering, in consultation with OMB, the implementation of agency information security policies and practices for information systems. It also operates the federal information security incident center (the U.S Computer Emergency Readiness Team or US-CERT), deploying technology to continuously protect the nation's information systems and networks. The agency is also responsible for developing, issuing, and overseeing the Implementation of binding operational directives to agencies. and implementing policies to address emerging IT security risks, and oversight of government-wide response to major incidents and vulnerabilities. CyberStat Reviews: OMB has also established the “CyberStat Review’ process, which involves evidence-based meetings led by OMB to ensure agencies are accountable for their cybersecurity posture. FISMA reporting: As required by FISma, OMB reports annually to Congress on the effectiveness of information security policies and practices at executive branch agencies during the preceding year. diagnose and mitigate threats, compiling and analyzing data, and developing and conducting targeted operational evaluations of systems. In May 2015 DHS issued its first directive, which required all departments and agencies to review and mitigate all critical vulnerabilities on their Internet-facing systems. DHS identifies these vulnerabilities using scanning tools and reports the results to agencies on a weekly basis. Agencies are then required to mitigate the DHS-identified vulnerabilities within 30 days of the report, or provide a justification to DHS outlining barriers, planned steps for resolution. supplied agencies with tools and technologies to assist in protecting against cyber threats and vulnerabilities. Since fiscal year 2013, DHS has provided agencies the opportunity to use a suite of tools and capabilities to identify cybersecurity risks. National Cybersecurity Protection System: NCPS is an integrated system-of-systems intended to deliver a range of capabilities for intrusion detection, intrusion prevention, analytics, and information sharing. When deployed on an agency’s connection to the Internet, NCPS can be used to identify and mitigate cyber threats. unique operational challenges. Risks to cyber-based assets can originate from unintentional or intentional threats. Unintentional threats can be caused by natural disasters, defective computer or network equipment, software coding errors, and the actions of careless or poorly trained employees. Intentional threats include targeted and untargeted attacks from criminal groups, hackers, disgruntled employees, and disgruntled customers. The senior agency official responsible for information security is the Associate CIO, who heads the IRS Information Technology Cybersecurity organization. employees, foreign nations engaged in espionage and information warfare, and terrorists. These adversaries vary in terms of their capabilities, willingness to act, and motives. These threat sources make use of various techniques, or exploits, that may adversely affect federal information, computers, software, networks, and operations. These exploits are carried out through various conduits, including websites, e-mails, wireless and cellular communications, Internet protocols, portable media, and social media. Further, adversaries can leverage common computer software programs as a means by which to deliver a threat. As technology has advanced, the federal government has become increasingly dependent on computerized information systems. Federal agencies rely on such systems to process, maintain, and report large volumes of sensitive data, such as personal information. Ineffective protection of these systems and information can impair delivery of vital services and result in loss or theft of computer resources, assets, and funds. It can also undermine of agency missions due to embarrassing incidents that erode the public’s confidence in government, the report says. damage to networks and equipment; and high costs for remediation. Federal law includes requirements intended to improve the protection of government information and systems. The Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014 requires the head of each agency to provide information security protections commensurate with the risk and magnitude of harm resulting from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction of the agency’s information or information systems. More specifically, federal agencies are to develop, document, and implement an agency-wide information security program to provide security. The number of information security incidents affecting systems supporting the federal government is increasing. The number of incidents reported by federal agencies to the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) increased from 5,503 in fiscal year 2006 to 67,168 in fiscalyear 2014, an increase of 1,121 percent. According to OMB, agencies reported 77,183 incidents in fiscal Year 2015. Similarly, theNumber of incidents involving PII reported byFederal agencies has more than doubled in recent years, from 10,481 in 2009 to 27,624 in 2014. Authentication occurs when an individual proves through the means of authentication that he or she possesses and controls the token. The cryptographic methods used at this level may still allow someone with malicious intent to intercept the transmission of a password through eavesdropping and crack it using a dictionary attack. Approved cryptographic methods should be strong enough to protect against impersonation of the verifying entity. Level 4: Is intended to provide the highest practical remote network authentication assurance, requiring at least two authentication factors. An individual proves possession of a physical or software token in combination with some memorized knowledge. federal systems and websites, including the following. OMB M-15-13, Policy to Require Secure Connections across Federal Websites and Web Services, which requires all publicly accessible federal websites and web services to provide service through a secure connection. O MB M-04-04, E-Authentication Guidance for Federal Agencies, which addresses federal government services accomplished using the Internet, instead of on paper, and calls for identity verification or authentication to make sure that online government services are secure and protect privacy. NIST Special Publication 800-63-2, Electronic Authentication Guideline, provides technical guidelines for federal agencies implementing electronic authentication. It covers remote authentication of users (such as employees, contractors, or private individuals) interacting with government IT systems over open networks. It provides technical requirements for agencies to use in selecting technology to authenticate users. It also provides technical recommendations for agencies on how to use the technology to protect users' privacy and security. It is published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from the government. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The daily transcript is a written version of each day's featured news story. Use this transcript to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com. The Daily Transcript is published weekly and is curated by CNN's iReport team. For more information, go to the Daily Transcript's News Quiz, or go to http://www.cnn.com/newsquiz/2013/01/07/26/29/28/290715/news/features/top-stories/topstories.

ROUGE-1: 81.48, ROUGE-2: 72.69, ROUGE-L: 37.26
BERTScore: 62.69

==============================================
==================== [89/100] ====================
Summary:
$40billion over 5 years to modernize Iraq's oil, electrical, chemical, agricultural, and transport sectors. Russia profits greatly from high oil prices, the biggest single factor behindRussian economicgrowth today. Russian leaders fear that a post-Saddam Iraq (with the second largest proven oil reserves in theworld) mightmaximize its oil output, dramatically driving up the price of oil. In 2000,Russia's oil exports earned $25.3 billion. The total Russian Federal budget in 2000 was $48 billion. down the price of oil. A sharper price drop, below $18/bbl, would severely impactRussiangovernment revenues. With a Duma (lower legislative chamber) election in December 2003 and Putin expected to seek reelection in March2004, such adevelopment is dreaded in the Kremlin. Many observers believe that Russian policy is also motivated by a desire to restrain U.S. global domination and rein in perceived U.N.tendencies toward unilateralism. Some analysts estimated that a $6/b Bl fall couldcut Russia's projected economic growth in 2003 in half. Baghdad owed Moscow $7-$8billion for Soviet-era arms sales during the Iran-Iraq War. Adjusted for inflation, this debt may total $10-12 billiontoday. Russian oil companies havecontracts that could beworth as much as $30 billion over 20 years to develop Iraqi oil fields. In August 2002, Iraq announced that Russian firms would receivecontracts worth $20 billion over 10 years. Russian firms have contractsworth billions to helpmodernize Iraq's economic infrastructure. U.S. officials reportedly suggested an informal "gentleman's agreement" to respect Russian economic interests in post-Saddam Iraq. Russia's economic interests will receive due consideration, says U.S., but Iraq owes money to manycountries. Russia ought not be put in a special category in preference to all others, says the United States. The United States does not control the price of oil and cannotguarantee specificprice levels, adds the U.N. secretary-general. the Bush Administration began to make clear in 2002 its determination to overthrow the regime of Iraqi President SaddamHussein. By mid-2002, some Russian officials and scholars hinted that Moscowmight not objecttoo strongly to U.S. military action against Iraq, provided that Washington did not act unilaterally and that Russianeconomic interests in Iraq were respected. These discussions werereported in the Russian and American press and undoubtedly were detected in Baghdad. Iraq's announcement (August 16, 2002) of the $40 billion agreement for Russian firms to modernize Iraq'sinfrastructure may have been an attempt to ensure Russian political support. Most discussions of Russian interests in Iraq focus on economic factors. Moscow has cultivated friendly relations with Baghdad since the 1960s. U.S.R. was Saddam's main arms supplier during Iraq's 1980-1988 war with Iran. Russia stillperceives itself ashaving strategic interests and an historic role in that region and does not want to be seen as betraying a long-timefriend. Back to Mail Online home. Backto the page you came from. Back To The page you come from. December 2002, Iraqi authorities cancelled a $3.7billion contract with Lukoil to develop the huge West Qurna oil field. Many analysts viewed this asretaliation against Lukoil, whose CEO, Vagit Alekperov, reportedly held discussions with U.S. Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham. Moscow can also be seen trying to balance its interest in preserving a major role for itself in a multi-polar world in cooperation withFrance, Germany, and China, on one hand, against its desire to avoid conflict with the United States. vis-a-vis the United States. Most of Russia'spolitical elites as well as the majority of the national security establishment were hostile to the prospect of a U.S.war in Iraq. Over90% of Russians also strongly opposed the war. Putin may feel that he cannot appear completely to ignore the opinions of hisgenerals and diplomats, the political establishment, and the voters. By early April, the demonstration - yet again - of America's unrivaled military capability must have been very disturbing to manyRussians. casualty figures, which must be much higher than announced. Thewide and widening gap betweenU.S. and Russian military capabilities both embarrasses and frightens many Russians. The Bush Administration has not given Moscow the firm assurances it wantsguaranteeing Russian economic interests in Iraq. Now that the battlefield aspect of the Iraq conflict is essentially over, it remains to be seen how strong Russian opposition will be to U.S.-led policy. That may depend on how Putin weighs the benefits of "principled" and domestically popularopposition to the United States against the costs. in Iraq, Putin called the attack "a big mistake," "unjustified," and insistedthat military action be ended quickly. Russian media, like that in many other European countries, took a generallynegative attitudetoward coalition military action. InRussia, however,the Kremlin exercises very strong influence over the media, especially TV. Russian public opinion overwhelminglyopposed whatmost Russians saw as U.S. aggression. There were large anti-war rallies in major cities and spontaneousmanifestations ofanti-Americanism. and excessive reliance on military force. The idea of a multi-polar world not totallydominated by asingle "hyper-power" still has strong appeal in Russia. Putin does not seek to project Russia into theforefront of ananti-American coalition. He seeks, in cooperation with the U.S., to defeat al Qaeda in the Middle East and other terrorist groups in the region, writes Peter Bergen. He says Russia may have an interest inprinciple in opposing "unilateral" U.N. military action in Iraq. traditional U.S. allies France and Germany as well as withRussian partnerssuch as China. Putin reoriented Russian foreign and defense policy toward broad cooperation with the United States. Putinsees Russia's economic reconstruction and revitalization proceeding from its integration in the global economic system dominated by the advancedindustrial democracies. This cannot be accomplished in an atmosphere of political/military confrontationor antagonismwith the United State, he says. He says Putin therefore shifted Russian policy in 2001 to put some limits on U.s. power. Russia's shift suggests two questions: why the more hard-line stance toward U.S. policy on Iraq; and has Putin irrevocably "jumpedinto the French and German camp"? There are probably multiple factors behind Putin's more hard line stance toward the United States. There is Russia's interest inpromoting a "multi-polar world" and bolstering the stature and authority of the U.N. Russia has been "straddling both sides" of the war in Iraq. perhaps in their timing. In February 2003, Russian opposition to U.S. military action against Iraq hardened. The Russian Duma postponed action on the Strategic OffensiveReductions Treaty. On March 20, Putin criticized the U.s. attack as a political blunder thatcould jeopardize the international security system. The two presidents spoke by telephone on March 18 and reportedly agreed that despitedifferences on Iraq,bilateral cooperation on other issues would be increased. The Bush Administration also brandished sticks as well as carrots. Iraq conflict. Several legislative leaders close to Putin, however, criticized this action as against Russianinterests andpredicted Russian approval of the treaty soon. (18) Some lawmakers close to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, have called for the treaty to be scrapped. (19) Russian lawmakers have also called for an end to the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq. (20) Russian legislators have also criticized the treaty, saying it is against Russian interests. (21) The treaty is expected to be approved by Russia soon. was demonstrated in the negotiations leading up the U.N. Security Council's (UNSC)approval of Resolution1441 (November 8, 2002), in which France took the lead in pressing the United States for concessions. Many observers believed that the conclusion of Putin's balancing act would be a deal with Washington whereby Russia would agreenot to use its UNSC veto in return for U.S. guarantees of Russian economic interests in Iraq. A Russian parliamentary leader close to Putin suggested such a deal in October 2002. that there wasstill an alternativeto war and that Russia, France, and Germany were determined to work together to complete disarmament in Iraqpeacefully. (14) On March 2, Putin rejected regime change as a legitimate goal in Iraq. "[T]he international community cannot interfere with thedomestic affairs of any country in order to change its regime," he said. On March10, Foreign Minister Ivanov declared that if the U.S.-backed resolutionauthorizing war was submitted to the UNSC, Russia would vote against it. national security policy toward integration with the West and cooperation withthe United States. Most observers believe thisremains the basis of Putin's national security policy. By February 2003, Russian experts concluded that war in Iraq was virtually inevitable and Russia began evacuating its citizens. Although Russia opposed U.S. military action, it hoped to prevent this disagreement from damaging broaderbilateral relations. OnMarch 12, Deputy Foreign Minister Georgi Mamedov said that if war erupts, Russia "will cooperate with the UnitedStates for anearly resolution" of the conflict. "If the Americans and British can reassure Moscow that a future Iraqi regime will not beprejudicial toRussian economic interests, they will be better placed to secure its acquiescence" Putin sent his chief of staff, Aleksandr Voloshin,to Washington (February 24-25, 2003), where he met with the President, Secretary of State, and National SecurityAdvisor. TheRussian press reported his trip as, "an attempt to seal concrete economic deals in return for Russia's support orabstention on theSecurity Council" Russiawanted concrete, unequivocal guarantees. On February 28, 2003, the U.S. State Department designated three Chechen groups with alleged links to Al Qaeda as terroristorganizations. On March 6, the Senate unanimously approved the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty. OnMarch 10, SenLugar introduced a bill ( S. 580 ) to exempt Russia from the provisions of the Jackson-Vanik amendment. None of thesemoves are directly related to Iraq, except for the treaty.

ROUGE-1: 82.26, ROUGE-2: 74.44, ROUGE-L: 31.91
BERTScore: 73.19

==============================================
==================== [90/100] ====================
Summary:
number of samples that we might have drawn. Since each sample could have provided different estimates, we quantified the sampling error. We express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample’s results at a 95 percent confidence interval. This is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples we could have drew. Within each stratum and overall, the confidence intervals for survey results for percentages are generally within +/- 5 percentage points. The only estimates for which the confidence interval exceed 5 percentage point are certain results for the business methods stratum. In these instances, the confidence intervals are from 5 to 6 percentage points. The quality of survey data can also be affected by nonsampling error. For other estimates in the report, we have not provided the upper and lower bounds in the text or tables. Those details for all survey results are available in the e- supplement related to this report. In this report, our figures containing survey results show the upper & lower bounds for estimates at the 95 percent confidence interval. In the report’s e- Supplement, we show the results of our survey of more than 2,000 people. question 3 based on the midpoint. The 95 percent confidence intervals for these results are within +/- 10 percent of the estimates themselves. For some other survey questions, we also reviewed examiners’ open- ended responses on selected topics. We selected those topics based on our interviews with experts and USPTO officials as well as our analysis of closed-ended survey responses. The estimate for technology center 2100 (Computer Architecture, Software, and Information Security) has a95 percent confidence interval of within +/- 18 percent of its estimate itself. nonresponse errors, and data collection and processing errors. To minimize nonsampling error, we took several steps in developing the survey and in collecting and analyzing survey data. We worked with our survey professionals, among other things, to draft questions that were clear and unbiased. We pretested the survey in person with five USPTO staff: three examiners who are also representatives to the examiners’ union, a supervisory patent examiner, and a quality assurance specialist. We used these pretests to check that the questions wereclear and unambiguous, used correct terminology, requested information that could be feasibly To minimize nonresponse error, we made a variety of contacts with the sample of examiners during the survey. We used survey software in our analyses to produce appropriate estimates and confidence intervals. The programs we used to process and analyze the survey data were independently verified to ensure the accuracy of this work. In addition, from October 20 through 23, 2015, we attempted to follow up via telephone calls to all 1,102 examiners who had neither completed the survey nor told us that they were. obtained, and were comprehensive and unbiased. We also obtained comments on the survey from USPTO management and leadership from the examiners’ union. Using a web-based survey provided several advantages, including allowing examiners to enter their responses into an electronic instrument that created an automatic record for each respondent. This eliminated the potential for errors that could have resulted if we had used a manual process to enter respondents’ data from paper surveys. In addition, we obtained a quality review by a separate GAO survey methodologist. no longer examiners. To adjust the sampling weight for potential nonresponse bias, we used standard weighting class adjustments. The weighted response rate was also 80 percent. In this report and in the related e-supplement, we present the survey results using the nonresponse adjusted weights, which are generalizable to the eligible population of examiners and are based on USPTO years of experience at the agency. We also analyzed nonresponse biases to assess whether any factors were associated with examiners’ propensity to respond and (2) allow our analysis of respondents to properly reflect the sampling universe. prior art searches in the past quarter; we excluded those responses. Where possible, we coded responses to reflect a range of numbers by assigning a low and a high value. A second analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. We checked the sensitivity of results overall, within strata, and within GS level categories. Results were not statistically different when using the low value, midpoint (average between low and high values), or high value of a range. As a result, we present results for which examiners’ responses most frequently included keywords we identified for each topic. An analyst conducted a keyword search of all responses to the selected open-ended questions and coded responses containing the keywords. A second analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. Our report provides some examples or summaries of examiners' comments based on this review. Examiners' responses to open- ended questions are not generalizable to other examiners. In addition, because we did not conduct a systematic review of all open-ending responses to our survey, we do not report the exact number of examiner who provided responses on the topics we reviewed. All tests of association were carried out at the 5 percent level of significance. The testing was carried out in SUDAAN, which is statistical software appropriate for the analysis of survey data. The null hypothesis was that there is no association between the two tested variables. When the association between two variables, conditional on a third variable, is of interest, this is referred to as the stratum-adjusted test. The results of the study were independently verified to ensure their accuracy. The study was published in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. USPTO is taking steps to strengthen monitoring as well as helping examiners consider a wide array of nonpatent literature sources. But USPTO has not developed and documented a strategy to identify and assess the optimal means of incorporating new sources of art into these tools. Such a strategy would be consistent with federal standards for internal control and maintenance of information systems. Developing and periodically updating such a strategy could help USPto take full advantage of its new information technology tools to address some of the challenges examiners face in identifying relevant prior art. additional nonpatent literature sources to its new system because of its initial focus on developing parity with the existing system. USPTO had not established a documented strategy to identify and assess new sources in the future or the most optimal means of providing access to them. According to federal standards for internal control, control activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and mechanisms that help ensure that actions are taken to address risks. These activities are an integral part of an agency’s planning to achieve effective results and efficiently manage government resources. Federal standards for internal control specify that agencies should assess the risks the agency faces. An estimated 23 percent of examiners remained not at all confident to somewhat confident. In USPTO’s 2014-2018 Strategic Plan, the agency indicated its intent to evaluate changes to the its system for overtime. The agency is also looking at ways to improve the incentives for examiners to do their jobs better, the report says. The U.S. Office of Personnel Management is a private, nonprofit organization based in Washington. Patent examiners may move from one technology center or art unit to another during their careers. USPTO has reported that examiner attrition has increased over the past 5 years. As we found in 2007, attrition of less experienced examiners is a significant loss for the agency, in part because examiners require 4 to 6 years of on-the-job experience before they become fully proficient in conducting patent application reviews. When these staff leave, the agency loses as much as 5 years of training investment in them. of May 2015, approximately 39 percent of all examiners in the technology centers we reviewed had been at the agency for less than 5 years. As of September 2015, a majority of examiners did not have a degree beyond a bachelor’s degree when hired. USPTO officials told us that the agency has aimed to match new hires’ previous work experiences and educational backgrounds to technology centers. We found in 2005 that examiners were reluctant to attend voluntary training given the time demands involved. assess and measure each technology center’s progress toward closing any gaps in examiners’ technical knowledge and skills. Identifying critical occupations, skills, and competencies and analyzing workforce gaps are leading principles in workforce planning, as we and the Office of Personnel Management have previously identified. All personnel need to possess and maintain a level of competence that allows them to accomplish their assigned duties. Management needs to ensure that skill needs are continually assessed and that the organization is able to close any gaps. to obtain a workforce with the skills required to achieve organizational goals. Management also needs to provide employees the right training to develop and retain skill levels to meet changing organizational needs. USPTO developed a human capital strategy, its 2015-2018 People Plan, which replaced its 2011-2015 Strategic Human Capital Plan. The agency also identified the role of patent examiner as a mission- critical occupation and identified the competencies needed for this occupation. These competencies include technical work experience/education and technical competence, which we refer to collectively as technical competence. knowledge and skills of the individual examiners assigned to that center. Without periodically evaluating gaps between the technical competence of examiners and the knowledge and skills needed in each technology center, USPTO cannot ensure that it has appropriate strategies, such as training or other efforts, to close any gaps. The agency’s 2015-2018 People Plan does not include measures for monitoring progress in closing gaps, the authors say. The steps, in conjunction with developing measures to monitor progress toward closing any gaps, would help the agency address the effects of evolving technologies and workforce changes over time. requires that agencies (1) establish objective, quantifiable, and measurable performance goals and (2) establish performance indicators to measure progress toward each performance goal. The limitations to USPTO’s. ability to monitor examiners’ prior art searches at a technology center or art unit. level may hinder the agency�s ability. to identify and address issues in the thoroughness of examiners.“Internal controls should generally be designed to assure that ongoing monitoring. of their internal controls should assess the quality of performance over time,” the agency says.  examiners’ technical competence is an important factor in understanding patent applications and locating relevant prior art in the time allotted. USPTO has taken steps to identify the technical competencies of various examiner positions and to offer voluntary technical training opportunities to examiners. The agency has not conducted an overall analysis of the technical competence of its examiners to identify potential competency gaps for each technology center. Periodically conducting such analyses report to analyze the time examiners need to perform a thorough examination, the authors say. interpret written technical materials, rules, regulations, instructions, and reports. Specific technical competencies vary depending on the technology examined by each technology center and art unit. USPTO has documented specific technical competency for examiners in a series of “job analysis worksheets’ The technology centers use performance appraisal plans to individually assess examiners’ skills and competency gaps, officials say. But doing so does not address the question of whether broader Competency gaps exist at the technology center level or how they can be addressed. USPTO is updating its contract for initial classification services to require a higher level of expertise. The agreement between USPTO and EPO that supports the CPC system commits both offices to exchange best practices on classifications. As of March 2016, EPO and USPPO had not agreed upon a measure of consistency between the offices. The agencies can enhance and sustain their collaborative efforts by defining and articulating a common outcome and establishing mutually reinforcing or joint strategies, the authors say.. Establishing agreement with EPO on a target of consistency in classifying patent applications would help to implement this practice. the Department of Commerce’s written comments, reproduced in appendix IV, the Department concurred with our recommendations. USPTO provided additional technical comments that we incorporated, as appropriate. We also provided a draft of this report to EPO and JPO for their views and comment. EPO indicated it had no comments on the draft; JPO provided technical comments. The Department noted ongoing efforts to work with EPO to identify a target level of consistency for CPC decisions and develop a plan to monitor consistency. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office: Hiring Efforts Are Not Sufficient to Reduce the Patent Application Backlog. USPTO: Improvements Needed to Better Manage Patent Office Automation and Address Workforce Challenges. USpTO: USPto Has Made Progress in Hiring Examiners, but Challenges to Retention Remain. US PTO: Key Processes for Managing Patent Automation Strategy Need Strengthening. U.S PTO has made progress in hiring examiners but challenges to retention remain. of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of Commerce, the Director of the USPTO, the Commissioner for Patents, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. not identified a target level of consistency or a plan to monitor consistency between USPTO contractor and EPO classifications. The potential benefits of adopting the new classification system may be reduced as inconsistently classified patents make it more difficult for examiners to identify relevant U.S. and foreign patent literature. The new search system US PTO plans has the potential to integrate additional sources of nonpatent literature, an approach that EPO and JPO have taken and cited with other patent offices. USPTO is taking a number of steps to improve patent quality. USPTO has experienced some challenges working with EPO to adopt and consistently implement a new patent classification system. To enhance USPto’s ability to identify relevant prior art, we recommend that the Secretary of Commerce direct the Director of USPPO to take the following seven actions as the agency continues to implement its efforts to improve prior art searches. To ensure that USPBO is able to take full advantage of its investment in quality patents, the agency should develop a plan to monitor consistency to achieve the target. USPTO has found that classifications for some U.S. patent applications under the CPC system are inconsistent with EPO’s classifications. USPTO officially adopted the Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) system in January 2015. CPC gives examiners greater access to foreign patent literature compared to the prior system. It can be expanded more easily to include new technologies, USPtoT officials say. The new system is to be jointly used by both offices. Officials from both offices say it is a response to technological change. We conducted this performance audit from November 2014 to June 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. In assessing USPTO’s efforts, we identified criteria in the federal standards for internal control and the Government Performance and Results Act of 1993, as amended. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. This appendix provides details on steps in the patent examination process at the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) This report describes the challenges examiners face in identifying relevant prior art. It also describes how selected foreign patent offices have addressed challenges. The report assesses the extent to which the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) has taken steps to address any challenges. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. Report was coordinated with our report on patent quality. The European Patent Office and the Japan Patent Office were selected based on comments observers made about the quality of their work. World Intellectual Property Organization says 2.7 million patent applications were filed worldwide in 2014. 2.2 million applications filed with patent offices in the United States, China, Japan, South Korea, and Europe. EPO issues patents that cover 42 countries, most of which are member countries that are party to the European Patent Agreement (EPO) The organization estimates that approximately half of all applications worldwide are repetitive filings in a patent family, and the rest are initial filings. The IP5 offices, including EPO and JPO, each receive hundreds of thousands of applications each year. EPO and JPO have about one-half and one-fifth as many examiners as USPTO, respectively. There is a limit on the number of federal employees JPO can have; therefore, 494 of its 1,702 examiners are fixed-term. English (about 80 percent of applications), French (about 5 percent), and German (about 15 percent) are the official languages of the EPO, JPO and other patent offices. The EPO has three official languages, one of which is used for processing an application.  EPO only recruits students with at least a master’s degree and almost all JPO examiners join the office after graduate school. At EPO, examiners must also meet a requirement that they understand English, German, and French. JPO officials identified the longevity of examiners as a strength, stating that examiners are well trained and have experience that may enhance the quality of patent application examinations.to officials from these offices. EPO examiners spend their first 2 years in training, alternating periods of classroom training with periods of on-the-job training. EPO’s quality management system also calls for random audits, including a minimum of two prior art search audits for each examiner per year. JPO officials also reported taking steps to ensure that the patents it issues are of high quality. These steps include a director quality check, consultations with other examiners, and quality audits of a sample of examinations. In 2014, examiners recorded approximately 83,000 consultations and received approximately 243,000 new applications, according to JPO official's. EPO and JPO have procedures to review examiners’ work before issuing or denying a patent. At EPO, applications are examined by a panel of three examiners: a first examiner, second examiner, and chair. An individual examiner may serve as first examiner on some applications and second examiner or chair on others. USPTO has taken actions to leverage the work of foreign patent offices just as EPO andJPO have done, but the agency has experienced challenges working with EPO on a new patent. EPO and JPO examiners use classification and keyword searches instead of more complex search tools. EPO uses some automated tools that assist in keyword-based searches or provide automated search results. One EPO tool provides recommended search terms in its three official languages to examiners, based on a database of examiners’ past searches. The results are in the form of a ranked list of potentially related documents, which provides a starting point for examiners before they begin a manual search. The examiners in both offices hire examiners with technical expertise and provide several years of training. EPO’s primary search tool allows examiners to use a single interface to search through all of EPO's internal databases as well as some external databases of prior art. In addition to creating an internal database of nonpatent literature documents to facilitate examiners’ searches, EPO also added descriptive metadata to index these documents to help examiners find the most relevant documents. The system also incorporates features that make it user-friendly—for example, grouping documents to avoid examiners facing dozens of copies of the same article from different sources. EPO officials identified their search engine and the large number of indexed prior art resources available within the search engine as strengths of the office. EPO officials said that the office prefers to have internal collections of these resources so they may be integrated into its search tools. Some sources remain external and separate from EPO’s search systems. Because the cost of bringing sources into EPO's search systems is high, the office needs a strong business case to justify the expense. According to these officials, EPO needs to be able to provide a service to the public that it can't provide today. USPTO is collaborating with foreign patent offices to give examiners access to examination files from those offices. USPTO, in collaboration with EPO, designed and implemented a new, joint patent classification system. The U.S. Patent Classification system became outdated following budget constraints in the early 2000s that undermined the agency’s efforts to update the classification system in the United States, Europe, or other offices that adopt the system. In the pilot with the Korean Intellectual Property Office, examiners perform independent searches and examinations, then compare results. uses commercial databases of nonpatent literature to augment its internal database and annually evaluates whether each external database is useful for prior art search. Using patent classification systems. EPO and JPO use classification systems to help examiners narrow their searches and find relevant patent literature even if the patent application uses inconsistent terms or is written in a foreign language. Examiners may then look at other applications and patents within the same group to find similar inventions. A system that has more groups— sometimes more than one. Classification systems allow examiners to conduct prior art searches based on the classes assigned to an application, independent of its language and wording. This can improve search quality by producing results that would not be found from a specific keyword search but are nonetheless closely related. Reducing the number of results an examiner needs to consider decreases the time needed for the prior art search, thereby improving efficiency. According to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, the average time it takes to search for a patent is about three minutes. worksharing could give offices access to search reports of unpublished applications at other offices. These search reports may include prior art relevant to similar applications filed with EPO. EPO and JPO incorporate specific nonpatent literature resources into their offices’ main search tools, which may allow examiners to more efficiently search both patent and nonpatents literature by keyword, rather than searching multiple sources individually. JPO’s internal databases include JPO patent literature and some foreign patent literature. USPTO examiners face a variety of challenges in identifying relevant prior art during patent examination. EPO and JPO use several approaches that may help their examiners address challenges. These approaches include worksharing, creating internal databases of nonpatent literature, using patent classification systems, adopting advanced search tools, hiring and training of examiners to promote technical expertise, and incorporating review and audit procedures. The exchange of prior art searches or patent examination results among patent offices facilitates more efficient prior art search. patent offices to leverage others’ work and knowledge. The IP5, a multilateral forum of the five largest patent offices, identified worksharing as the main tool for addressing an increasing number of patent applications. JPO examiners still have to review the relevant literature themselves, but access to foreign examination results may help examiners identify relevant art or sources of prior art. An EPO official also noted thatWorksharing systems allow more efficient access toforeign patent literature. and help JPO Examiners more easily see foreign examiners' work. About half of all patent applications worldwide are part of patent families filed in multiple offices. To gain patent protection in multiple countries, inventors may file applications for the same invention in several different offices. Because the underlying invention is the same, the search and examination results at one office may be useful to examiners in another office. Worksharing can ameliorate the challenges posed by the quantity of potential prior art that examiners must search and the time pressure examiners face by allowing for worksharing. USPTO contributes data to three worksharing systems that make applications, prior art citations, and examination results from foreign patent offices available to examiners and the public. One system, the Common Citation Document, provides bibliographic information, such as title and source, of patent and nonpatent prior art citation. Another system, Global Dossier, provides access to the examination history of applications. A third system, PATENTSCOPE, run by the World Intellectual Property Organization, gives access to applications filed with multiple offices under the Patent Cooperation Treaty. USPTO has entered into two pilot programs to jointly examine certain applications. Applicants who file related patent applications with USPTO and either JPO or the Korean Intellectual Property Office may request to enter the pilot. In the pilot with JPO, USPPO will review the applications of both JPO and the Korean IP Office. The Collaborative Search Pilot Program is open to all patent applicants in the U.S. and to all other countries in the world. It is intended to address challenges related to managing the large quantity of prior art and accessing prior art. technology was determined when the examiner performance and production system was first created in the 1970s or when subsequent art units were added. USPTO adjusted the time allotted to examiners between fiscal years 2010 and 2012 and gave all patent examiners a total of 2.5 additional hours per application. The agency did not evaluate art unit or technology-specific factors prior to making this change. In April 2016, approximately 1,000 examiners received an additional 2.7 hours for examinations of certain technologies. The time pressures created by USPTO’s system for determining allotted examination time have important implications for examiners’ ability to conduct thorough prior art searches. About two-thirds of examiners responding to our survey reported having insufficient time to complete a thorough Prior Art Search. The Department concurred with our recommendation on assessing the time examiners need to conduct a thorough prior Art Search for different technologies. We continue to believe that the agency should review the time allotted for all technologies, and not only those identified through feedback related to CPC. of examiners in the Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry technology center. How often examiners searched for foreign patent literature, scientific articles or presentations, or foreign-language nonpatent literature was statistically associated with their description of the sufficiency of time they had to complete a thorough prior art search. A majority of examiners (an estimated 72 percent) worked voluntary/uncompensated overtime in the past 6 months to meet their goals, as shown in figure 6. An estimated 30 percent of examiner worked an average of more than 10 hours of voluntary/uncompensated overtime per biweekly period. However, on the basis of our survey, an estimated 56 percent of examiners experience no pressure to work overtime. Experts we interviewed and examiners we surveyed had mixed opinions about the need for overtime. In a 2007 report on USPTO’s efforts to hire and retain an adequate workforce, we found that an estimated 70 percent of Examiners worked voluntary/Uncompensate overtime in the previous year. Examiners are expected to complete their examination of an application in a certain number of hours. The time allotted varies depending on factors such as the technology and the seniority of the examiner. Less than half of the examiners—an estimated 46 percent—were moderately or very confident that they found the most relevant prior art during the time allotted. The allotted time includes the time needed to review the application, perform that examiners spent an average of 8 hours per application during the past quarter. becoming GS-14 examiners. Question 3 in the survey asked examiners approximately how many hours they spent per application on prior art searches in the past quarter. Examiners provided a variety of open-ended responses. Some respondents chose to provide a range, such as “5 to 10,” while others provided a single number for hours spent perApplication. Some examiners also provided responses that did not clearly indicate the approximate hours per application spent on priorArt.com. Most examiners below the GS-14 level must have their actions reviewed by a more senior examiner. Some GS-13 examiners are in the process of becoming primary examiners. In addition to applying for a patent from USPTO, an inventor may also seek patent protection in other countries for the same invention by filing in multiple patent offices. Such interrelated patent applications are described as a patent family. The World Intellectual Property analyzed the responses to the survey for all examiners, as well as responses by technology center and by the General Schedule (GS) level. and interviewed USPTO officials; a group of four supervisory patent examiners; officials of the examiners’ union, the Patent Office Professional Association. We also conducted semistructured interviews with subject matter experts (experts) active in the intellectual property field and knowledgeable about the subject of prior art. We selected and interviewed 18 experts to obtain views of different stakeholder communities, including four academic experts and four patent holders from the following technology fields: chemical technologies, electrical and others. The survey was designed to collect information on challenges USPTO faces in finding relevant prior art. To identify our survey population, we obtained a list of patent examiners as of May 2015. We excluded examiners from the following 3 technology centers: We excluded the Designs technology center because these examiners work on design patents instead of utility patents; design patents are outside the scope of this engagement. The survey was fielded between August and November 2015, and the results were published in November 2015. technologies, and mechanical technologies, based on data from USPTO that identified the companies receiving patents in these fields from 2010 through 2014. Five attorneys based on their leadership (e.g., as chairs or co-chairs) of patent-related committees or sections of various bar associations. Three nongovernmental organizations we identified during background research that had activities or publications related to patents. Two patent data experts who were listed in a 2015USPTO analysis evaluating search technologies. In addition, we conducted a web-based survey of a stratified random sample of 3,336 eligible patent examiners from across 8 of the 11 fields. policies, search tools, and human capital management. Our survey results show the extent of the challenges may vary by technology center or examiners’ GS level (see app. III). Because we surveyed a generalizable stratified random sample of examiners, our results provide estimates for each technology center included in our study. See the related e-supplement, GAO-16-478SP, for the original survey language and more detailed results. In addition to the contact named above, Chris Murray (Assistant Director), Tind Shepper Ryen, Krista Breen Anderson, Hilary Benedict, Richard Burkard, John Delicath, Alice Feldesman, Armetha. agriculture, and business methods. We received responses from 2,669 eligible examiners for an 80 percent response rate. Because we used a probability procedure based on random selections, our sample is only one of a large number. We drew our stratified random sample of 3,336 eligible USPTO patent examiners from a list of 3,336 eligible patent examiners. This resulted in nine strata with a target survey population totaling 7,825 examiners. and have different statutory and administrative requirements than utility patents. We excluded examiners who perform “reexamination” work and not initial patent examinations. We then defined nine strata by technology center, with one technology center separated into two strata, as described in table 6. Specifically, the Transportation, Construction, Electronic Commerce, Agriculture, National Security and License and Review technology center includes a diverse set of technologies, including transportation, construction, and Electronic Commerce. We also excluded examiner employed at USPTO for less than 1 year. According to USPTO policy, examiners will consider this information when reviewing a patent application. Excessive references make it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. Applicants are generally not required to explain the relevance of the references or to point examiners to the particular portions of references that are relevant. Some relevant prior art may require a fee to access, may not be in a text- searchable format, or may otherwise be difficult to access. commonly known in this field but may not be found by searching a public database. One expert suggested that prior art from before the mid-1970s is difficult to find because patents issued before then have not been fully digitized. Less than half of examiners encountered applications with a subject matter in which they have knowledge of existing prior art based on their education or previous work experience. The training examiners receive may also affect their ability to maintain the technical competence they need to effectively identify relevant prior art. Patent examiners told us that prior art searching is the most time-consuming aspect of patent examination. Based on our survey, an estimated 80 percent of examiners spent, on average, from 6 to 20 hours initially examining patent applications and completing a first office action. For the prior art search portion of these efforts, we estimate that 67 percent find they have somewhat or much less time than needed to complete thorough prior art searches given a typical workload. Our survey also found that examiners’ perception of the sufficiency of time for completing thorough priorArt searches varies by technology center. 45 percent of all examiners in the eight technology centers we reviewed find that the large quantity of art makes it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. Fewer examiners—34 percent—find that the quantity makes it  easier. responses varied among technology centers, as shown in appendix III. In response to an open- ended survey question, one examiner described their difficulty as “overwhelming.’’ In the Computer Networks, Multiplex Communication, Video Distribution, and Security technology center, an estimated 42 percent of examiners find CPC classifications make it “somewhat or much easier” Misclassification occurs when an application is not classified into the group most closely associated with the invention. This can result in applications being routed to the wrong USPTO technology center or art unit for examination. About half of examiners (an estimated 50 percent) find that additional translators would make it somewhat or much easier, according to a survey by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), which oversees the patent system. The U.N.’s Office for Patent Examinations (OPEX) is the body that oversees the USPtoT. is because misclassified applications may be difficult to find when examiners search for patent literature using technology-specific patent classification categories. Ensuring examiners’ technical competence. According to most experts we interviewed, ensuring that examiners have sufficient and appropriate technical backgrounds, knowledge, or skills for conducting thorough prior art searches is also a challenge. The role of patent examiner is a difficult one that can take years to learn, and examiners with less education or work experience, may not have the technical knowledge necessary to identify relevant prior art. USPTO and EPO told us that there were disagreements between the two offices on how to classify some applications. USPTO examiners in certain technology centers reported difficulty with the CPC system in our survey. Inconsistently applying the classification system to applications undermines its usefulness, the authors say. Also, misclassified applications may require examiners to familiarize themselves with new technologies, they say, which increases the amount of time it takes for them to conduct their prior art searches and negatively affect their confidence in the system. USPTO provided examiners and classification contractors with training on how to classify applications. USPTO assigned lead quality experts to each technology center to provide training and assistance. The agency has not identified specific reasons that account for differences between its system and the CPC system. The examiner may revise the classification during examination. The CPC system is being rolled out across the U.S. over the next few months, the agency says. The new system is expected to be fully implemented by the end of the year. USPTO uses two methods to review examinations, which may help the agency monitor the effects of the challenges described above as well as the thoroughness of searches. USPTO does not require supervisory examiners to document these reviews in a consistent form, the agency cannot analyze the data to examine issues with prior art search quality in specific technology centers and art units. Beginning in November 2015, OPQA made changes to its review processes that along with an increase in staff, should allow the office to perform statistically valid assessments. about 12,000 audits in 2016, according to OPQA officials. In 2015, USPTO drafted a master review form that could standardize OPQa and supervisory examiner reviews with a single, consistent approach and documentation. As of March 2016, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office had not made a decision about the final content of the review form, when supervisory patent examiners might begin to use the new form, or how the data from the reviews would be used. USPTO supervisory patent examiners are required to review at least four office actions of each of their primary examiners per year. Auditors in OPQA documented the results of their reviews, and the office used them to evaluate the examiner corps from year to year. Supervisory examiners do not need to perform an independent search for prior art, according to a USPTO training document, but should adjust their reviews based on an examiner’s skills, abilities, and performance history. The Department said it would ensure adequate search data are collected to assess the quality of searches at the technology center level. The Department noted that a great deal of information on examiners’ prior art searches is potentially available from records and reviews by primary examiners, supervisors, OPQA, and others. Over time, the Department concurred, it would investigate using audits and reviews to monitor the thoroughness of examiners' prior art Searches over time. The department noted that these reviews have not been carried out or recorded in a consistent manner in the past. draft of the new master review form did not require OPQA or supervisory examiners to evaluate the thoroughness of an examiner’s search. If a reviewer finds that the examiner should have made a rejection but did not, the form asks the reviewer to identify the source of prior art needed for the missed rejection. The March 2016 draft of the form does not include, and does not require the examiner to record his or her search strategy for prior art associated with the inventor's name. Survey results show, examiners’ search strategies and the sources they use will differ based on the technology. Examiners have access to guidance and training on classification-based searches. USPTO has not documented technology-specific guidance on what constitutes a thorough prior art search for each class. We adjusted our report to acknowledge the information USPto provides on these suggested search areas. We also recommend that reviews of examiners' prior art searches collect sufficient information to assess search quality at the technology center level. art searches are conducted and documented that could help to address a weakness of its past efforts. However, USPTO still faces limitations in its ability to use the data to monitor the thoroughness of examiners’ prior art searches. To improve its monitoring of priorArt searches, US PTO should take the following three actions: Develop written guidance on what constitutes a thorough prior art search within each technology field (i.e., mechanical, chemical, electrical), technology center, art area, or art unit. Establish goals and indicators for improving prior Art searches. We reviewed documents from the agency related to prior art search procedures and capabilities. We also interviewed stakeholders knowledgeable about the offices’ practices, such as academics who study these offices. Because these individuals were not necessarily knowledgeable about USPTO practices, they are not included among the 18 experts discussed above. The report also looked at initiatives related to information technology resources or capabilities, the examiner workforce and related human capital management efforts, training practices, and international cooperation. For more information, visit the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office's website. USPTO is procuring an automated prior art search capability that could enhance examiners’ ability to identify relevant prior art. In June 2015, USPTO requested information on a search system that uses the claims and specification within a patent application to search for patent and nonpatent literature automatically, without human involvement. The new system will initially replicate the current systems, such as EAST and WEST, which focus on U.S. patent literature and include only one source of nonPatent literature. USPTO is in the process of a major, multiyear $405 million effort to upgrade its information technology tools. A new system will manage all aspects of patent examination, including certain aspects of their prior art searches. The new system, called Patents End-to-End, will, according to USPTO’s Strategic Information Technology Plan for fiscal 2014-2018, will make it somewhat or much easier to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted to examiners. enhance accurate and consistent results in examination quality. USPTO’s goals for patent quality in the strategic plan and for the quality initiative do not currently include goals or indicators assessing the thoroughness of prior art searches. We have previously reported that establishing program goals and associated indicators constitutes a leading practice for planning within federal agencies. Among other things, the Government Performance and Results Act Modernization Act of 2010 is aimed at improving the quality of federal government programs and services. It is not required to establish goals for improving prior art search quality. Examiners have minimum production goals, based on the time allotted, for the number of office actions they must complete. USPTO uses several different information technology systems to assist examiners in conducting prior art searches. Of the 18 experts, 10 agreed that the search tools and capabilities available to examiners create challenges to conducting thorough prior art Searches. One expert said that examiners’ electronic priorArt searches predominantly rely on using keywords, and this is a problem if the examiners do not know the most appropriate keywords. different applications may use different terms to describe the same thing. Inconsistent terminology can make it more difficult for examiners to find relevant prior art because searching for one term using keyword searches will not identify documents that use a different term. Examiners reported that issues with the clarity of the application make itMore difficult to complete thorough prior art searches in the time needed to do so. According to four of the experts we interviewed, the absence of standard terms is particularly a challenge for software-related applications. USPTO has taken or begun planning various actions that may help address challenges in identifying relevant prior art. But some of these actions have limitations that may hinder their effectiveness. USPTO requires examiners to perform a thorough prior art search and record their search results or search history. But the agency has not clearly defined what constitutes a thoroughPrior art search.not conduct additional searches. The agency has also not established goals and indicators for improving prior art searches, the authors say. They say the agency cannot identify and address issues that are more prevalent in certain technology centers or art areas. USPTO requires applicants and others assisting in filing an application to submit all information known to be material to patentability. Examiners we surveyed reported difficulties with the amount and relevance of prior art references provided by applicants. 60 percent of examiners in the Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, and Products technology center and 60 percent in the Chemical and Materials Engineering technology center reported difficulties in identifying relevant prior art. To complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted, compared to other technology centers, examiners need more time. The focus of patent examination is to determine whether the invention in a patent application satisfies the legal requirements for a patent, including that the invention be novel and not obvious. USPTO’s manual for patent examiners establishes certain requirements and processes that examiners must follow in examining patent applications, including performing prior art searches. There are generally two types of prior art—patent literature or patent expert exhaustive readiness. The examining process involves a variety of steps, at least one of which includes prior art searches. USPTO plans to evaluate changes to the agency’s system for determining the number of applications a patent examiner is expected to review within a specified period of time. The agency has not identified plans to assess the amount of time examiners in different technologies need to perform thorough prior art searches. Without this information, the agency does not know if it is allotting examiners appropriate amounts of time to complete their work. Based on our survey, most examiners find that they do not have sufficient time for thorough priorArt searches. Time pressures may reduce examiners’ ability to conduct thorough prior art searches. USPTO may not have reasonable assurance that examiners in all technology centers have the skills and knowledge to identify relevant prior art during patent examination. Examiners face a number of challenges in their efforts to search for prior art, including the large volume of prior art from multiple sources to consider, unclear patent applications, difficulties identifying or accessing relevant nonpatent literature and prior art in foreign languages, and limits on the time available. practice that examiners should attempt to identify all applicable grounds for rejecting a claim or claims during their first review. According to USPTO’s manual for patent examiners, this practice aims to avoid unnecessary delays. Such delays could be caused by examiners waiting to continue examining an application until previously identified issues are resolved. However, the practice of compact prosecution may discourage examiners from resolving any issues of clarity or ambiguity before conducting their initial searches for relevant prior art. For example, as one examiner commented in our survey, in order to follow the compact prosecution practice, The large volume of prior art available from multiple sources makes searching for relevant prior art challenging. Nonpatent literature overall and software-related prior art are more difficult to find. Prior art related to computer technologies has also been hard to find, according to one expert we interviewed, in part because a lot of information is now available in a variety of formats. The amount of patents, publications, and other nonpatent Literature has grown exponentially, making it harder to findrelevant prior art in the time allotted. relevant prior art from searches for certain types of prior art more than other types. How often examiners search for certain type of prior Art varies by technology center. Expert: Clarity of applications can pose a challenge to finding relevant prior art. Examiners requested a method capability to efficiently search for prior art using a single, integrated search that includes both patent literature and multiple sources of nonpatent literature. The time it takes examiners to search the large and increasing volume of nonPatent literature and the inefficiency of having to search many different sources individually. CMH test. The test statistic is Wald Chi-Square. We also performed CMH tests on responses to questions on how often examiners search for certain types of prior art. The types of art included were foreign patent literature, scientific articles or presentations, foreign- language nonpatent literature, and industry-related nonpatents. We found that examiners were more likely to search for prior art that they had not previously seen or that they were less likely to have time to complete a thorough search. submissions may address challenges related to the quantity and availability of prior art. According to information from USPTO, third parties submitted prior art for less than 1 percent of the approximately 600,000 patent applications received per year since third-party submissions began in 2012. An internal review of 300 randomly selected applications found that examiners used a submission to reject a patent application in 20 to 25 percent of such cases. We estimate that 83 percent of examiners have rarely or never seen an application with a third- party submission. Since 2012, USPTO has had authority to receive submissions from third parties that may help identify potentially relevant prior art for published patent applications. This process, sometimes described as crowdsourcing, allows experts and other interested parties to share documents that they believe will aid USPto’s examination of an application. Prior art submitted by third parties can help identify prior art that is not immediately available to examiners or that may be difficult to find.USPTO considered allowing examiners to use crowdsourcing to solicit such art for specific applications or topics. USPTO’s manual for patent examiners requires them to conduct a thorough prior art search. Patent literature consists of previously issued U.S. or foreign patents and published patent applications. Nonpatent literature can include such things as product manuals, standards established by international organizations, textbooks, periodicals, or conference presentations. Both patent and nonpatent Literature may be written in a language other than English, referred to as foreign-language art in this report. USPTO officials say adopting the CPC system helps examiners give greater consideration to foreign patent documentation. Patent examiners may face difficulties with applications that have been translated from a foreign language. The effect of unclear applications may be exacerbated by USPTO’s policies. In our patent quality report (GAO-16-490), we provide additional information on how the clarity of applications affects patent quality. All rights to this article are reserved by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. For. confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. USPTO anticipates that a pilot system will be available to a limited number of examiners. The new system could expand upon the capabilities of a currently available system. Such a system could improve the search tools available to examiners and help address the challenge of managing the quantity of potentially relevant prior art. USPTO uses the current system to perform searches for about one-tenth of the agency’s incoming applications, whereas it expects to use the new system for every application. USPTO’s Scientific and Technical Information Center (STIC) operates systems that can search U.S. patent literature and that store some nonpatent literature. Examiners may access additional foreign patent documents through other web-based tools. In some cases, USPTO examiners may not be able to use public search engines because searching for specific terms or concepts from an unpublished application may put the confidentiality of the application at risk. On the basis of our survey, a majority of examiners (an estimated 86 percent) agree that having access to immediate machine translation of foreign-language documents would make it somewhat or much easier to complete a thorough prior art search. As of May 2015, USPTO had nearly 8,300 patent examiners across the eight technology centers we reviewed. Examiners at the GS-14 level or above are generally primary examiners. Primary examiners may accept or reject a patent application without additional review.machine translation services from STIC and three contracted translation vendors that currently cover 35 languages. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office uses the General Schedule (GS) classification system for examiners, whose levels range from GS-5 to GS-15.

ROUGE-1: 65.35, ROUGE-2: 60.99, ROUGE-L: 19.34
BERTScore: 54.35

==============================================
==================== [91/100] ====================
Summary:
corrosion. Army officials from the 3rd Infantry Division have stated that with the exception of rubber seals on some vehicles, prepositioned equipment entering Southwest Asia was in good shape. These officials said they did not experience any corrosion that affected their ability to perform operations. Officials with the 1st and 2nd Marine Expeditionary Forces who used or observed the use of prepositioning equipment in Southwest Asia found it was in a high state of readiness and could not recall any instance where corrosion affected their operations. 3rd Marine Expeditionary Force said the equipment on the prepositioning ship USNS Lummus that was used in a 2004 training exercise in South Korea was generally in the same good operating condition it was when first uploaded about 2 years previously. They told us that with the exception of minor hydraulic leaks and o-ring deterioration, the equipment was generally free of corrosion problems. The primary measure to reduce corrosion problems is to replace the equipment with new, more modern equipment. The equipment was removed from the ship in August 2005. Corps have taken other measures intended to help reduce the impact of corrosion on prepositioned assets. Army and Marine Corps policies require that repaired equipment be restored to good condition before being placed in prepositioning status. Marine Corps maintenance guidance for prepositions includes visual inspections for leaks, corrosion removal and recoating, and preservation. Army maintenance regulations also provide for the use of lubricants and preservatives, as well as regular inspections for equipment stored on the prepositional ships.. The Army and Marine Corps consider collection of this information to be a low priority. Army regulations require units to collect corrosion-related data as part of their equipment maintenance and storage programs. The Marine Corps, on the other hand, does not require the collection of corrosion information for all equipment, but believes it to be beneficial. The mission of the Marine Corps’ Corrosion Prevention and Control Program is to reduce maintenance requirements and costs associated with corrosion. The program seeks to identify and assess current and projected corrosion problems for all tactical ground and ground support equipment. Officials from both the Army and the Marine Corps said that corrosion is routinely treated as part of the overall maintenance process. Army officials at Camp Carroll, South Korea, told us that corrosion observed on the engine blocks in 5-ton trucks would be repaired during maintenance performed on the entire engine. According to Marine Corps officials, corrosion information has value but not enough to be included with more critical information, such as the amount of equipment in the inventory and amount in serviceable condition. Although the army and Marine Corps are not collecting data about corrosion, they have no incentive to collect it. We believe that funding and priorities should be aligned to the greatest extent possible to provide greater assurance that the department’s resources are being used prudently. As stated in our report, DOD can achieve long-term cost savings by investing in additional corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. We interviewed officials and obtained documentation at the following locations: Office of the Secretary of Defense Corrosion Policy and Oversight Office Headquarters, Department of the Army U.S. Army Materiel Command, Fort Belvoir, Virginia Tank-Automotive and Armaments Command, Warren, Michigan. given the resources the military services devote each year to addressing corrosion-related problems. Corrosion prevention measures may reduce the amount of maintenance needed, thereby extending the availability of equipment items over their life cycle. The Army has had previous success using corrosion data regarding non-prepositioning programs to support corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. For example, the Army National Guard began the initial phase of a humidity-controlled storage program for its vehicles and equipment in 1994. Guard officials told us that they collected and analyzed an extensive amount of information on corrosion and its cost impacts. work that DOD and the military services did not have an effective management approach to mitigate and prevent corrosion. We recommended that DOD develop a departmentwide strategic plan with clearly defined goals, measurable outcome-oriented objectives, and performance measures. DOD concurred and in December 2003 issued its corrosion strategy. According to DOD’s corrosion strategy, knowing the costs of corrosion is essential to adequately implementing the strategy. Having corrosion data helps the department learn what works so it can be more effective in reducing corrosion. on selected pieces of equipment and estimated that a significant amount of corrosion-related costs could be avoided by using humidity-controlled storage facilities. Program officials currently estimate that the sheltering and preservation effort will save a total of about $1.2 billion through fiscal year 2010. Army officials cited similar results after collecting corrosion data on Hellfire missile launchers. Effectively addressing corrosion on prepositioned stocks of equipment can enable the services to achieve significant cost savings and increase readiness and safety for rapidly fielding combat-ready forces. The extensive and long-term deployments of U.S. troops in Southwest Asia are likely to magnify the effects of corrosion on military equipment. Higher rates of corrosion result in increased repairs and replacements, drive up costs, and take critical systems out of action, reducing mission readiness. Corrosion can also reduce the safety of equipment items. estimates of corrosion costs DOD-wide have ranged from $10 billion to $20 billion annually. We have found in our prior research that corrosion can reduce mission readiness by as much as 50 percent. The Army determined that about $8.7 million (31 percent) of the estimated $28 million spent to restore this equipment to serviceable condition was used to address corrosion-related problems. Marine Corps officials estimated that corrosion costs make up at least 50 percent of the $110,000 needed, on average, to repair motorized lighterage prepositioned equipment. The additional information that would be obtained through the collection of corrosion data could support the Army’s and Marine Corps’ efforts to more effectively prevent and mitigate corrosion. efforts, we recommend that the Secretary of Defense take the following three actions. The Army should examine the feasibility of using temporary shelters, including humidity-controlled facilities, to store land-based prepositioned assets currently stored outdoors. The Marine Corps should require the collection of corrosion-related data and use these data to support additional corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. We were told by Marine Corps officials that collection of these data has been a low priority. However, DOD did not provide specific information on planned actions, milestones, and resources for implementing the recommendations. Corrosion data could be used to help identify underlying causes of maintenance problems. The military services have estimated that at least 25 percent of overall maintenance costs are corrosion related. As much as one-third of these costs could be reduced through more effective corrosion prevention and mitigation. According to Army and Marine Corps officials, corrosion information on prepositioned assets is unavailable primarily because it has low priority.. Army officials said most of those responsible for documenting the maintenance action do not want to take the extra time to include corrosion information because they see it as having the current costs. We focused our review on the prepositioned assets managed by the Army and Marine Corps. These services provided most of the equipment used in current operations in Southeast Asia. We met with DOD officials involved with developing DOD’s long-term strategy to prevent and control corrosion. We also discussed additional actions that could be taken to further prevent and mitigate corrosion. The Army and the Marine Corps have the majority of the military’Southeast Asia prepositioning assets, the report says. The U.S. Army is the largest prepositioner of military equipment in the world. The Army and Marine Corps have taken some measures to reduce the impact of corrosion on prepositioned assets. The Army could increase its use of storage facilities for land-based assets. Sheltering assets, especially sheltering in humidity-controlled facilities, has been shown to be a key anticorrosion practice. Without such data, the services may lack the incentive to support efforts to more effectively prevent and mitigate corrosion and achieve long-term cost savings, the authors say. and new incentives to reward life-cycle cost reduction efforts must be implemented. The Army is currently storing a substantial portion of its prepositioned equipment outdoors. Temporary shelters may be a feasible option to address immediate storage needs. Maintaining low humidity levels reduces corrosion because moisture is a primary cause of corrosion. Army and Marine Corps officials told us that the use of humidity-controlled facilities is effective at minimizing equipment corrosion and maintaining high readiness levels. The Army stores some of its land-based prepositioning equipment in humidity- Controlled warehouses. Marine Corps prepositiones assets are stored in humidified facilities either on ships or in caves in Norway. The humidity-controlled sheltering program includes combat vehicles, trailers, radar systems, and other equipment located at Guard facilities in 45 states and U.S. territories. According to Army storage and maintenance guidelines, storage of equipment in facilities without humidity control invites greater and more rapid deterioration because of corrosion. For example, whereas combat vehicles in humidity- controlled facilities need to be exercised and road tested every 30 months, vehicles stored with humidity control require exercising every 12 months. One of the benefits of humidity. Temporary shelters are available in a range of sizes, materials, and features, including humidity control. Army officials told us that temporary shelters are used primarily in situations where immediate storage is required. The military services have made prior use of temporary shelters in several locations, for both prepositioned and non-prepositioned equipment. For example, the Marine Corps uses temporary humidity-controlled facilities in Florida to store some of its prepositioning assets awaiting maintenance and upload to ships. In addition, the Army has stored prepositione equipment in temporary shelters located in Livorno, Italy, and Camp Carroll, South Korea. The Army National Guard estimates that it will have achieved a total of over $1.2 billion in cost savings by fiscal year 2010. Most of the projected savings is based on having to perform less maintenance on equipment that is stored in humidity-controlled facilities. According to a study by the Army Cost and Economic Analysis Center, sheltering equipment in a humidity- controlled facility had a potential return on investment of a minimum of $8 for every $1 invested. The Army estimates that the cost savings will be in excess of $1 billion. amount of land-based prepositioned assets outdoors without adequate sheltering. At these locations, assets are left relatively unprotected from moisture, sand, and other elements that contribute to corrosion. At Camp Carroll in South Korea, about 30 percent of the Army’s Heavy Brigade Combat Team equipment—mostly sustainment stock—is stored outdoors in an often damp and humid region. In some cases, equipment is stored outside well over 3 months. For example, 44 M1A1 tanks and 10 fuel tankers sat outdoors for more than a year after undergoing maintenance and experienced a total of $1.2 million. facilities. Army officials told us that the equipment had been poorly maintained and, as a result, experienced many significant defects and readiness shortfalls. Officials said some of the equipment corroded faster and more severely because of being stored outside. It costs more to maintain equipment that is stored outside in part because the equipment needs to be inspected three times more often than equipment in humidity-controlled storage, officials said. Large amounts of Army prepositioned equipment are being stored in South Korea and Japan. As of April 2006, the Army was storing outside nearly all of its prepositioned assets (numbering about 11,000 items) in Southwest Asia. At the Army’s prepositioning facility in Goose Creek, South Carolina, equipment is stored outside during the time it is not undergoing maintenance because of a lack of storage facilities. Also stored outside in Kuwait where the environment is highly corrosive because of the humid climate, sand with high salinity levels, and strong winds. The amount of time equipment is storage outside ranges, on average, from 1 month to more than 3. plans, additional storage facilities will not be available at all three sites until 2012 at the earliest. In South Korea and Kuwait, Army officials said that even with the additional planned storage facilities, substantial amounts of equipment will still be stored outdoors. Officials estimated about 20 percent of equipment in Kuwait will remain outside. Officials cited competing funding priorities as the primary reason for not providing indoor storage for all land-based prepositioned assets. Army officials also cited uncertainties regarding the number and type of equipment and length of time it is stored. The lack of available land limits the ability to construct new, or expand existing, facilities. Estimates of storage needs are difficult because of uncertainties regarding the consolidation and reconfiguration of U.S. Forces Korea facilities. Army officials said that the Goose Creek facility primarily is a maintenance facility and is not meant for the storage of equipment, which makes it difficult to justify the building of new storage space. Although building new storage facilities is difficult, Army prepositioning afloat is possible, officials said. The military services have prepositioning programs to store combat or support equipment and supplies near areas with a high potential for conflict. The Army’s program involves three primary categories of stocks: combat brigade sets, operational projects, and war reserve sustainment stocks. The Air Force prepositions stocks of war reserve supplies to meet initial contingency requirements and to sustain early deploying forces. The Navy prepositioned war reserve stocks include bare base sets; vehicles; munitions; and a variety of consumable supplies. DOD has made significant investments in its military prepositioning programs. The services have collectively used an average of over $1 billion each year to operate and maintain these assets. Prepositioned assets have been used extensively to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Army spent $386.1 million for storage and maintenance of prepositioned. assets in fiscal year 2005, including $76.5 million for assets in South Korea and $38.3 million for Assets in Southwest Asia. The Marine Corps used equipment from two of its three pre positioned squadrons to support these operations. Most of the military services store equipment and supplies in Southwest Asia, the Pacific theater, Europe, and aboard prepositioning ships. Figure 1 shows the major locations of prepositioned stocks.ships around the world. In addition to the contact named above, Thomas Gosling, Assistant Director; Larry Bridges; Renee Brown; Lisa Canini; Amy Sheller; Allen Westheimer; and Tim Wilson were major contributors to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Battalion Afloat, Goose Creek, South U.S. Forces Korea, Yongsan Garrison, South Korea. Field Support Battalion Far East, Camp Carroll, Materiel Support Center Korea. 19th Theater Support Command, Camp Walker, Daegu, South Korean. U.s. Army Pacific, Fort Shafter, Hawaii. Marine Corps Headquarters, Quantico, Virginia. Blount Island Command, Jacksonville, Florida. Office of the Inspector, Jacksonville,. Florida. The Marine Corps Logistics Command, Albany, Georgia. We conducted our work from May 2005 through February 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We reviewed available data for inconsistencies and discussed the data with DOD and service officials. We determined that the data used in this report was accurate and reliable. We are happy to make clear that this is not the case with any of the other data used by the U.S. military during this period of time. We apologize for any confusion caused by the use of this data. We have no further comment on this matter. for our review were sufficiently reliable for our purposes. If you or your staffs have any questions, please contact me at (202) 512- 8365. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. In addition, this report is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.

ROUGE-1: 66.84, ROUGE-2: 61.84, ROUGE-L: 27.50
BERTScore: 60.48

==============================================
==================== [92/100] ====================
Summary:
The Department of Transportation’s (DOT) Hazardous Materials Information System maintains and provides access to comprehensive information on hazardous materials incidents, exemptions and approvals. The system consists of five modules that register carriers and shippers, document incidents involving hazardous materials, issue special permits, facilitate approvals and exemptions pertaining to safety regulations, and document standards. To replace legacy modules, and plan to retire the legacy modules by the end of fiscal year 2018, the system will be replaced by software applications and processes. on scanned hazardous materials incident reports; the software was no longer supported by the vendor, as of December 2014. DOT is in the process of updating the functions performed by the system. The new system’s modules are intended to be integrated, automated, and improve efficiency, effectiveness, and data quality. Further, the unsupported application is planned to be eliminated. While DOT does not have dates for when individual legacy modules will be retired, officials stated that they plan to have all the legacy modules retired by the end of fiscal year 2018. DOT’s profiled system was initiated about 46 years ago and allows the agency to maintain comprehensive information on hazardous materials incidents. Of the 12 investments or systems, agencies had plans to replace or modernize 11 of these. However, the plans for 3 of those were general or tentative in that the agencies did not provide specificity on time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. The profiles of these systems and investments are available on the DOT's website. Diversity Visa Information System (DVIS) is an electronic case management system used by approximately 30 federal employees and contractor staff working at the Department of State’s (State) Kentucky Consular Center. It tracks and validate application information submitted by foreign nationals under the Diversity Visa immigration program. System start date: early 1990s Age: Approximately 26 years System anticipated end date: 2020 Fiscal year 2016 funding: about $164,000 Total estimated life-cycle costs: $2.4 million Development costs: Not tracked at. The Strategic Automated Command and Control System is the Department of Defense’s (Defense) dedicated high-speed data transmission, processing, and display system. The system coordinates functions for intercontinental ballistic missiles, bombers, tankers, munitions sites, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance platforms. Defense is initiating a $60 million full system replacement which is scheduled to be completed in fiscal year 2020. The total estimated life-cycle costs: $135 million through 2032 and $75 million for operations and maintenance. For those in the nuclear command area, the system’s primary function is to send and receive emergency action messages to nuclear forces. The system is still running on an IBM Series/1 Computer, which is a 1970s computing system, and written in assembly language code. It also uses 8-inch floppy disks, which are a1970s-era computing system. The U.S. nuclear system is made up of technologies and equipment that are at the end of their useful lives. National and global real-time exchange services using automated communications resources to collect and distribute a wide variety of environmental data. Thousands of customers worldwide use data distributed by the NWSTG and these data affect a wide range of economic and emergency management decisions. Concerns with the system had been increasing because the investment faced risks and challenges associated with an aging and unsupportable infrastructure, limited backup capability, and un-scalable architecture to support future data volume collection and dissemination. In 2013, the agency upgraded its hardware and software to Power7 IBM servers and Unix. operating systems (as depicted in the figure); however, NWSTG still lacks full backup capability for 26 percent of its functions. In fiscal year 2013, a major rearchitecture and redesign effort began which, according to Department of Commerce officials, will result in an entirely new dissemination architecture. According to officials, a detailed project plan is now being carried out and is scheduled to replace theNWSTG in early fiscal year 2017. The Personnel and Accounting Integrated Data will be replaced with an integrated system that is more capable, more reliable and have 100 percent backup capability. ROSS is used to mobilize and deploy a multitude of resources, including qualified individuals, teams, aircraft, equipment, and supplies. The technology used by ROSS is on the verge of technical obsolescence. One of the applications ROSS uses is no longer supported by the vendor, creating vulnerability issues. In addition, in order to use the system, users must download client software. The system supports the basic needs of the first responders and support personnel at an incident location by processing orders and replenishing supplies. CAS uses a version of Oracle Federal Financials software that was first available in 2004. The extended vendor support for the software ended in November 2013. The agency plans to pursue using other shared services to provide its financial management services and, therefore, began looking for a new provider of financial services to use in the near future. It plans to use a combination of cloud-based and on-premises services to offer its financial services in the long-term. It also plans to begin using a new vendor to provide financial services for the agency in 2015. The agencies agreed to a staggered transition of these services, with DNDO transitioning in fiscal year 2016, TSA in 2017, and USCG in 2018. Until the migration is complete and CAS can be decommissioned, USCG plans to resolve emergent issues and maintain applications. In the meantime, due to the costs associated with implementing a full fix and the impending transition to shared services,. USCG has accepted the security risks and will continue to use CAS until the transition is complete. The transition will take place in fiscal years 2016-17 and 2017-18. System is a case tracking system that is to facilitate maintenance and transfer of case specific data with regard to Medicare appeals through multiple levels of the appeal process. The system runs on a Solaris 10 operating system, last updated in February 2016, and uses commercial off-the-shelf systems for case management and reporting. According to the agency, the software is still supported by the vendors. TheSystem has faced challenges due to the rapid growth in Medicare appeals and the number of people seeking treatment. appeals processed each year, expanded use of settlements, and the increased interest in appeals data. This has resulted in an increased need for infrastructure changes, such as more storage, licenses, and processing capacity. Agency officials stated that they do not have any plans to address these gaps and that doing so is contingent on funding. They also noted general plans to continuously update the system, but they too are contingent on receiving funding. Number of users: Thousands of users across the federal, state, and local levels, in addition to those in the international. The investment is a commercial off-the-shelf system that runs on Windows and Unix servers using Oracle’s PeopleSoft applications. The investment uses the PeopleSoft Supply Chain Management and PeopleSoft Financials modules. According to an agency official in Savannah River Operations, the investment will be used to manage 13,000 employees and pensioners at the Savannah River Site. It will also manage human resources, transparent financial reporting to Energy, supply chain, and project management, the official said. infrastructure investments to have an operational analysis performed. OMB’s guidance on operational analyses does not exclude infrastructure investments. Numerous old investments are using obsolete programming languages. Several agencies, such as the Department of Justice (Justice), DHS, HHS, Treasury, USDA, and VA, reported using Common Business Oriented Language (COBOL)—a programming language developed in COBOL. Until agencies ensure that their O&M investments are fully reviewed, the government’'s oversight of old and vulnerable investments will be impaired. the late 1950s and early 1960s—to program their legacy systems. It is widely known that agencies need to move to more modern, maintainable languages. In 2010, Gartner noted that there should be a shift in focus to using more modern languages for new products. Some legacy systems may use parts that are obsolete and more difficult to find. For instance, Defense is still using 8-inch floppy disks in a legacy system. For more information, go to Defense.gov. used by the system have become outdated and costly to maintain. Officials stated that costs have increased due to maintaining the personnel with the knowledge to use these older applications. The costly applications include those for scanning, imaging, and documentation management. These applications are compartmentalized, so data is duplicated and not integrated. Finally, the system uses an application that is no longer supported by the manufacturer, which can cause security risks, among other issues. The system uses Kofax Indicius software to perform optical character recognition. were re-categorized because they include both supercomputers and laboratory facilities. Department of Commerce reduced spending by approximately $110 million and attributed it to the reclassification of satellite ground systems from its IT portfolio. We disagreed with these reclassifications, and reported that they run contrary to the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, which specifies requirements for the management of IT. Further, we reported that by gathering information on satellites, the CIO and others in the oversight of satellites. that coordinates the operational functions of the United States’ nuclear forces. Further, in some cases, the vendors no longer provide support for hardware or software, creating security vulnerabilities and additional costs. For example, each of the 12 selected agencies reported using unsupported operating systems and components in their fiscal year 2014 reports. Commerce, Defense, DOT, HHS, and VA reported using 1980s and 1990s Microsoft operating systems that stopped being supported by the vendor more than a decade ago. Lastly, legacy systems may become increasingly more expensive as is already appropriately replacing and modernizing systems as needed within budget constraints. Commerce’s comments are reprinted in appendix VI. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In written comments, Defense partially concurred with our recommendation to address obsolete IT investments in need of modernization or replacement. It stated that the department has modernized, upgraded, or retired hundreds of systems in the last several years through an investment review process. It plans to continue to identify, prioritize, and manage legacy systems that should be modernized or replaced. replace IT systems. In written comments, DHS stated that it concurred with its recommendation. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In comments provided via e-mail on May 11, 2016, an official from Justice’s audit liaison group, speaking on behalf of DHS, said the department plans to establish a framework for identifying and replacing or modernizing legacy systems after receipt of the finalized guidance. The report also includes technical comments from the Department of HHS. The DVIS interface software, PowerBuilder, is no longer supported by the vendor. According to State officials, the main challenges in maintaining DVIS’s aging technology are related to information security and infrastructure concerns. State plans to replace DVIS with a project called ConsularOne. The replacement effort is to begin in October 2018, State officials say. The cost of replacing DVIS at system level is not tracked at the system level, according to the State Department. The project is expected to be completed at an unknown time. storage device; and assembly programming code typically used in mainframes. Replacement parts for the system are difficult to find because they are now obsolete. As of March 2016, Defense is initiating a $60 million full system replacement which is scheduled to be completed in fiscal year 2020. In addition to replacing some legacy functions in the near term, there is a plan underway to replace the floppy disks with secure digital cards. This effort is underway and is expected to be complete in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2017. PAID system automates time and attendance for employees, timekeepers, payroll, and supervisors in the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) The PAID software has three major modules: Time and Attendance, Employee Master Record Downloads, and Education Tracking. System start date: 1963 Age: 53 years System anticipated end date: 2017 Fiscal year 2016 funding: $6.7 million Total estimated life-cycle costs: n/a, not tracked by system. Operations and maintenance costs: $ 6.6 million yearly. PAID is a 50-year old COBOL-based system at the end of its life span. The system runs on IBM mainframes and uses an IBM database. Officials stated the system is not user friendly and requires extensive training in order to use the system successfully. VA officials stated that PAID is intended to be mostly replaced by the Human Resources Information System Shared Service Center. The center will consolidate several IT services to provide core human resources- related functions. It is expected to be completed by 2015. Human Resources Information System Shared Service Center in 2017 is to consolidate human resources IT functions and services. However, the target solution is experiencing cost overruns of $14.8 million and VA officials stated that they will not be able to replace all of PAID’s functions. The agency is currently working on a transition plan and will determine whether VA should find another solution for the missing functionality or continue to keep PAID running indefinitely. The U.S. Department of Agriculture”s (USDA) U.s. Forest Service’S Resource Ordering and Status System is being replaced by PAID. IMF was written in an outdated assembly language code and operates on a 2010 IBM z196/2817-m32 mainframe. This has resulted in difficulty delivering technical capabilities addressing identify theft and refund fraud, among other things. IRS plans to address these issues by replacing IMF with a new, modern mainframe in 2015. The new mainframe will be powered by a new IBM Z196/2717-M32 system. The IRS will also be replacing its current mainframe with a newer, more modern IBM z 196/2716-M31 system in 2016. IMF with the Customer Account Data Engine 2 (CADE 2) investment. The CADE 2 investment includes plans to re-engineer the IMF. However, the replacement date is currently unknown. In addition, we have previously reported on IRS’s difficulty in delivering planned capabilities on time and on budget. Further, a key phase of the replacement project was initially to be completed by March 2015, but IRS is currently planning to complete parts of this phase well. The IMF is the world's largest bank. When Sentry was first deployed over 30 years ago, it was comprised of approximately 700 program routines written in COBOL. It became increasingly more difficult and expensive to maintain complex, highly-customized systems written in older programming languages. Sentry’s mainframe operating system, transaction processing software, the system software, and the database software and system were recently updated in 2012 and uses Java and a new database. As part of this, the bureau is using Java to process inmates at all phases of incarceration. migrated the older database, merged the legacy data into the newer database platform. modified the COBOL programs to ensure compatibility with the new software and database. The bureau has plans for updating the user interface and integrating the data through September 2016. According to agency officials, there are no plans to replace Sentry, as the system is the main system used by the bureau.. Department of Defense—Air Force Number of users: 175 users across the agency's various branches, including the Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps. onto their local computers, as opposed to accessing the system through the web. In September 2015, the U.S. Forest Service issued a request for information for services to develop ROSS’s replacement. Agency officials estimated that this effort will cost $14 million through fiscal year 2019 and the solution will go live in 2018. In January 2016, Forest Service officials signed a charter to begin this project. The project is expected to be completed in 2018, with a cost estimate of $12 million to $15 million. Sentry is a real-time information system comprised of various modules. It provides information regarding security and custody levels, inmate program and work assignments, and other pertinent information about the inmate population. Sentry is used by the Bureau of Prisons to maintain proper custody of persons committed to their custody. The system is expected to be fully operational by September 2016. It has a life-cycle cost of $571.5 million and plans to update the user interface and integrate system data through September 2016, the agency says. vendors still support all of the hardware and software used by this investment. The agency is not currently planning future modernization activity because the investment has gone through several updates in the past. The officials stated that there is no projected end of life date, and they plan to continue to maintain and use the system. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security has 14,000 Coast Guard users and also services the Transportation Security Administration. The investment start date: 1998 Age: 18. The last allowed the retirement of 16 associated legacy applications in 2011 and retired two mainframes. and they plan to retire DVIS when appropriate. In the meantime, the department plans to upgrade the unsupported software to a new version, which is also not supported. Department of Transportation—Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration Number of users: 250 federal users, 547,000 active hazardous materials facilities, 10,000 pipeline operators, and several million potential facilities. Investment start date: 1970s Age: about 41 years Investment anticipated end date: 2018 Fiscal year 2016 funding : $6.7 million Total estimated life-cycle costs: $38.0 million Core Accounting System (CAS) Suite is the primary financial management system for the U.S. Coast Guard. CAS is a set of several applications that assist the agencies in several areas, including accounts. Agency plans to transition to federal shared services in fiscal year 2018. The agency's total estimated life-cycle costs are $543.2 million. The U.N. Security Council has approved the use of CAS for the Coast Guard, TSA and the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office (DNDO) The Internal Revenue Service’s (IRS), Individual Master File (IMF) is the authoritative data source for individual taxpayer accounts. Within IMF, accounts are updated, taxes are assessed, and refunds are generated as required during each tax filing period. Virtually all IRS information system will be replaced by Customer Account Data Engine 2 at an unknown date. The IMF is expected to be retired by 2019. The IRS has approximately 230 million tax accounts. It is estimated to cost $135.4 million to replace. The agency will continue to maintain two separate systems until the replacement is complete. The agency has general plans to continuously update the system. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ Medicare Appeals’ system is expected to be retired in 2020. The system is estimated to cost $99.6 million through fiscal year 2017, with $79.0 million in operations and maintenance costs. It has 1,900 system users and an estimated life-cycle cost of more than $100 million. It was built in 2005 and has an estimated age of 11 years. Services general public, 1,300+ field offices with 50,000 to 60,000 employees. System start date: 1985 Age: 31 years Investment anticipated end date: None Fiscal year 2016 funding: $9.6 million Total estimated life-cycle costs (through fiscal year 2017): $519.8 million Development costs: $235.7 million Operations and maintenance costs: £284.1 million Plans for retirement or modernization: Agency has ongoing modernization efforts. The Social Security Administration’s (SSA) Title II investment includes the Title II system which determines retirement benefits eligibility and amounts. The National Weather Service Telecommunication Gateway (NWSTG) system is operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The agency plans to retire the system in fiscal year 2017 and replace it with a new system. It is the nation’s hub for the collection and distribution of weather data and products and provides information to the public and academic communities. The NWSTG system has a life-cycle cost of $282.8 million, including $35.4 million for development and $247 million for operations and maintenance. officials, the Title II investment accomplished its goal to improve service delivery by eliminating antiquated Title II programs. SSA officials stated that Title II is comprised of 162 subsystems and some are still written in COBOL. These systems were also built in a compartmentalized structure by SSA, rather than contractors, because the agency determined that there were not commercial programs that could satisfy the agency’s business needs and the volume of data needed. Most of the employees who developed these systems are ready to use them. SSA does not have plans to retire the Title II system. Rather, the agency plans to continue to eliminate and replace Title II’s older and more costly subsystems. SSA currently is planning to retire four Title II subsystems, including a claims control system, and one that processes changes in earnings transactions. In addition, SSA has other efforts to modernize or consolidate Title II systems, such as its database management systems.retire and the agency will lose their collective knowledge. retire two high-risk, COBOL- based systems in 2017 and 2018. VA’s comments are reprinted in appendix XII. SSA stated that it agreed with our recommendation and that it has already initiated numerous activities to modernize or replace legacy systems. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees; the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Energy, Health and Human Services, Homeland Security, State, the Treasury, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs; the U.S. Attorney General of the Department of Justice. issues associated with losing knowledgeable employees. SSA officials stated that the agency has rehired retirees to work on the legacy systems. In addition to the contact name above, individuals making contributions to this report included Gary Mountjoy, Kevin Walsh, Scott Borre, Rebecca Eyler, Bradley Roach, Tina Torabi, and Jessica Waselkow. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. This report will also be available at no charge on our website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions on matters discussed in this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9286. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix XIV. Our objectives were to (1) assess the extent to which. the CIO stated that one reason for the increased spending on O&M as a percentage of its total is because initially DHS had high DME spending to setup the agency. DHS officials stated that they anticipate future increases in DME funding as prioritized IT modernization efforts are approved and funded. Further, an official in Department of State’s (State) Bureau of Information Resource Management stated that the increase is largely due to increased costs of maintaining the infrastructure, including meeting security requirements. Moreover, VA officials stated that updates to its technology are the primary reason for the increase in spending. In addition, an official in HHS’s Office of the CIO stated that the increased spending on O&M was largely due to grants to states and local entities for new programs, such as the Affordable Care Act. Conversely, several agencies have decreased spending onO&M. For example, as we have previously reported, the Department of Energy reduced spending by approximately $300 million, which it attributed to the reclassification of high performance computers. We reviewed data reported to OMB as part of the budget process to determine operations and maintenance (O&M) spending for fiscal years 2010 through 2017. We analyzed that data to determine the extent to which spending had been spent. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In some cases, agencies reported that they do not use their three oldest systems. The 51 federal bureaus which reported spending less than 10 percent of their IT funds on development, modernization, and enhancement in fiscal year 2015. agency spending on operations and maintenance from fiscal year 2010 to fiscal year 2015. OMB staff in the Office of E-Government and Information Technology have recognized the upward trend of O&M spending and identified several contributing factors. Of the more than $80 billion that the 26 agencies reported spending for federal IT in fiscal year2015, the agencies spent about $61 billion on O &M. To its credit, OMB has identified a performance metric to measure the percent of its budget that goes to O&m activities. Federal agencies reported spending $55 billion—69 percent of total IT spending—on non-provisioned O&M in fiscal year 2015. OMB has not identified an associated goal with its non- provisioned IT measure. For example, State allocates about 87 percent of its IT spending on non- Proportions. Department of Transportation (DOT) allocates 50 percent. See figure 5 for details on agencies’ planned spending allocations. For more information on OMB’s Non-Provisioned IT Measure, visit the OMB website. systems has decreased by about $7.3 billion since fiscal year 2010. O&M spending relative to overall IT spending has increased by 9 percent since 2010. In fiscal year 2017, agencies plan to spend 77 percent of their IT funds on O &M. The percentage of total IT spending on O&m ranges from a 20 percent increase (Department of Education) to a 16 percent decrease (Office of Personnel Management). Appendix II provides detailed information on agency spending. The spending changes per agency range from an approximately $4 billion increase to a decrease of $600 million. Federal agencies reported spending the majority of their fiscal year 2015 IT funds on operating and maintaining a large number of legacy investments. 26 federal agencies spent about $61 billion on O&M, more than three-quarters of the total amount spent. Over the past 7 fiscal years, O &M spending has increased, while the amount invested in developing new IT systems has decreased. The 10 IT investments spending the most on O & M for fiscal year2015 total $12.5 billion, 20 percent of thetotal spending. 5 of the 26 agencies that report to the IT Dashboard reported spending less than 10 percent on DME activities in fiscal year 2015. 34 percent of bureaus (i.e., 51 of the 151) spent less than ten percent on the DME. According to agency officials, reasons for low DME spending include the size and mission of the bureau. The agency or bureau is unable to innovate, according to the agency officials. For more details, see appendix III of this report. department policies and processes, and consistent to the extent practicable with OMB’s draft guidance. In written comments, Energy partially concurred with our recommendation to address obsolete IT investments. Since OMB's draft guidance has not yet been issued, Energy could not concur with this part of the recommendation, but plans to review and consider implementation of such guidance. HHS stated that it is working to identify and plan to modernize or replace legacy systems. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. We received comments on a draft of this report from OMB and the other 12 agencies in our review. Eight agencies (USDA, Commerce, HHS, DHS, State, Transportation, VA, and SSA) and OMB agreed with our recommendations. Defense and Energy partially agreed, and Justice and the Treasury stated they had no comment on the recommendations. Each agency’s comments are discussed in more detail below. The report is available in its entirety at: http://www.enhanced.gov/. the report as appropriate. In written comments, Commerce concurred with both of its recommendations. Regarding the recommendation that the department ensure that required analyses are performed on investments in the O&M phase, the department concurred and stated that it will reiterate and expand the department’s existing policies requiring such analyses. The department also concurring with the recommendation to identify and plan to modernize or replace legacy systems and stated. that it would do so as soon as possible after receiving the report. via e-mail on May 12, 2016, an official from Treasury’s Office of the CIO stated that the department had no comments on the draft report. In written comments, VA concurred with our recommendation and stated that it launched a new office in April 2016 that will provide lifecycle management oversight for portfolios of systems. In addition, the department is planning to launch a new system management office in the fall of 2016. In comments provided via e- mail on May 6, 2016,. an official  from Transportation’‘s Office for the Secretary stated that they had no additional comments. Over the past several years, we have made over 20 recommendations to help improve the accuracy and reliability of the information on the IT Dashboard. Most agencies agreed with our recommendations or had no comment. In January 2010, the Federal CIO began leading TechStat sessions to terminate or turn around IT investments that are failing or are not producing results. These meetings involve OMB and agency leadership and are intended to increase accountability and accountability for agency IT investments. The CIO’s best judgement of the level of risk facing the investment.(low risk and green) based on the CIO's best judgement. improve performance. OMB also empowered agency CIOs to begin to hold their own TechStat sessions within their respective agencies by June 2012. In June 2013, we reported that OMB and selected agencies held multiple TechStats, but additional OMB oversight was needed to ensure that these meetings were having the appropriate impact on underperforming projects. As of October 28, 2015, OMB had only conducted one TechStat review in the prior 2 years and had not conducted one in the past 2 years. was evaluated, its Trusted Internet Connection Investment did not meet its internal TechStat criteria of having cost variance over 10 percent. An official from USDA’s Office of the CIO stated that while the office did not hold a formal TechStat, the program was required to work on a corrective action plan and has since been upgraded from high to moderate risk. It should be noted that recent legislation requires agencies to perform a review of each major IT investment that receives a high-risk rating for 4 consecutive quarters. assess costs, schedules, whether the investment is still meeting customer and business needs, and investment performance. Table 5 provides details on the 23 investments and whether the operational analyses and TechStats were performed. Although not required, agencies had performed TechStats on only five of the at-risk investments. Three of the four investments rated as high risk: DHS’s Customs and Border Protection - Integrated Fixed Towers, HHS’S Trusted Internet Connection Investment, and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Agencies provided several reasons for not conducting TechStats. For example, several of the investments’ risk levels were reduced to low or moderately-low risk in the months since the IT Dashboard had been publicly updated. An Acting Deputy Executive Director in DHS’s Enterprise Business Management Office stated that the agency had performed an internal “health assessment” on its Integrated Fixed Towers investment, understood the issues it was facing, and decided that a TechStat was not necessary. An official from HHS”s Office of the CIO stated that, at the time it was created, the agency did not have a need for TechStat. an investment if it has been rated as high risk for 3 consecutive months. In addition, operational analyses were not conducted for four at-risk investments. These investments were: Commerce’s Enterprise Cyber Security Monitoring and Operations, DHS”s Integrated Fixed Towers, Treasury’” Departmental Offices IT Infrastructure Mainframes and Servers Services and Support, and Treasury”” End User Systems and Support. National Weather Service (the responsible bureau) reviews the status of the previous month's activities for the development, integration, modification and procurement.  Commerce's monthly process does not include all of the key elements of an operational analysis. DHS plans to perform the analysis on the investment in August 2017. Performing the analysis once the investment is operational will enable DHS to determine whether it is meeting the needs of the agency and delivering the expected value. The Director of Treasury’s Capital Planning and Investment Control program stated that the department’S policy does not require an analysis before an investment is made. The Integrated Fixed Towers Program Manager stated that since the investment had only become operational in October 2015, an operationalAnalysis was not yet required. we selected one system or investment per agency using the following factors: investment type (major or non- major), system or Investment age, and risk level as of November 2015. We also reviewed agency documentation and interviewed agency officials on those profiled systems or investments. To assess the reliability of the OMB budget data and IT Dashboard data, we reviewed related documentation, such as OMB guidance on budget preparation, capital planning, and other topics. We sought to have a mix of systems and investments that included both major and non-major investment types and a range of ages. track the ages of individual systems, and as a result, we requested that the agency provide their 3 oldest IT investments and their approximate age. Table 10 provides a listing these systems or investments, as reported by agencies. We selected one system or investment per agency using a combination of factors including investment type (major or non-major), system or Investment age, and risk level as of November 2015. In particular, we sought to have a mix of systems and investments that included both major and non- major investment types, a range of ages, and aRange of risk ratings. or tentative in that the agencies did not provide specific time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. For a full list of the agencies’ reported oldest systems, see appendix IV. Separately, we profiled one system or investment from each of the 12 selected agencies. The selected systems and investments range from 11 to approximately 56 years old, and serve a variety of purposes. For example, Treasury’s Individual Master File was first initiated about 56 years ago and is the authoritative data source for individual taxpayer accounts. that agencies provide a list of their three oldest systems. In some cases, agencies reported that they do not track the ages of individual systems. Agencies noted that these systems and investments may have components that are newer than their operational age. We also compared OMB and agencies’ current practices with federal guidance, such as OMB’s Circular No. A-11: Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget and its associated supplement on capital assets, to determine whether they are adequately managing the age and obsolescence. agencies have to deal with the previously mentioned issues and may pay a premium to hire staff or contractors with the knowledge to maintain outdated systems. For example, one agency (SSA) reported re-hiring retired employees to maintain its COBOL systems. Selected agencies reported that they continue to maintain old investments in O&M. Table 6 shows the 10 oldest investments and/or systems, as reported by selected agencies. Agencies reported having plans to modernize or replace each of these investments and systems. OMB has created draft guidance that will require agencies to identify and prioritize legacy information systems that are in need of replacement or modernization. The draft guidance includes time frames. In the last 6 years, we made approximately 800 recommendations to OMB and multiple agencies to improve effective and efficient investment in IT. As of October 2015, about 32 percent of these their O&M investments to determine whether they should be kept as-is, modernized, replaced, or retired. The guidance is intended to develop criteria through which agencies can identify the highest priority legacy systems. that outweigh their benefits. To better manage legacy systems and investments, we are making 2 recommendations to OMB and 14 recommendations to federal agencies. We recommend that the Director of OMB identify and publish a specific goal associated with its non-provisioned O&M spending measure, and commit to a firm date by which its draft guidance on legacy systems will be issued. To monitor whether existing investments are meeting the needs of their agencies, we recommend the Secretaries of Commerce and the Treasury. for the efforts regarding developing criteria, identifying and prioritizing systems, and planning for modernization. However, OMB did not commit to a firm time frame for when the policy would be issued. Until OMB’s policy is finalized and carried out, the federal government runs the risk of continuing to maintain investments that have outlived their effectiveness and are consuming resources that outweigh their benefits. If enacted, the IT Modernization Act was introduced into the U.S. House of Representatives. It would establish a revolving fund of $3 billion that could be used to retire, replace, or upgrade systems. direct the respective agency CIO to ensure that required analyses are performed on investments in the operations and maintenance phase. Further, to address obsolete IT investments in need of modernization or replacement, we recommend that the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Energy, Health and Human Services, Homeland Security, State, the Treasury, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs; the Attorney General; and the Commissioner of Social Security direct their respective CIOs to identify and plan to modernize or replace legacy systems as needed. not provide specificity on time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. Agency did not plan to modernize or replace 4 of the investments. Legacy federal IT investments are becoming obsolete. Several aging investments are using unsupported components, many of which did not have specific plans for modernization or replacement. Until agencies fully review at-risk O&M investments, the government’s oversight of such investments will be impaired and its spending could be wasteful. The federal government runs the risk of maintaining investments that have outlived their effectiveness.  Agencies are, in part, maintaining obsolete investments because they are not required to identify, evaluate, and prioritize their investments. This critical process allows the agency to identify and address high-cost or low-value investments in need of update, replacement, or retirement. We have previously provided guidance that organizations should periodically evaluate their investments, including those that are in O&M; at, near, or exceeding their planned life cycles; and/or are based on technology that is now obsolete. CIOs from 12 selected agencies reported that 23 of their 187 major IT O&M investments were moderate to high risk as of August 2015. Of the 23 investments, agencies had plans to replace or modernize 19 investments. However, the plans for 12 of those were general or tentative in that the agencies did of IT spending on non-provisioned IT spending. It has not identified an associated goal with this measure. Until it does so, OMB and agencies will be constrained in their ability to evaluate their progress in adopting cloud and shared services. The data is intended to allow OMB, other oversight bodies, and the general public to hold the government agencies accountable for results and progress. Among other things, agencies are to submit ratings from their Chief Information Officers (CIO), which, according to OMB’s instructions, should reflect the level of risk facing an investment. Each agency CIO is to assess his or her IT investments against a set of six pre-established evaluation factors and then assign a rating of 1 (high risk and red) to 5. of federal IT. To select systems or investments to profile, we identified agencies’ existing investments in O&M that were rated as medium or high risk. We then interviewed agency officials to confirm and obtain additional information on the systems. From the resulting list of systems and investments, we created a list of the agency-identified oldest systems. We also used the list of agency- identified oldest systems or Investments to identify the oldest investments in the federal IT system. The list of oldest systems and Investments was then used to select the agencies to profile. OMB guidance called for agencies to develop an operational analysis policy and perform such analyses annually. DHS’s analysis addressed most, but not all, of the factors that OMB called for (e.g., comparing current cost and schedule against original estimates). The remaining agencies did not assess their investments, which accounted for $7.4 billion in reported O&M spending. OMB and the five selected agencies agreed with our recommendations and have efforts planned and underway to address them. The agencies should develop operational analysis policies, annually perform analyses on all investments, and ensure the assessments include all key factors. The aim is for the amount of spending on DME and provisioned IT services to rise. OMB has not identified a specific goal for the measure because it would be ever changing. While goals for performance measures may change over time, it is still important for OMB to set a target by which agencies can measure their progress in meeting this measure. In particular, leading practices should be monitored to ensure that agencies are following the best practices. That is part of the PortfolioStat process. The O&M phase is often the longest phase of an investment and can consume more than 80 percent of the total lifecycle costs. As such, agencies must actively manage their investment during this phase. Until OMB develops a specific goal associated with measuring non- provisioned services, OMB and agencies will be limited in their ability to evaluate progress that has been made and whether or not they are achieving their goals to increase the amount spent on development activities and provisioned IT services.starting at the top, set clear measurable goals aligned to achieving better outcomes. costs refer to the expenses required to operate and maintain an IT asset in a production environment. DME costs refers to those projects and activities that lead to new IT assets/systems, or change or modify existing IT assets to substantively improve capability or performance. A provisioned IT service is one that is (1) owned, operated, and provided by an outside vendor or external government organization and (2) consumed by the agency on an as-needed basis. Beginning in 2014, OMB directed agencies to further break down their O&M and DME cost to identify provisionedIT service costs. increased in maintaining applications and systems that use older programming languages. programmers knowledgeable in these older languages are becoming increasingly rare and thus more expensive. OMB encourages agencies to adopt provisioned IT services, such as cloud computing and shared services, to make IT more efficient and cost-effective. According to OMB, agencies tend to categorize investments as O&M because they attract less oversight, require reduced documentation, and have a lower risk of losing funding. In several situations where agencies are not sure whether to report costs as O and DME, agencies default to reporting as O &M. stress that organizations should measure performance in order to evaluate the success or failure of their activities and programs. Performance measurement involves identifying performance goals and measures, identifying targets for improving performance, and measuring progress against those targets. Without links to outcomes and goals, organizations are not able to effectively measure progress toward those goals. OMB’s own website, performance.gov states that when measuring performance, a goal is a simple but powerful way to motivate people and communicate priorities. In addition, the website states that the federal government operates more effectively when agency leaders, at all levels of the organization, focus on performance. OMB had not listed any savings from TechStats in its quarterly reporting to Congress since June 2012. In order to accelerate the adoption of cloud computing solutions across the government, OMB’s 25-Point IT Reform Plan included a “Cloud First’ policy that required each agency CIO to implement cloud-based solutions whenever a secure, reliable, and cost-effective cloud option exists. OMB issued the Federal Cloud Computing Strategy, which provided definitions and benefits of cloud services. In April 2016, we identified 10 key practices that if included in cloud service agreements can help agencies ensure services are performed effectively, efficiently, and securely. OMB’s guidance, released in February 2012, included most of the key practices, and we recommended that OMB include all of them in future guidance. To better manage existing IT systems, OMB launched the PortfolioStat initiative in March 2012. It requires agencies to conduct an annual, agency-wide IT portfolio review to, among other things, migrate to cloud computing. About 8.5 percent of federal agencies’ planned spending for fiscal year 2016 has gone toward provisioned IT services. The vast majority of spending going toward IT that is non-provisioned. OMB has developed guidance that calls for agencies to develop an operational analysis policy for examining the ongoing performance of existing legacy IT investments to measure, among other things, whether the investment is continuing to meet business and customer needs, and enable innovation.service could include cloud services or shared services from another federal agency or a private service provider. In May 2012, OMB released its Federal IT Shared Services Strategy. The strategy requires agencies to reduce commodity IT spending and demonstrate how their IT investments align with the agency’s mission and business functions. In 2013 and 2015 we reported that agencies had the potential to save at least $3.8 billion through this initiative. However, we noted that weaknesses existed in agencies’ implementation of the initiative. We made more than 60 recommendations to OMB and agencies. OMB partially agreed with our recommendations, and responses from 21 of the agencies varied. to use shared services for IT service delivery in order to increase return on investment, eliminate waste and duplication, and improve the effectiveness of IT solutions. Examples of commodity IT areas to consider migrating to a shared environment include software licenses, e-mail systems, and human resource systems. We have previously reported on legacy IT and the need for the federal government to improve its oversight of such investments. For example, in October 2012, we reported on agencies’ operational analyses policies and practices. For more, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/features/how-federal-agencies-moved-to-a-shared-environment. Congress has enacted several laws to assist agencies and the federal government in managing IT investments. The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996 requires OMB to establish processes to analyze, track, and evaluate the risks and results of major capital investments in information systems. Most recently, in December 2014, Congress enacted IT acquisition reform legislation (commonly referred to as the Federal Information Technology Act of 2014) The bill requires agencies to report to Congress on the net program performance benefits achieved as a result of these investments. OMB uses several data collection mechanisms to oversee federal IT spending during the annual budget formulation process. OMB requires federal departments and agencies to provide information related to their Major IT Business Cases and IT Portfolio Summary. The purpose of this requirement is to provide a business case for each major major IT program or initiative. The data collection mechanism was created by the FITARA acquisition reform act. FITara requires OMB to develop standardized performance metrics, including cost savings, and to submit quarterly reports to Congress. recommendations had been implemented. OMB has implemented a series of initiatives to improve the oversight of underperforming investments and more effectively manage IT. In June 2009, to further improve the transparency into and oversight of agencies’ IT investments, OMB publicly deployed the IT Dashboard. Currently, the Dashboard publicly displays information on the cost, schedule, and performance of over 700 major federal IT investments at 26 federal agencies. Further, the public display of OMB’s recommendations will be expanded. and IT Dashboard submissions. In addition, we corroborated with each agency that the data downloaded were accurate and reflected the data it had reported to OMB. We conducted this performance audit from April 2015 to May 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions. We determined that the budget and IT Dashboards data were reliable for our purposes of reporting IT O&M spending. IT investment and to allow OMB to monitor IT investments once they are funded. Agencies are required to provide information on each major investment’s cost, schedule, and performance. OMB directs agencies to break down IT investment costs into two categories: (1) O&M and (2) development, modernization, and enhancement (DME) incomplete information on IT investments, OMB increases the risk of not fulfilling its oversight responsibilities, of agencies making inefficient and ineffective investment decisions, and of Congress and the public being misinformed. federal agencies have invested in operating and maintaining existing information technology (IT) We also evaluate the oversight of at-risk legacy investments, and (3) assess the age and obsolescence of federal IT. For all three objectives, we focused on the 12 agencies with the highest planned IT spending for fiscal year 2015. These agencies make up over 90 percent of the federal IT spending over those years. We also compared OMB’s associated performance measure on driving value in federal IT investments to federal best practices. Federal IT investments have too frequently failed or incurred cost overruns and schedule slippages while contributing little to mission-related outcomes. The federal government has spent billions of dollars on failed and poorly performing IT investments which often suffered from ineffective management. In February 2015, we introduced a new government-wide high-risk area, Improving the Management of IT Acquisitions. This guidance calls for an annual operational analysis of each investment that addresses cost, schedule, customer satisfaction, strategic and business results, financial goals, and innovation.

ROUGE-1: 82.82, ROUGE-2: 76.27, ROUGE-L: 21.37
BERTScore: 53.75

==============================================
==================== [93/100] ====================
Summary:
U.S. General Accounting Office. 2000 Census: Coverage Evaluation Matching Implemented As Planned, but Census Bureau Should Evaluate Lessons Learned. 2000 census: Better Productivity Data Needed for Future Planning and Budgeting. 2000ensus: Analysis of Fiscal Year 2000 Budget and Internal Control Weaknesses at the U.S Census Bureau.2000 census: Significant Increase in Cost Per Housing Unit Compared to 1990 Census.2000 Census: Review of Partnership Program Highlights Best Practices for Future Operations.2000ensus: Historical Data on Enumerator Productivity Are Limited. 2001. U.S. General Accounting Office. 2000 Census: Information on Short- and Long-Form Response Rates. GAO/GGD-00-127R. Washington, D.C.: June 7, 2000. The Census was conducted between July 1, 1999, and July 31, 2001. The results of the 2000 Census were released on June 6, 2001, and on June 9, 2002, respectively, by the Census Bureau. The data was released to the public by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) Our work was done in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Accurate census results are critical because the data are used to reapportion seats in the House of Representatives and for congressional redistricting. Census data remain an important element in allocating federal aid to state and local governments. With billions of dollars at stake, we need accurate census results. We address them in the “Agency Comments and Evaluation” section of this report. We are happy to answer any questions you may have about the report. also provided minor technical corrections that we incorporated in our report as appropriate. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date. At that time, we will send copies to other interested congressional committees, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Director of the Bureau of the Census. Copies will be made available to others upon request. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. was processing a key geographic data file and was thus able to incorporate the corrections before the data were finalized. Second, the FSCPE analysts had thoroughly documented the issues and recommended how the bureau should correct the errors. The five errors did not require additional research or field verification. Bureau officials told us that they lacked the time to research the remaining issues, as well as field staff to inspect purported discrepancies. As a result, the bureau missed an important opportunity to verify and possibly improve the quality of the data. a larger number of issues was that the bureau’s requirements for documenting data issues were not clearly defined. For example, the training materials did not provide any specific guidance on the type of evidence analysts needed to support data issues. This could help explain the variation that we observed in the quality of the documentation analysts provided. In some cases, the bureau provided only minimal data, while others supported issues with state and local administrative records, historical data, photographs, and maps. The training materials told analysts to supply as much supporting information as necessary. Bureau data show that after reviewing census data for 39 states and Puerto Rico, FSCPE members identified a total of 1,402 issues. Since the bureau has yet to resolve most of these issues, it is not known whether they are necessarily errors. Group quarters issues were those most frequently identified by the bureau, accounting for 1,599 of the 4,809 issues identified (33 percent) Group quarters issue: The bureau was unable to classify 2,060 issues (43 percent). Bureau officials said that in these cases, analysts did not provide sufficient documentation for the bureau to determine the nature of the issue. Bureau and FSCPE analysts were to ensure that group quarters were correctly placed or “geocoded” on census maps. They were to describe each issue flagged and provide supporting documentation derived from bureau resources and/or resources of the respective state government. Staff from the regional offices reviewed demographic data from the 50 states, Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia. They focused on identifying inconsistent demographic characteristics and did not necessarily concentrate on individual states. The U.S. Census Bureau estimates the population of the United States at more than 100 million people. not indicate their nature. FSCPE members compared census data to administrative records and other data, and were better able to document specific issues. Examples of the three issue categories and how they were found include: Group quarters issues: Analysts noticed that the group quarters population count in a particular census tract of a large midwestern city appeared to be too high. By comparing state administrative records to information obtained from bureau resources, analysts determined that bureau data had placed college dormitories in the wrong tract. on any one particular state or locality. The bureau reimbursed state governments for wages and expenses FSCPE members incurred. A separate set of employees from the bureau’s Population Division assessed issues identified by Full Count Review analysts. Those issues deemed to have adequate documentation were classified as a “group quarters,” “housing unit,’ or “household” or ‘other’ issue. Bureau officials told us that the remaining issues could not be categorized because the issues were too complex. FSCPE members identified the five issues, all of which involved group quarters that were placed in the wrong locations. They included (1) a military base in Nevada, (2) 10 facilities at a college in Wisconsin, (3) 9 facilities in New York City and (4) 14 at a Washington prison. Bureau officials said that the bureau was able to correct these issues for two reasons. First, FSCPE analysts found them early in the Full Count Review program, while the bureau found them later. to suspected discrepancies in the population counts and locations of prisons, dormitories, nursing homes, and similar group living arrangements. Analysts also identified 479 housing unit issues (10 percent of the total), and 288 household issues (6 percent) There were also 383 issues (8 percent) that the bureau classified as “other” They contained questions concerning the demographic characteristics of the data such as age, race, and gender. The count of occupied housing units differed from what analysts expected while household issues had population data for occupied residences that differed. An analyst compared population data from the 1990 Census and 2000 Census. Data from the 2000 Census appeared to accurately reflect the large amount of new house construction that had taken place within a specific census tract. However, because the population count differed, it was flagged as not reflecting the increase in housing units in the area. The analyst then compared the data from both censuses and found that the 2000 census did not appear to reflect the increase. It was then flagged as 'not accurate' and the data was re-examined. The apportionment and redistricting data were released with more than 4,800 unresolved issues. Until these issues are resolved, uncertainties will surround the accuracy of the census data for the affected localities. Some of the issues might be resolved under the CQR program, which the bureau designed to respond to challenges to housing unit and group quarters population counts received from state, local, or tribal governments. Of the 4,804 issues remaining after Full Count Review, 1,994 (42 percent) were referred to CQr, and of these, 537 were accepted for further investigation. had difficulty determining the precise nature of an issue or if in fact an issue even existed. In contrast, the CQR program provides comprehensive guidelines on the documentation required for making submissions. A third, and related factor that affected the bureau’s ability to resolve a larger number of issues stemmed from the lack of information from government and tribal officials. The guidance then details the information needed to support boundary corrections, geocoding and coverage corrections, and group quarters population corrections. The bureau will investigate concerns raised by government and Tribal officials, such officials must first supply specific information. members’ local demographic knowledge. According to bureau officials, the bureau plans to include a Full Count Review program in census tests it expects to conduct later in the decade. Foremost among the areas in need of improvement is resolving a larger number of data issues prior to the release of apportionment testing procedures under conditions as close to the actual census as possible. The bureau is exploring the feasibility of using staff from the bureau’s regional offices to help investigate issues, the authors say. The Full Count Review program was designed to rapidly examine, rectify if possible, and clear census data files and products for subsequent processing or public release. The program was poorly integrated with other census operations and units that could have investigated the issues and corrected the data if warranted. The fact that the apportionment and redistricting data were released with around 4,800 unresolved data issues of unknown validity, magnitude, and impact is cause for concern. It will be important for the bureau to explore how to make better use of the program for correcting potential errors in census data. the bureau would only check for systemic errors. Because of the inconsistent message on the purpose of the Full Count Review program, the bureau may have set up the expectation that a larger number of issues would be resolved. For example, one FSCPE member told us that he expected FSC PE members to identify any geographic discrepancies that contrasted with preliminary census data. He noted that both he and his staff were very “dismayed” to find out that certain discrepancies involving group quarters were not resolved prior. from that indicated by other data sources, the analyst flagged it as an issue to avoid undercounting the population. According to bureau officials, the bureau corrected data for 5 of the 4,809 issues prior to the December 31, 2000, release of reapportionment data and the April 1, 2001,release of redistricting data. The officials noted that the bureau generally did not use the Full Count Review program to resolve individual issues. None of the issues were found to be software problems. the bureau’s decision came after the 1998 dress rehearsal for the 2000 Census, which meant that the bureau had no opportunity to test the Full Count Review program in an operational environment. The effort would require close coordination with several bureau units. A second factor that affected the bureau's ability to correct the issues was the lack of time or staff to correct them. If more time was available in the future, it would be possible to correct a larger number of individual issues prior to the release of the public law data, officials said. just 14 months before Census Day, April 1, 2000. The timing of the decision stemmed from the Supreme Court’s January 1999 ruling that prohibited the bureau from using statistical sampling for purposes of congressional apportionment. The bureau originally planned a ‘one-number’ census that would have integrated the results of a sample survey with the traditional census to provide one adjusted set of census numbers. Faced with the larger workload of reviewing two sets of data— adjusted and unadjusted—the bureau decided to enlist the help of FSCPE members. The overall results of the Full Count Review program and FSCPE members’ participation appear to be mixed. Unlike the CQR program, where the bureau required local governments to provide specific documentation before it would commit resources to investigate local data issues, the Fullcount review program had no filter for screening submissions based on the quality of the documentation. Better guidance on documenting issues for the Full count review program could make the bureau’s follow-up investigations more efficient. Another area where there is room for improvement concerns the consistency and clarity in which the bureau communicated the objectives of the program. We analyzed the work papers submitted by FSCPE members and other participants in the Full Count Review program. We also analyzed data from the bureau’s Count Review Information System. To identify lessons learned for future improvements, we examined bureau training manuals, statements of work, process models. We performed our audit in Washington, D.C., and the bureau's headquarters in Suitland, Maryland, between May 2001 and April 2002. program was created to help the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services identify and fix problems in the health care system. The Full Count Review program ran from June 2000 through March 2001. Some of the analysts’ work was contracted to members of the FSCPE, an organization composed of state demographers. The bureau surveyed the 40 entities that participated in the program and found that most were satisfied with their experience. We recommend that the Secretary of Commerce direct the bureau to develop ways to resolve a larger number of data issues prior to the release of the public law data. The full report can be found at: http://www.census.gov/. data issues in the field prior to the release of public law data. The Secretary of Commerce should also ensure that the bureau clarifies and consistently communicates to participants the objectives of the Full Count Review program. The Bureau of the Census concurred with all of our recommendations and had no comments on them. The bureau has not responded to our request for comment on this report. The full report is available online at: http://www.fscpe.org/full-count-review-report.

ROUGE-1: 74.81, ROUGE-2: 67.57, ROUGE-L: 34.58
BERTScore: 65.19

==============================================
==================== [94/100] ====================
Summary:
The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents is through the Internet. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full-text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their format as well as on the GAO Web site. The GAO evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to Congress. GAO posts this list, known as “Today’s Reports,” on its Web site daily. The list contains links to the full-text document files. To have GAO E-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to our home page and complete the easy-to-use electronic order form found under “To Order GAO Products” Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/Fraudnet.htm, E-mails: fraudnet@gao, or 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system) you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report for 14 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to interested congressional committees, the Chairman, FCC; the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Communications and Information, Department of Commerce; and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. If you have any questions about this report, please call me at 202- 512-2834. Key contacts and major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV. the entity must obtain their addresses from among the allocations made by ARIN to their Internet backbone provider. ISPs and end users with whom we spoke expressed concern about method of IP address allocation. In addition to those named above, Naba Barkakati, John Karikari, Faye Morrison, Lynn Musser, Madhav Panwar, Ilga Semeiks, and Mindi Weisenbloom made key contributions to this report. The General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities. Several ISPs and end users expressed concern about the manner in which Internet addresses are allocated. Most ISPs and other end users do not directly obtain their own IP addresses. Instead, they instead receive a block of IP addresses from a backbone provider. This method of IP address allocation was adopted for technical efficiency reasons, the authors say.. The method of allocating IP addresses in large blocks enables backbone routers to operate efficiently. Some of the ISPs and. end users with whom we spoke also told us that it makes it difficult for smaller. entities to switch backbone providers. a new block of addresses from the new backbone provider. Two respondents expressed concern about the loss of customers due to a change of IP addresses. A few also told us that it is not uncommon for an ISP to retain a relationship with its original backbone provider—paying for a minimal level of connectivity to that provider. We found that the degree of difficulty in changing address space depends on how an individual company’s computer network is configured. It can be time consuming and costly to change address space. use, there is concern about the growth in the number of routing tables entries. Historically, IP addresses were organized into three commonly used classes—Classes A, B, and C. For Class A, there are 126 possible network addresses, each with nearly 17 million hosts. Slightly more than 16,000 networks may have a Class B address, each of over 65,000 hosts. Finally, there can be approximately 2 million networks with a Class C address,Each with a maximum of 254 host addresses. Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) treats multiple contiguous Class C addresses as a single block that requires only one entry in a routing table. This method of IP address allocation was adopted for technical efficiency reasons. CIDR presents unique problems for smaller ISPs and other entities. If an entity seeking IP addresses cannot utilize a large block of address issued by ARIN, it may not be able to use the address at the request of that entity. The number of IP addresses that must be maintained in each router for traffic routing purposes is reduced. signals that were split into separate pieces or “packets” at the transmission point are separately routed over the most efficient available pathway and reassembled at their destination point. The standards that specify most data transmissions are known as the Internet Protocol (IP) Suite. Under part of this protocol, streams of packets are routed to their destination over themost efficient pathway. Other aspects of the protocol facilitate the routing of packets to their appropriate destination by examining the 32-bit numeric identifier— or IP address—attached to every packet. Currently, IP addresses for North America are allocated by the American Registry for An Internet Protocol (IP) address is a number that is typically written as four numbers separated by periods. When information is sent from one network or node to another, the packet of information includes the destination IP address. Because the IP deals with inter-networking, the IP address is based on the concept of a network address and a host address. The network address indicates the network to which a computer is connected, and the host address identifies the specific computer on that network. The IP address uniquely identifies a computer connected to the Internet. known as “routers” send data packets from one network to another by examining the destination IP address of each packet. In its memory, the router contains a “routing table’ which contains information specifying all of the IP addresses of other networks. The router compares a packet’s destination IP addresses with the information contained in the routing table to determine the network to which the packet should be sent. As more and more network addresses come into use, the need for routers to include an entry for each possible network will increase. National Science Foundation designed and partially funded four NAPs, each of which was managed by a different company. Representatives of two companies with whom we spoke noted that the Naps play an important role in helping to keep the market for backbone service open for entry. NAP's provide new backbone firms an efficient, low-cost method for exchanging traffic with numerous other providers. In the first years of their existence, NAP’s became congested with the rapid rate of growth.  congestion and poor quality of connections at the NAPs led backbone providers to engage in “private interconnection.” Private interconnection refers to the exchange of traffic at a place other than a NAP. Despite a variety of technological developments, the majority of Internet traffic exchange occurs at private interconnection points. Of the 17 companies that we met with, 10 provided estimates of how their mix of private interconnections and NAP use would likely change in the future. Only one company said that it was likely to make greater use of Naps in thefuture. In a peering arrangement, two backbone providers agree to exchange traffic destined only for each others’ networks. By the mid to late-1990s, another financial arrangement known as “transit’ emerged. While peering generally entails traffic exchange between two providers without payment, transit entails payment by one provider to another for carrying traffic. When a backbone provider buys transit from another provider, it obtains not only access to the “supplier’s” backbone network, but also access to any other backbone network with which its supplier peers. In a “peering” relationship, backbone providers exchange data destined only for each other’s network generally without the imposition of a fee. Transit payments involve the payment by one backbone provider to another for the mutual exchange of traffic and for the delivery of traffic to other providers. A NAP facilitates the interconnection of multiple backbone providers. In the early to mid-1990s, the place at NAPs as well as at private interconnection points. Currently, there is a segregation of backbone providers into “tiers” as well as that of backbone A (with which backbone C does not have an independent relationship) because B will pass C’s traffic off to A as part of its delivery of transit service to C. A smaller backbone provider generally need only buy transit from one or two large providers to achieve universal connectivity. We found that it is generally not viewed as economical for a backbone provider to peer with a less geographically dispersed backbone provider. Even if there were equal traffic flows, the larger provider will tend to carry traffic a further distance. backbones C and D exchange traffic, C must carry the traffic much farther on the return path before it can hand off the data packets to D. C might consider D to be benefiting from C’s network investment and thus, C would be more likely to view D as a customer purchasing access to its network than as a peer in traffic exchange. The “tiering” of Internet backbone providers and the dual system of peering and transit agreements have caused controversies. Several of the non-Tier 1 backbone providers with whom we spoke expressed concerns about their inability to peer. Reps of ISPs and end users we interviewed throughout the country described the Internet backbone market as competitive. Most of these providers stated that they have several choices of backbone providers from which to obtain services. A few ISPs and other purchasers of backbone services also noted that the extensive choice of providers enables them to engage in “multihoming” — purchasing backbone services from more than one provider. Commonly cited characteristics of importance were a network with a broad geographic scope, many customers, significant capacity and good peering arrangements with other providers. noted that, coincident with increased choice of backbone providers throughout the country, the price of backbone connectivity had declined significantly in recent years. Representatives of several companies told us that although they were presented with standard contracts by backbone providers, they were able to negotiate terms and conditions in their contracts that were important to them. A few ISP representatives with whom we met said they receive frequent sales calls from multiple backbone providers. An ISP representative noted that many backbone providers are working to increase the speed and decrease the latency of transmissions of their networks to improve their networks. Boardwatch reports 41 backbone providers with a national network and many other regional backbones. Approximately five to eight of these national providers are considered to be “Tier 1” backbone providers. Unlike telecommunications services, the provision of Internet backbone service is not regulated by governmental communications agencies. A Tier 1 provider is defined by Boardwatch as having a network of wide geographic scope, having many IP addresses, having extensive information for traffic routing determinations, and handling a large percentage of transmissions. For more information, visit Boardwatch. with the largest providers. We were told that the inability of non-Tier 1 providers to peer with Tier 1 providers puts smaller companies at a competitive disadvantage. To some extent, market forces may be relieving some of these problems. Some backbone providers with whom we spoke stated that the market is competitive, and transit rates have been decreasing. We are also told that peering policies should be made public. We will report back on our findings in the next edition of this column. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. of which were Tier 1 providers and some of which were not) said they already had posted or soon would be posting their peering policies on their Web sites or otherwise making them publicly available. Some non-Tier 1 backbone providers do not want to peer with the largest backbone providers. Some stated that it is difficult to guarantee their own clients a certain level of service if they receive few guarantees themselves. For example, one provider spoke critically of the quality of peering connections and thequality of service provided between peers. A remaining concern regarding the “tiered” segmentation of the market is the potential for the number of Tier 1 providers to decline or for one of these providers to become dominant. The recent economic downturn in the communications sector may portend a further shakeout of backbone providers. Several of the company officials we interviewed expressed concern that there would be consolidation among the Tier 1 provider and thus noted the importance of antitrust oversight of this industry. Moreover, both an FCC Working Paper and the Antitrust Division have expressed concern about this issue. No official data sources were identified that would provide information on the structure and competitiveness of the Internet backbone market. The majority of market participants expressed the view that the Internet. backbone market is competitive, if not highly competitive. Market participants noted the importance of Tier 1 backbone providers and the potential for reduced competition if consolidation were to occur at the Tier 1-provider level. Some backbone providers are filling market niches by offering customers additional or unique services to complement their backbone services. The success of the. Internet, as evidenced by its growth, evolution, diversity, and cooperative structure, has occurred with minimal. government involvement or oversight. market or cause other problems, such as the limited number of Tier 1 providers, the limited choice of providers in rural areas. We were also told that the choice of local telephone companies providing access to Internet backbone networks may be limited, creating problems for providers of Internet services. We found no official data source that could provide information to allow an empirical investigation of the nature of competition in the Internet backbone market. We interviewed eighteen Internet backbone providers of varying size; two miscellaneous Internet companies that provide backbone-like services; and eight end users of backbone services. Neither the U.S. Census Bureau nor the Labor Statistics collects data directly on Internet backbone providers. To investigate the degree of competition, we spoke with an array of buyers and sellers of backbone connectivity. We asked questions that were designed to provide information about the competitiveness of the market. For example, we asked questions about the availability of choice among providers in the market, the viability of purchasing transport to a distant location to connect to a backbone provider, and the length of the journey to connect. of presence, which are access points to the Internet, and proximity to network access points (NAP), which are points where Internet backbones interconnect. Also considered were the presence of other features, including regional backbone networks, statewide educational or government networks, state Internet Service Provider (ISP) associations, or Native American reservations. In the selected localities, we conducted 55 semistructured interviews with participants in the Internet backbone market between January and June 2001. For these interviews, we used interview guides containing questions concerning background information about the company. We contacted an additional 32 market participants and industry representatives for purposes of conducting interviews to support this study. In some cases, our request for an interview was declined, our telephone contacts were not returned, or we were unable to schedule an interview after repeated discussions with company officials. In addition to the information collected through interviews, we also conducted technical, legal, and regulatory research on the characteristics and competitiveness of the Internet backbone market. Each individual network or node that is connected to the Internet is identified by From the Federal Communications Commission, the Department of Justice, the National Science Foundation, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the Census Bureau. We also interviewed two national Internet industry trade associations and three academics with expertise in this area. To obtain information from a wide variety of participants within the Internet backbone market, we visited locations in 12 states with varying characteristics. We included large and small cities and rural areas from various regions of the country. Other criteria used for selection of areas were proximity to Internet points. Some companies expressed concern about slow or limited deployment of high-speed Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) service in residential areas. Some backbone providers and ISPs said that these problems were more severe or more limiting in rural areas. For instance, we were told that rural areas are least likely to have competitors to the local carrier, and the incumbents were less likely to roll out DSL in their more rural markets. Incumbent local carriers, on the other hand, have stated that there is considerable competition in the provision of special access service. New Internet services, such as video streaming and voice telephone calls over the Internet, are expected to become increasingly common in the coming years. Both Internet backbone networks and local communications infrastructure must have sufficient bandwidth and technical capabilities to support such services. Incumbent local telephone companies have stated that the rollout of DSL service is hampered. We found that most of those with whom we spoke were optimistic that backbone capacity and technical features would adapt to new needs. But concern was expressed that limited broadband capabilities in local telephone markets could stall certain new applications.  DSL rollout is hampered by certain regulations that require incumbents to sell parts of their network (including DSL lines) to entrants at cost-based rates. Legislation is pending in the 107th Congress that would address these concerns. Opponents of the legislation believe the bill will not foster increased deployment of broadband services and may stifle competition in the local telephone market. Other bills have been introduced to address the same issues, but none have yet been voted on by the Senate or the House of Representatives. Members of Congress are often concerned about whether telecommunications services reach rural areas. Several representatives of companies we interviewed noted that there are less Internet backbone facilities running through rural areas and fewer points of presence in those areas. As such, purchasers of backbone connectivity in rural areas may have fewer choices among providers than their counterparts in more urban locations. Two rural providers said rural areas sometimes have subsidized networks (e.g., state networks or networks funded, in part, by governmental subsidy) that may discourage private backbone companies from entering such markets. There appears to be ample deployment of fiber optic cable in Internet backbone networks to support high bandwidth services. Concerns were expressed to us that shortcomings in the local telephone market were likely to intensify in the future due, in part, to the increase in demand for broadband applications and content. We found that some companies are concerned about the growth of the broadband market in the U.S. and other countries. Some companies are also concerned that the growth in the broadband marketplace will lead to a decline in the number of telephone subscribers. Most ISPs and other end users connect to a backbone provider’s point of presence through the local telecommunications infrastructure. These systems are typically owned and operated by incumbent telephone companies. Many of the market participants with whom we spoke noted that local telephone markets are, in their view, close to monopolistic. Some companies attempting to compete against incumbent local telephone carriers have recently gone out of business. In particular, interviewees stated that incumbent telephone carriers take a long time to provision or provide maintenance on special access services and other high speed access lines. offering services to address this problem by attempting to bypass incumbent telephone companies’ facilities and bring services directly to customers. Most of these efforts are focused on business customers in urban areas. Metropolitan fiber rings are being constructed as an alternative to using incumbent carrier services. Wireless direct access is also becoming available that will enable a company’s data traffic to bypass local telecommunications infrastructures. For example, we found that Metropolitan fiber Ring customers purchase a direct connection to the fiber ring, which is connected directly to the backbone point of presence. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 sought to increase competition in other communications sectors, primarily the local telephone market. No provisions were contained in the 1996 act pertaining to Internet backbone services. However, the act did provide for the creation of a “telecommunications’ and “information” commission. The commission was created to regulate the Internet backbone market, but it was later expanded to include all Internet services, including voice and data services. The agency is now looking at how to regulate data-processing services on the Internet. treatment of these more established communications services and infrastructures under the Communications Act of 1934 has indirectly affected the Internet medium. Two types of facilities are used for the exchange of data traffic by interconnected Internet backbone providers. The first type of facility, known as a “network access point” (NAP), enables numerous backbone providers to interconnect with each other at a common facility. Internet data traffic is also exchanged at the NAP. The act provided FCC and states the authority to take actions to encourage the deployment of advanced telecommunications capability. found little in the way of official or complete information on the relative size of companies. Neither FCC nor NTIA collect data on the provision of Internet backbone services. FCC does solicit public comments on the deployment of underlying telecommunications infrastructure. DOJ often collects data for merger-specific analyses, but such data are not publicly available. We also found that neither the Bureau of Industry and Security nor the Department of Justice collects data on Internet providers' share of the market in the U.S. and abroad. and trends of the Internet backbone market and the potential effects of the convergence of communications services. If a more formal data collection program is deemed appropriate, FCC should exercise its authority to establish such a program. We provided a draft of this report to the FCC, NTIA of the Department of Commerce, and DOJ for their review and comment. FCC and NTIA officials stated that they were in general agreement with the facts presented in the report. Technical comments provided by FCC,. NTIA and DOJ officials were incorporated in this report as appropriate. FCC said it believes that the appropriate means to collect information on Internet backbone networks at the present time is through informal and experimental efforts, which are currently under way. Because of the trend towards convergence in the communications marketplace and the nation’s increasing reliance on the Internet, FCC may need to periodically reassess its data collection efforts to evaluate whether they are providing sufficient information about key developments in this industry. FCC should develop a strategy for periodically evaluating whether existing informal and Experimental methods of data collection are providing the information needed to monitor the essential characteristics. in Internet traffic. Two of the providers with whom we spoke said that some NAPs were not well managed. If traffic exchange at a NAP became congested, service quality could be compromised. Two typical problems that congestion causes include latency (delay in the transmission of traffic) and packet loss (when transmitted data are actually lost and never reach their destination). For example, one backbone provider told us that the loss of data was so great that the company had to shut down its network. such as IP telephony and interactive video require “bounded delays” These services require very low and uniform delays between sender and receiver. More broadband content is expected to be transmitted over the Internet. Before such broadband content can be provided, both the backbone and the local communications infrastructure must have sufficient bandwidth. Many industry representatives with whom we met told us that latency and the loss of data packets due to traffic congestion is a consequence of the current protocols for transmitting Internet traffic. As transmissions of time-sensitive data packets are lost due to congestion. The Internet was not engineered to enable extremely high quality service at all times. The quality of Internet services can be compromised when high levels of traffic flow lead to congestion. Because the Internet is a network of interconnected networks, finding the source, cause, or reason for a problem may be difficult. ISPs and end users expressed frustration that accountability for traffic transmission problems is lacking, the authors say. They underscore the need for adequate information on such items as geographic scope of backbone networks, the number of backbone providers’ customers, traffic flows, and outages. The quality problems inherent in the Internet lead some customers to purchase expensive private network services. One of the initiatives of the current and fifth Network Reliability and Interoperability Council (NRIC V) is a trial program for voluntary reporting of outages by providers not currently required to make such reports to FCC. A focus group of the Council will evaluate the effectiveness of the program upon its completion and analysis of trial data, and it will make a recommendation on outage reporting of these networks. We were told that, due to applications over the Internet become increasingly common in the future, these problems may become particularly acute. A few of those we interviewed noted that these applications can run well across one backbone network, but when traffic must transverse across more than one network, quality cannot be assured given current routing protocols. We found that participants in Internet markets have begun to address latency and reliability problems in Internet backbone networks. For example, NRIC V is in the process of evaluating and will report on the reliability of “packet- switched” networks. Backbone networks link at interconnection points and take traffic to and from residential users through ISPs and directly from large business users. Backbone providers have points of presence in varied locations, although they concentrate these facilities in more densely-populated areas where Internet end users’ demands for access are greatest. Once on an Internet backbone network, digital data data can be sent to other parts of the world. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from. Back To The page you were from. of the 8 end users we interviewed used transport from their location to another location for at least some of their Internet traffic. Sometimes transport was used to move data traffic to a nearby city that was not very far away. But in some cases—particularly for ISPs in rural areas—traffic was transported a few hundred miles to a point of presence of a backbone provider. The majority of officials from these companies told us that the quality of Internet service is not diminished by transporting traffic across such distances. Even ISPs and users in more rural areas told us that they generally had choice among backbone providers that could receive traffic at varied distant locations. The one disadvantage of distant transport noted by several providers, however, was cost. Some company officials noted that it generally costs more to purchase transport to a distant location than it does to connect to a backbone at a local point of presence. Two companies specifically mentioned that they had or were planning to move their facilities to more urban locations. For more information, visit backbone.us. of DOJ have noted that in industries such as the Internet backbone market, interconnection among carriers is critical to the quality of service consumers receive. As such, a much larger provider may have less incentive to have good interconnection quality with other providers. Without quality interconnection, customers may have an incentive to buy service from the largest provider with the best-connected network. This would give the larger provider a competitive advantage, which in turn could cause the market to “tip” — that is, more and more users would choose connectivity from the larger network. A concern among several market participants we interviewed was the difficulty of guaranteeing customers a given level of quality for Internet services. We were told that this difficulty is related to the way that the Internet is engineered. Internet traffic is exchanged among providers on a “best efforts’ basis, they said. It appears, therefore, that customers’ feelings of being tied to a provider may lessen the effective level of competitiveness in this market.to avoid having to go through a disruptive readdressing process. The adaptability of backbone networks for new services, such as Internet-based voice and video services, foretell a trend commonly identified as “convergence” in the broader communications sector. There is a strong expectation that traditionally regulated services are already migrating to the Internet and will soon become part of the Internet. This expectation of greater convergence was widely shared by the market participants we interviewed for this study and for other studies we have conducted at your request over the past 3 years.in the Internet backbone market. common applications used by residential and business Internet users. The implications of convergence and greater future reliance on the Internet are at present largely unknown. No evidence came to light in the course of this study to suggest that the long-standing hands-off regulatory approach for the Internet has not worked or should be modified. Further, no evidence that the hands-on regulatory approach has worked or that it should be changed in any way in the future. The Internet has evolved from a nascent but promising information tool to a 21st century medium for commerce and communications. control and encryption. Companies reduce reliance on backbone service by caching frequently used content on their servers. “Internet2’ is a partnership of universities, industry, and government formed to support research and the development of new technologies and capabilities for future deployment within the Internet. The Internet is not viewed as conducive to supporting research capabilities of high-speed technologies and other advanced functions, so alternative methods for such research have emerged. In addition, companies have emerged that specialize in caching frequently accessed content and storing it in varied geographic locations. in Congress proposing various other approaches and strategies to accelerate the deployment of high-speed data services. In the 6 years since the federal government ended its sponsorship of a key backbone network, the Internet has changed the way people of the world live, work, and play. Its rapid growth is seen in the substantial investments made by private sector firms in backbone networks and interconnection facilities, and by the proliferation of interactive applications and content. These developments are particularly noteworthy in light of the dynamic nature of the Internet backbone. Many companies are developing technologies to enable voice services to be provided over IP networks. At present, many backbone networks are not well designed to provision such “time-sensitive” services. New services and some services that were traditionally regulated (such as telephone calls) are expected to become more commonly provided over the Internet in the coming years.by the cost of reengineering parts of the network and existing regulations that require them to sell piece parts of their networks to competitors at cost-based rates. Companies have emerged to build and provide services over networks that do not rely as much on traffic exchange across networks. For example, a few providers are building and relying on private data networks—rather than the Internet—for the transmission of voice services. Some companies are building “virtual private networks”— networks configured within a public network for data transmissions that are secured via access.is also examining issues related to interconnection and peering of Internet backbone providers and the sufficiency of the best efforts standard for Internet transmissions.

ROUGE-1: 77.45, ROUGE-2: 72.23, ROUGE-L: 29.24
BERTScore: 53.13

==============================================
==================== [95/100] ====================
Summary:
The Advisory Group on Public Diplomacy for the Arab and Muslim World reported that “hostility toward the U.S. makes achieving our policy goals far more difficult” Foreign leaders may seek to leverage anti-American sentiment in pursuit of their own political goals. As these leaders achieve personal political successes based on their opposition to the United States, they may then be less likely to support U.s. foreign policy going forward. The Council on Foreign Relations has argued that increasing hostility toward America in Muslim countries facilitates recruitment and support for extremism and terror. Anti-American sentiments may negatively affect American economic interests, U.S. foreign policy and military operations, and the security of Americans. According to Business for Diplomatic Action, anti-Americanism can cause boycotts of American products, a backlash against American brands, and increased security costs. A report from the Princeton-based Working Group on Anti-Americansism also found that anti-America sentiments have had a negative impact on U.s. security and foreign policy. The report was based on a survey of more than 1,000 people. than in 2004 or 2005 in most of the industries it reports on. Threats to American private property and personnel working overseas have become constant in some regions, especially the Middle East. Anti-Americanism around the world may reduce the U.S.’s ability to pursue its foreign policy goals, including efforts to foster diplomatic relationships with other foreign leaders and to garner support for the global war on terror. For instance, in October 2003, the Defense Science Board, the Brookings Institution, and others, to 12 percent over the same time period in Turkey. Numerous experts, expert groups, policymakers, and business leaders have expressed concerns that anti-Americanism may harm U.S. interests in various ways. While individual opinion polls may reflect a snapshot in time, consistently negative polls may. reflect the development of more deeply seated sentiments about the United States. The Council on Foreign Relations has claimed that the loss of goodwill may harm the U.N.’s ability to influence world leaders. The Defense Science Board states that “damaging consequences for other elements of U.s. soft power are tactical manifestations of a pervasive atmosphere of hostility” cannot draw a direct causal link between anti-Americanism and specific outcomes in these areas. It is clear that growing negative foreign public opinion does not help the United States achieve its economic, foreign policy, and security goals. U.S. public diplomacy efforts, which seek to counter anti- Americanism sentiment, have a critical role to play in supporting U.s. interests throughout the world. Over the past 4 years, we have identified and made recommendations to State and the BBG on a number of issues related to a general lack of strategic planning. Other factors, such as the visibility of Americans overseas, particularly in Iraq; the role of the media in supporting anti-Americanism; and the absence of economic security may also contribute to this violence. While all of the topics discussed here represent areas in which anti- Americanism may have negative consequences, the empirical evidence to support direct relationships is limited. We cannot confirm any causal relationships between negative foreign public opinion and specific negative outcomes regarding U.S. interests. Despite the fact that we.interests in those areas, it does seem to play a role in fueling such violence in Iraq. The State Department’s 2003 report on Patterns of Global Terrorism recorded 67 attacks on American business facilities and 7 business casualties. In 2006, the Overseas Security Advisory Council noted that more threats against the private sector occurred in 2006. The Travel Business Roundtable has reported significant declines in the U.S. market share of the worldwide travel market and a decline in overseas visitors to the United States since 9/11.generally echoes the possibility that anti- Americanism may harm U.s. business interests in these same areas. 56 private U.S. citizens were killed as a result of terrorism incidents in 2005. The Working Group on Anti-Americanism suggests that there is some correlation between anti- Americanism and violence against Americans in the greater Middle East. The relationship is complex. For example, while increased anti-Americanist in Europe or Jordan has not led to violence against American or U.s. citizens, it has led to more violence in the region. The group notes that Americans face an increased risk of direct attack from individuals and small groups. Security concerns are particularly elevated in countries with significant Muslim populations. Threat level for terrorism is rated as “critical” or “high” in 80 percent of posts. Security and budgetary concerns have led to the closure of publicly accessible facilities around the world, such as the U.S. Embassy in Cairo. The U.N. has a responsibility to ensure the safety and well-being of its personnel and their families, and to protect its facilities and facilities from harm. The United Nations has a duty to protect the safety of its citizens and its facilities. as American Centers and Libraries. In Pakistan, for example, all American Centers have closed for security reasons; the last facility, in Islamabad, closed in February 2005. These same concerns have prevented establishing a U.S. presence elsewhere. As a result, embassies have had to find other venues for public diplomacy programs. Some activities have been moved onto embassy compounds, where precautions designed to improve security have had the ancillary effect of sending the message that the United States is unapproachable and distrustful. use of cell phones and pagers within the embassy. According to one official in Pakistan, visitors to the embassy’s reference library have declined to as few as one per day. Other public diplomacy programs have had to limit their publicity to reduce the risk of becoming a target. A recent joint USAID-State report concluded that “security concerns often require a ‘low profile’ approach during events, programs or other situations.” This constraint is a result of the U.S. decision to limit the use of pagers and cell phones in the embassy, the report said. particularly acute in Pakistan, where the embassy has had to reduce certain speaker and exchange programs. State has responded to security concerns and the loss of publicly accessible facilities through a variety of initiatives. American Corners are centers that provide information about the United States, hosted in local institutions and staffed by local employees. According to State data, there are currently 365American Corners throughout the world, including more than 200 in the Muslim world. However, two of the posts we visited in Pakistan were closed. U.S. Department of State: Staffing and Foreign Language Shortfalls Persist Despite Initiatives to Address Gaps. State Department Efforts to Engage Muslim Audiences Lack Certain Communication Elements and Face Significant Challenges. U.s. Public Diplomacy: State Department and Broadcasting Board of Governors Expand Efforts in the Middle East but Face Significant challenges. This is a work of the U.S., government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission. countries with significant Muslim populations. In Arabic language posts, about 36 percent of language- designated public diplomacy positions were filled by staff unable to speak Arabic at the designated level. State officials said that there are even fewer officers who are willing or able to speak on television or engage in public debate in Arabic. The information officer in Cairo stated that his office does not have enough Arabic speakers to engage the Egyptian media effectively. State has begun to address these language deficiencies by increasing its overall amount of language training. GAO: State Department continues to experience significant foreign language proficiency shortfalls in countries around the world. Report noted this problem was particularly acute at posts in the Muslim world where Arabic—classified as a “superhard” language by State—predominates. Officials at State said that the Management bureau is currently considering options for reducing the administrative burden on posts, including the development of centralized administrative capabilities offshore. In 2003, GAO recommended that the Secretary of State designate more administrative positions to overseas public affairs sections. State Department had 887 established public diplomacy positions (overseas and domestic) as of March 31, 2007, but 199, or roughly 22 percent, were vacant. Compounding this challenge is the loss of public diplomacy officers to temporary duty in Iraq, which, according to one State official, is a major problem. Several embassy officials stated that, with current staffing levels, they do not have the capacity to effectively utilize increased funds. The U.S. State Department has a responsibility to focus and direct its international broadcasting efforts. Staffing shortages may also limit the amount of training public diplomacy officers receive. Public diplomacy officers at posts are burdened with administrative tasks, and thus have less time to conduct public diplomacy outreach activities than they did previously. One senior State official said that administrative tasks have drawn down field officers even further. The number of field officers has remained the same in fiscal years 2004 and 2006, the State Department says. The State Department is repositioning several public diplomacy Officers as part of its transformational diplomacy initiative. duties, such as budget, personnel, and internal reporting, compete with officers’ public diplomacy responsibilities. Another official in Egypt stated that she rarely had enough time to strategize, plan, or evaluate her programs. These statements echo comments we heard during overseas fieldwork and in a survey for our 2003 report. In that survey, officers stated that, although they manage to attend public outreach and other functions within their host country capitals, it was particularly difficult to find time to travel outside the capitals to interact with other communities. The average length of tour at posts in the Muslim world is about 22 percent shorter than tour lengths elsewhere. Public affairs officers who have shorter tours tend to produce less effective work than officers with longer tours, a senior official at State said. In our May 2006 report, we reported that the prevalence of 1-year tours in theMuslim world was high. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. To read the rest of the report, click here: http://www.cnn.org/2006/01/29/world/features/world-diplomat-tours-in-mideast. Secretary has issued limited guidance regarding the goal of countering extremism to 18 posts selected to participate in a pilot initiative focusing on this objective. We have recommended that State adopt strategic communication best practices (which we refer to as the “campaign-style approach” and develop country-specific communication plans that incorporate the key steps embodied in this approach. These steps include defining the core message, identifying and segmenting target audiences, developing detailed communication strategies and tactics, and using research and evaluation to inform and re-direct efforts as needed. report, our review of public diplomacy operations in Nigeria, Pakistan, and Egypt in 2006 found that this approach and corresponding communication plans were absent. Rather, post public diplomacy efforts constituted an ad hoc collection of activities designed to support such broad goals as promoting mutual understanding. In a recent development, 18 posts participating in the department’s pilot countries initiative have developed country-level plans focusing on the countering extremism goal. These plans were developed on the basis of a template issued by the Under Secretary that requires each post to provide a list of supporting objectives, a description of the media. environment, identification of key target audiences, and a list of supporting programs and activities. We reviewed most of the plans submitted in response to this guidance. Although useful as a high-level planning exercise, these plans do not adhere to the campaign-style approach. The plans omit basic elements, such as specific core messages and themes, or any substantive evidence that proposed communication programs were driven by detailed audience research. This requires a level of rigor and detail that normally exceeds the three- to four-page plans produced by pilot countries. some marking and publicity requirements in their policies, regulations, and guidelines. We identified some challenges to marking and publicizing U.S. foreign assistance. The lack of a strategy for assessing the impact of marking. and publicity efforts on public awareness and the lack of governmentwide guidance for marking and. publicizing foreign aid is one of the challenges. State indicated that the interagency public diplomacy strategy will address assessment and will include governmentwide marking andPressure guidance. In 2005, we noted that State’s efforts to engage the private sector in pursuit of common public diplomacy objectives had met with mixed success. the absence of such research, programs may lack important information about appropriate target audiences and credible messages and messengers. Based on prior reports by GAO and others, the department has begun to institute a more concerted effort to measure the impact of its programs and activities. The department created (1) the Office of Policy, Planning, and Resources within the office of the Under Secretary. The Public Diplomacy Evaluation Council to share best practices. The Department established an expanded evaluation schedule that is designed to cover all major public diplomacy programs. department also has called on program managers to analyze and define their key inputs, activities, outputs, outcomes, and impact to help identify meaningful performance goals and indicators. In 2001, the BBG introduced a market-based approach to international broadcasting that sought to “marry the mission to the market.” This approach was designed to generate large listening audiences in priority markets. The department recently launched a pilot public diplomacy performance measurement data collection project that is designed to collect, document, and quantify reliable annual and long-term outcome performance measures. State has not yet developed a comprehensive strategy to guide the Department’s efforts to engage the private sector. In 2005, the Under Secretary established a strategic framework for U.S. public diplomacy efforts. It includes three priority goals: (1) offer foreign publics a vision of hope and opportunity; (2) isolate and marginalize extremists; and (3) promote understanding regarding shared values and common interests between Americans and peoples of different countries, cultures, and languages. The State Department hosted a Private Sector Summit on Public Diplomacy in January 2007. and faiths. State has not yet developed written guidance that provides details on how these five tactics will be used to implement the Under Secretary’s priority goals. This framework partially responds to our 2003 recommendation that State should develop and disseminate a strategy to integrate its public diplomacy efforts and direct them toward achieving common objectives. However, it should be noted that the Under. Secretary has said she intends to achieve these goals using various public diplomacy programs and other means, including coordinating outreach efforts with the private sector. The U.S. government lacks an interagency public diplomacy strategy. The lack of such a strategy complicates the task of conveying consistent messages. State officials have said that it also diminishes the efficiency and effectiveness of governmentwide public diplomacy efforts. Such a plan has been drafted and will be released shortly, the authors say. The authors recommend that meaningful performance goals and indicators be established by both State and the BBG.performance and results. They also recommend that State develop a strategic plan to integrate its diverse efforts. The key objectives of U.S. public diplomacy are to engage, inform, and influence overseas audiences. Public diplomacy is carried out through a wide range of programs that employ person-to-person contacts. Since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, State has expanded its public diplomacy efforts. The State Department’s efforts have focused on foreign elites. However, the dramatic growth in global mass communications and other trends have forced a rethinking of this approach, and State has begun to consider techniques for communicating with broader foreign audiences. established a new Policy Coordination Committee on Public Diplomacy and Strategic Communications. This committee intends to better coordinate interagency activities, including the development of an interagency public diplomacy strategy. We have been told this strategy is still under development and will be issued soon. The U.S. government also lacks a governmentwide strategy and meaningful methods to ensure that recipients of U.s. foreign assistance are consistently aware that the aid comes from the United States. In March 2007, we reported that most agencies involved in foreign assistance activities had established. BBG accept our recommendation and has informed us that it is currently considering how it will do so. Public diplomacy efforts in the field face several other challenges. Post officials have consistently cited a general lack of staff, insufficient administrative support, and inadequate language training. The BBG’s disparate organizational structure has been viewed as a key challenge. The U.S. State Department has a responsibility to improve its public diplomacy efforts, the authors say. They recommend the BBG improve its audience research methods, including identifying significant methodological limitations. October 2005 were having difficulty finding hosts for American Corners, as local institutions fear becoming terrorist targets. The Broadcasting Board of Governors has its own set of public diplomacy challenges, including trying to gain large audiences in priority markets. As noted in the BBG’s strategic plan, “diverse organizations with different missions, different frameworks, and different constituencies’ makes it a challenge to bring all the separate parts together in a more effective whole” As we reported in July 2003, the Board hoped to. its public diplomacy efforts globally, focusing particularly on countries in the Muslim world considered to be of strategic importance in the war on terror. In May 2006, we reported that this trend continued with funding increases of 25 percent for the Near East and 39 percent for South Asia from 2004 to 2006. The BBG supports U.S. public diplomacy’s key objectives by broadcasting news and information about the United States and world affairs. It serves as a model of how a free press should operate. State and the BBG spent close to $1.5 billion on public diplomacy programs in fiscal year 2006. As others have previously reported, in recent years anti-American sentiment has spread and intensified. For instance, favorable attitudes toward the United States in Indonesia declined from 75 percent in 2000 to 30 percent in 2006 and from 52 percent to 40 percent in 2005. The Pew Global Attitudes Project has found that the decline in favorable opinion of the U.S. is a worldwide trend.. The Board’s vision is to create a flexible, multimedia, research-driven U.S. international broadcasting system. Implementing this strategy has focused on markets relevant to the war on terrorism, in particular in the Middle East. The BBG subsequently created a single strategic goal to focus on the key objective of maximizing impact in priority areas of interest to the United States. However, we found that weaknesses in the BBG”s audience surveys create uncertainty over whether some of Radio Sawa’  performance targets for audience size have been met. on how to implement this strategic framework has not yet been developed. posts generally do not pursue a campaign-style approach to communications that incorporates best practices endorsed by GAO and others. In 2003, we reported that the United States. had begun to take credible steps towards instituting more systematic performance measurement practices. The BBG has added audience size as a key performance measure within its strategic plan. However, our latest review of MBN’s operations call into question the potential value of this measure due to various methodological concerns. address this key challenge through two primary means. First, it planned to treat the component parts of U.S. international broadcasting as a single system with the Board in the position of actively managing resources across broadcast entities. Second, it intended to realign the BBG’s organizational structure to reinforce the CEO with a host of responsibilities. In addition, in 2006, we found that MBN, which received $79 million in, was the largest broadcaster in the United States, followed by ABC. funding in fiscal year 2006, faces several managerial and editorial challenges that may hinder the organization’s efforts to expand in their highly competitive market. While MBN has taken steps to improve its process of program review and evaluation, it has not yet implemented our recommendations. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time. For questions regarding this testimony, please contact Jess T. Ford at (202) 512-4128 permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army on 8457 909090 or see http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/.

ROUGE-1: 82.78, ROUGE-2: 75.58, ROUGE-L: 31.42
BERTScore: 67.88

==============================================
==================== [96/100] ====================
Summary:
the CFO Act or FFMIA, the Accountability of Tax Dollars Act of 2002, requires DHS to prepare and have audited financial statements annually. The President’s Management Agenda recognized that an unqualified financial audit opinion is a basic prescription for any well-managed organization. Without sound internal control and accurate and timely financial information, it is not possible to accomplish the agenda and secure the best performance and highest performance, the White House said. The White House did not require DHS to comply with the CFO act. measure of accountability for the American people. Joint Financial Management Improvement Program (JFMIP) Principals have defined certain measures, in addition to receiving an unqualified financial statement opinion. These additional measures include being able to routinely provide timely, accurate, and useful financial and performance information, having neither material internal control weaknesses nor material noncompliance with laws and regulations. DHS obtained a consolidated financial audit for the 7-month period from March 1, 2003, to September 30, 2003. DHS received a qualified opinion from its independent auditors on its financial performance. subject to pending legislation. DHS is currently subject to most financial management improvement laws except for the CFO Act and FFMIA. DHS should not be the only cabinet-level department not covered by what is the cornerstone for pursuing and achieving the requisite financial management systems and capabilities in the federal government, the authors say. In view of the size of DHS and the importance of the C FO Act andFFMIA in improving financial management and its applicability to all other cabinet departments, we believe DHS should be a CFO act agency. and reporting of cost information, and the integration of accounting and budget information. The act also requires that the agency’s CFO be qualified, presidentially appointed, approved by the Senate, and report to the head of the agency. Although DHS is not currently subject to FFMIA, its auditors disclosed systems deficiencies in its financial management information systems, the application of accounting standards, and recording of financial transactions. Based on these weaknesses it is likely that DHS's systems would not have been in substantial compliance with the requirements of the CFO Act. includes defining, acquiring, and testing the planned solution. Phase II involves implementing the solution throughout DHS, and Phase III is ongoing maintenance of the solution. According to DHS, the eMergevendor selection to occur in April or May of 2004. However, vendor proposal requests were issued in June 2004 and selection is to be completed in July 2004. The Business Automation Initiative is an interim project to be developed by contractors during 2004. It will automate purchase requests for the department and to streamline the employee entry/exit process. Another interim initiative was considered by the department to integrate data mining and warehousing. However, instead of pursuing this interim solution, DHS plans to include it in the requirements of the eMerge initiative. A request for proposal (RFP) was issued by DHS for the e Merge initiative, but these documents were not provided to us until after we completed our fieldwork. Thus, we are not providing description, analysis, or evaluation of such information in this report, says the report. We have found that similar projects have proven challenging and costly for other federal agencies. NASA is on its third attempt in 12 years to modernize its financial management process and systems, and has spent about $180. We are unable to determine if DHS, through the RMTO, is developing a financial enterprise solution that will be in alignment with departmentwide information technology plans, many of which are still under development. We have reported on the efforts of National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the District of Columbia Courts (DC Courts) to acquire new information systems. DC Courts began its system acquisition in 1998 and has struggled in its implementation. DC Courts struggled in developing requirements that contained the necessary specificity to ensure the system developed would meet its users’ needs. To avoid similar problems, it is important, among other things, that DHS ensure commitment and extensive involvement of key stakeholders. It is also important to ensure that DC Courts develops a system that meets the needs of its users, rather than just a set of requirements that the government develops for the sake of the system. The support of top officials at the department will be key in ensuring that the necessary resources are available to address the weaknesses. DHS expects the acquisition and implementation of the financial enterprise solution to take place over a 3-year time period and cost approximately $146 million. According to the strategic framework DHS provided to us, the development of an integratedfinancial enterprise solution will be accomplished in three phases. The acquisition is in the early stages, and continued focus and follow through, among other things, will be necessary for it to be successful. It is too early to tell whether DHS’s planned financial enterprise solution will meet the requirements of financial management laws it is currently not subject to. DHS has implemented a commercial-off-the-shelf tool called Dynamic Object Oriented Requirements System (DOORS) to track requirements of various laws, regulations, and circulars place on the development of the system. It would certainly make good business sense to do so given DHS's size and mission. It is also important that DHS be proactive and incorporate the requirement of the CFO Act and FFMIA. DHS estimated that several thousand compliance requirements will be tracked using DOORS once analysis is completed. After the repository is complete, requirements reports are to be printed directly from DOORS and attached to future RFPs to ensure that contractors are aware of the legislative requirements of the systems to be developed. A system to record, track, and link all legislative requirements as a financial management system is being developed is important. Also important is that DHS be statutorily required to develop an integrated financial system. After 9/11, responding to potential and real threats to homeland security became one of the federal government’s most significant challenges. The Homeland Security Act of 2002 merged 22 federal agencies and organizations into DHS, making it the department with the third largest budget. In January 2003, we designated implementation and transformation of the new Department of Homeland Security as high risk based on three factors: (1) the implementation, (2) the funding, and (3) the political will of Congress. among other things, preventing terrorist attacks within the United States, reducing America’s vulnerability to terrorism, minimizing subsequent damage, and assisting in the recovery from attacks that do occur. To help accomplish this integrated homeland security mission, the various mission areas and associated programs of 22 federal agencies were merged, in whole or in part, into DHS. The department's organizational structure consists of eight major components, each of which is headed by an Under Secretary. The U.S. Coast Guard (Coast Guard), the U.s. Secret Service, the Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services (CIS), and five directorates are headed by Under Secretaries. relatively more significant than when considered in the context of the much larger consolidated operations of DHS as a whole. Resolving all previously reported internal control weaknesses, regardless of the current designation at DHS, is key to DHS’s ability to produce relevant and reliable financial information. The department is committed to resolving the remaining weaknesses and has developed a plan to do so. Along with developing corrective action plans, the CFO testified that DHS plans to implement a departmentwide tracking system to monitor the status of corrective actions. DHS has begun working with a contractor to design and implement a tracking system for outstanding weaknesses identified during the department’s independent financial audits. The system is not yet fully functional and does not include information on all reported weaknesses. Until such time that it does, it will provide limited oversight and information on the status of corrective actions to address weaknesses at DHS. Follow-through with planned corrective actions is paramount. The comments DHS provided to us are reprinted in appendix IV.actions. The original intent of our recommendation was to encourage DHS to track and resolve all auditor reported material weaknesses, reportable conditions, and observations and recommendations. It is too early to tell whether DHS’s planned financial enterprise solution will be able to meet the requirements of relevant financial management improvement laws. We did not complete audit procedures to determine if these reductions were positive or negative for the department. However, substantial documentation related to the eMerge initiative was not provided to us until after we completed our fieldwork. Thus, we did not include analysis or evaluation of such information in this report. We reviewed relevant laws and regulations, and relevant guidance related to financial. and transformation of DHS is an enormous undertaking that will take time to achieve in an effective and efficient manner. The Homeland Security Act of 2002 states that DHS’s missions include, outstanding inherited weaknesses, as well as address the newly identified department-level weaknesses. Through the eMerge initiative, DHS has plans to integrate and consolidate its financial and business systems. But without such things as continued active oversight from top-level management and systematic approaches to this integration, DHS could find itself in the same position as other federal departments. We reviewed relevant DHS Office of Inspector General (OIG) reports and our January 2003 report on major management challenges at DHS. We also reviewed DHS’s Performance and Accountability Report for the 7 months ending September 30, 2003. We reviewed prior-period component agency annual financial statement audit reports when available. We looked at how such challenges are being addressed at the Department of Homeland Security. This report is based on the OIG reports and a January 2003 DHS report on big management challenges in the agency. the Congress may wish to consider the following action: Enact legislation to designate DHS as a CFO Act agency. We are making eight recommendations for executive action at DHS that will improve financial management at the department. We fully support DHS including all management-identified control weaknesses as well, and have updated our recommendation accordingly. We applaud the current leadership at DHS for voluntarily complying with some audit provisions. We continue to strongly support passage of legislation that would statutorily make DHS a C FO Act agency, and thus guarantee future requirements to adhere to important financial management legislation. Reports for the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Departments of Transportation, Justice, and Treasury. We reviewed testimony of DHS’s current and former Chief Financial Officer (CFO) We reviewed planned corrective actions developed by the department to address its fiscal years 2002 and 2003 material weaknesses and reportable conditions. Further, we conducted a walk-through to review the system DHS is developing to track planned corrective action. Finally, we interviewed officials from the OIG and the Office of the Chief Financial officer (OCFO) management, financial reporting, systems implementation, and requirements. We also interviewed the Director of the RMTO and other officials. We performed our review from October 2003 through June 2004 in Washington, DC. We have not reviewed system requirements or other recently developed plans because these were completed and obtained after our fieldwork was completed. We requested comments on this report from the Secretary of Homeland Security or his designee. Written comments were received from the department’s Chief Financial Officer and are reprinted in appendix IV. plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies of thisReport to interested congressional committees and subcommittees. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report or wish to discuss it further, please contact me at (202) 512-6906. Each weekday, GAO posts newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence on its Web site. To have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to Updates.” The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through GAO’s Web site (www.gaO.gov) of accountability, integrity, and reliability. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Condition (In-bond Movement of Imported Goods) Observation & Recommendations to Management Material Weakness (Financial Systems Functionality and Technology) Immigration and Naturalization Service (as of February 28, 2003) Reportable Condition (Acceptance and Adjudication of Immigration and naturalization Applications) Reportability Condition (Accounts Payable and Undelivered Orders) Material Weaknesses (Financial Reporting) Materialweakness ( financial reporting) Material weakness (Intragovernmental Balances) The Government Accountability Office is the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. The GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values, which are set out in the agency's mission statement. The agency's core values are: "Accountability, transparency, and accountability for the American people" CBP did not have a reliable process of monitoring the movement of ‘in-bond’ shipments. CBP lacked an effective compliance measurement program to compute an estimate of underpayment of related duties, taxes, and fees. The Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services’ (CIS) process for tracking and reporting the status of applications and related information was inconsistent and inefficient. Also, CIS did not prevent excessive drawback claims and payments. The U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) failed to adequately monitor the movements of “in- bond” shipments, which are merchandise that is not subject to duties until it reaches its destination. process was complex and labor-intensive. Several DHS bureaus lacked clearly documented procedures, making them vulnerable if key people leave the organization. The Coast Guard was unable to support the recorded value of $2.9 billion in PP&E due to insufficient documentation provided prior to the completion of audit procedures. The Bureau of Customs and Border Protection’s (CBP) accounting system lacked automated controls to detect Drawback claims on duties, taxes, and fees. DHS lacked controls to verify that monthly financial reports and transferred balances from legacy agencies were accurate and complete. The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) lacked a comprehensive property management system. Internal controls over physical counts of OM&S were not effective at the Coast Guard. The Secret Service did not record the.documentation to support its estimation methodology. The Coast Guard also had not recently reviewed its OM &S capitalization policy, leading to a material adjustment to its records when an analysis was performed. The TSA lacked adequate policies and procedures to ensure the accuracy of its PP&E records. The auditors were unable to verify the recorded value of $497 million in OM & S. perform cycle counts of its work in process that would facilitate the accurate calculation of deferred revenue. Fund balance with Treasury (FBWT): The Coast Guard did not perform required reconciliations for FBWT accounts and lacked written standard operating procedures (SOP) to guide the process. Intragovernmental balances: Several large DHS bureaus had not developed and adopted effective SOPs or established systems to track, confirm, and reconcile intragovernmentals balances and transactions. Strategic National Stockpile (SNS): The SNS accounting process was fragmented and disconnected, largely due to operational challenges caused by the laws governing SNS. A $485 million upwards adjustment had to be made to value SNS in DHS’s records properly. CIS and the Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), TSA, and the Coast Guard had weaknesses in their processes for accruing accounts payable or reporting accurate balances for undelivered orders. SNS had a Material Weakness (Financial Systems Functionality and Technology) Reportable Condition (Drawback Claims on Duties, Taxes, and Fees) FEMA’s auditors reported seven internal control weaknesses for fiscal year 2002. These weaknesses resulted in the need for extensive manual effort to compile financial information. FLETC not having adequate policies and procedures in place to ensure that funds obligated were proper and that costs for construction in progress were recorded properly. Many of these weaknesses specifically contributed to FEMA's systems’ failure to substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA, according to the report. The report also found that FEMA had a lack of a process to evaluate the accuracy of a new claims estimation methodology. Many of these weaknesses lead to FLETC’s systems’ inability to substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA. Nine of the 30 internal control weaknesses identified in prior component financial statement audits have been closed as of September 30, 2003. The remaining 21 issues represent continuing weaknesses that have been reported in DHS’S first Performance and Accountability Report. To ensure financial accountability and establish an effective financial environment, DHS must address all of its internal control problems. Meeting these financial management improvement requirements will help produce timely and useful financial and business information. Within the Management Directorate is DHS’s Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) OCFO is assigned primary responsibility for functions, such as budget, finance and accounting, strategic planning and evaluation. OCFO also charged with ongoing integration of these functions within the department. The CFO Act requires the agency's CFO to develop and maintain an integrated accounting and financial management system that provides for complete, reliable, and timely financial information that facilitates the systematic measurement of performance at the agency. D.C.'s OCFO needs to establish financial reporting roles and responsibilities, assess critical needs, and establish standard operating procedures (SOP) for the department. The Coast Guard and the Strategic National Stockpile had weaknesses in financial oversight that have led to reporting problems. Key controls to ensure reporting integrity were not in place, and inefficiencies made the process more error prone. At the Coast Guard, the financial reporting was not in accordance with U.S. generally accepted government auditing standards. In addition to the 7 material weaknesses and 7 reportable conditions reported in DHS’s 2003 financial statement audit, DHS reported 12 additional weaknesses that affect the department's full compliance with certain objectives of 31 U.S.C. 3512(c), (d) (commonly known as the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA) Examples of the FMFIA weaknesses reported by DHS included deficient controls over laws and regulations regarding the border entry process and nonconformance related to system security. TSA is a relatively new agency formed after the September 11, 2001, terror attacks. TSA’s systems did not substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA. weaknesses can result in uncontrolled spending of taxpayer dollars, misplaced or unaccounted for property, and challenges in producing financial statements. Finally, these weaknesses contributed to Customs’ systems inability to substantially complying with the FFMia requirements, according to the report. The report was published by the Government Accountability Office on February 28, 2003. Auditors had reported 30 reportable conditions, 18 of which were considered material internal control weaknesses. All four agencies’ systems were found not to be in substantial compliance with the requirements of FFMIA. Most of the 22 components that transferred to DHS had not been subjected to significant financial statement audit scrutiny prior to their transfer, so the extent of the problems is not known. The full report is available on the Department of Homeland Security’s web site, which can be found at: http://www.dhs.gov/. For fiscal year 2002 and prior to its transfer to DHS, Customs’ auditors reported nine internal control weaknesses. These weaknesses can result in inaccurate reporting of certain material elements of Customs' financial situation. System security weaknesses that could leave Customs' information vulnerable to unauthorized access, and the necessity of extensive manual procedures and controls. For the 7 months ending September 30, 2003. For fiscal year 2001 and 2002, Customs reported nineinternal control weaknesses, including weaknesses in its ability to monitor the effectiveness of its internal controls over entry duties and taxes. Newly identified weaknesses related to the Coast Guard were one of the main reasons that independent auditors issued a qualified opinion on DHS’s consolidated balance sheet. The lack of procedures at DHS to verify the accuracy and completeness of balances transferred on March 1, 2003, and significant weaknesses with the number of qualified financial management personnel employed by the department. The Coast Guard and Secret Service also found significant deficiencies that prevented them from being able to express an opinion on certain financial statements. In addition to the internal control weaknesses cited in its 2003 report, DHS also cited a number of other internal control deficiencies. consolidated balance sheet as of September 30, 2003. Auditors were unable to opine on the consolidated statements of net costs and changes in net position. The auditors reported 14 reportable conditions on internal control, 7 of which were considered to be material weaknesses. For 5 of the agencies that DHS was created in March 2003 and merged with 22 diverse agencies, there were many known financial management weaknesses and vulnerabilities in the inherited agencies. For five of the agency that were created, the auditors could not opine. for the combined statement of budgetary resources and consolidated statement of financing. as 3 material weaknesses, while 5 were reported as reportable conditions. The department’s independent auditors classified the remaining 7 weaknesses as lower level observations and recommendations. FEMA, Customs, and TSA each had weaknesses at the time of their transfer to DHS. However, in the 2003 audit report, these weaknesses were classified as observations and Recommendations, a much less serious classification. Lower classification within DHS does not mean that the issues are now somehow less severe, it merely refers to the materiality of a component within DHS. inherited from component agencies. For example, Customs had a previously identified weakness related to the effectiveness of its internal controls over accurate reporting of entry duties and taxes. FEMA’s accounts receivable processes were strengthened to ensure that accounts Receivable are determined and recorded on a timely basis. In the U.S. military, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is responsible for the protection of the nation's national security. The Department of the Homeland Security has responsibility for the security of the country's borders, airports, ports of entry and waterways.

ROUGE-1: 74.59, ROUGE-2: 68.27, ROUGE-L: 29.14
BERTScore: 58.83

==============================================
==================== [97/100] ====================
Summary:
The Coast Guard did not conduct MSRAM assessments for all 50 of the OCS facilities that are subject to federal security requirements in 2011. Coast Guard officials added that they are working with DHS’s Office of Risk Management and Analysis in studying ways to improve how it assesses secondary economic impacts. We recommend that the Commandant of the Coast Guard revise policies and procedures to ensure that MSRAM analysts receive the annual updated list of security- regulated O CS facilities. We provided a draft of this testimony to DHS and DOJ for comment. The Coast Guard has taken steps to implement prior GAO recommendations to enhance energy tanker security. Improvements in security could help to prevent a terrorist attack against this infrastructure, which could have significant consequences, such as those resulting from the Deepwater Horizon incident. The Coast Guard does not consider OCS facilities that it has assessed in MSRAM to be high risk. However, it is important to assess all OCS Facilities as required by Coast Guard guidance. Our evaluation will focus on Coast Guard security inspections and other measures to better secure O CS facilities and deepwater. Coast Guard has coordinated efforts with the intelligence community and key stakeholders. OCS facilities are not considered to be high-risk targets. Based on the assessments of threats, vulnerabilities, and consequences, MSRAM produces a relative risk ranking for the OCS. The Coast Guard’s Intelligence Coordination Center inputs threat assessment data into MSRAM. Coast Guard analysts also use information from other stakeholders, such as reports produced by the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement. The Coast Guard does not have data on the ability of an OCS facility to withstand an attack. The Coast Guard recognizes that target hardness is an important consideration in assessing the vulnerability of OCS facilities. MSRAM analysts described challenges in assessing target hardness because empirical data are not available or research has not been done. The challenges are not unique to the Coast Guard’s risk assessment model and that these challenges are faced by others in the homeland security community involved in conducting risk assessments, the report says. Coast Guard expects to issue its report in the fall of 2011. The input for secondary economic impacts can have a substantial effect on how MSRAM’s output ranks a facility relative to other potential targets. However, the Coast Guard has limited data for assessingsecondary economic impacts from an attack on OCS facilities or deepwater ports. Undervaluing secondary economic impact could result in a lower relative risk ranking that underestimates the security risk to a facility, or inversely, overvaluingsecondary economic impact may result in overestimating security risk. Coast Guard analysts use MSRAM to assess security risks against energy infrastructure. MSRAM assesses three main factors—threats, vulnerabilities, and consequences. Research on whether a hijacked boat or an underwater attack could sink an offshore oil or natural gas platform would give the Coast Guard a clearer sense of whether this attack scenario could result in major consequences. The Coast Guard may recommend conducting more research on the vulnerability to and consequences of attack scenarios as a result of a study it is conducting on OCS facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. Coast Guard units throughout the country use this tool to assess security risks to about 28,000 key infrastructure in and around the nation’s ports and waterways. DHS issued an updated version of the 2006 National Infrastructure Protection Plan in 2009. The plan placed an increased emphasis on risk management and it centered attention on going beyond assessments of individual assets by extending the scope of risk assessments to systems or networks. The Coast Guard has also taken actions to supplement MSRAM by, among other things, including new data fields on the frequency with which tankers visit a port. associated with MODUs, such as the Deepwater Horizon, could improve the quality of program decisions. MSRAM does not assess systemic or network risks because, according to Coast Guard officials, these types of assessments are beyond the intended use. The study involves examining whether analysts should use MSRAM to assess MODUs in the future. The Coast Guard is studying the “lessons learned” from the Deepwaters Horizon incident and part of the study involves examine whether MSRAM should be used. face risks from various types of attack. Suicide attacks, armed assaults by terrorists or armed bands, and launching a “standoff” missile attack using a rocket or some other weapon fired from a distance. Terrorists have attempted, and in some cases carried out, attacks on energy tankers since September 11, 2001. To date, these attacks have included attempts to damage tankers or to kill crew members or crew members on board the tankers. In recent years, we have issued reports that discussed risks energy tanker face from terrorist attacks and attacks from other criminals, including pirates. 30 percent (490 of 1,650) of vessels reporting pirate attacks worldwide from 2006 through 2010 were identified as tankers. pirate attacks against tankers have tripled in the last 5 years. From January through June 2011, 100 tankers were attacked, an increase of 37 percent compared to tankers attacked from January to June 2010.available for patrolling them, make protecting energy tankers difficult. See table 1 for a summary of tanker attacked by pirates during 2006 to 2010. For more information, visit the International Maritime Bureau's website. in their levels of security, and the Coast Guard is limited in the degree to which it can bring about improvements abroad when security is substandard. In addition, while tankers are in transit, they face risks because they travel on direct routes that are known in advance and, for part of their journey, they may have to travel through waters that do not allow them to maneuver away from possible attacks. According to the Energy Information Administration, chokepoints along a route make tankers susceptible to attacks. tankers remain at risk upon arrival in the United States because of the inherent risks to port facilities. Beyond the relatively rare threat of terrorist attacks against tankers, the threat of piracy has become relatively common. In particular, piracy threatens tankers transiting one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes near key energy corridors and the route through the Suez Canal. The vast areas at risk for piracy off the Horn of Africa, combined with the small number of military ships, is a major concern. In 2002, terrorists conducted a suicide boat attack against the French supertanker Limburg off the coast of Yemen. In 2010, an incident involving another super tanker, the M/V M. Star, in the Strait of Hormuz is suspected to have been a terrorist attack. Our work on energy tankers identified three main places in which tankers may be at risk of an attack: (1) at foreign ports; (2) in transit, especially at narrow channels, or chokepoints; and (3) at U.S. ports. Media reports indicate a steady increase in ransoms for tankers. The U.S. Maritime Administration and the Coast Guard have issued guidance for commercial vessels to stay 200 miles away from the Somali coast. However, pirates have adapted and increased their capability to attack and steal cargo from ships and cargo ships.shows one of the recent suspected pirate attacks. In addition, tankers are fetching increasing ransom demands from Somali pirates. In June 2011 for the Kuwaiti tanker MV Zirku, the ransom was $12 million. There are two main types of offshore energy infrastructure that the Coast Guard oversees for security. The first type are facilities that operate on the OCS. The second type are deepwater ports, which are fixed or floating manmade structures used or intended for use as a port or terminal for the transportation, storage, or handling of oil or natural gas to any state. There are currently four licensed deep water ports in the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean. The U.S. Coast Guard regulates 50 facilities that, in 2011, are regulated for security because they meet or exceed the threshold criteria. The Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) contains an estimated 85 million barrels of oil. The Louisiana Offshore Oil Port (LOOP) is responsible for transporting about 10 percent of imported oil. As the lead federal agency for maritime security, the Coast Guard seeks to mitigate many kinds of security challenges in the maritime environment. Doing so is a key part of its overall security mission and a starting point for identifying security gaps and taking steps to close them, the agency says. The U.S. Coast Guard is based in New Orleans, Louisiana. About 49 percent of the nation’s crude oil supply was transported by tanker into the United States in 2009. The remaining oil and natural gas used in the U.S. comes from Canada by pipeline or is produced from domestic sources in areas such as offshore facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. The United States’ economy and security are heavily dependent on oil, natural gas, and other energy commodities, the authors say. The authors say the government needs to do more to ensure the safety and security of the country. officials acknowledged that their policies and procedures did not include this requirement. The number of OCS facilities could change each year. For example, some facilities may drop below the production or personnel thresholds described earlier in this statement, thereby falling outside the scope of 33 C.F.R. part 106, or other facilities could meet or exceed such thresholds, thereby rendering them subject to part 106. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government state that policies and. procedures enforce management directives and help ensure that actions are taken. Mobile offshore drilling units (MODUs) do not generally pose a risk of a terrorist attack. There is a brief period of time when a drilling unit strikes a well, but the well has yet to be sealed. The Deepwater Horizon was in this stage when it resulted in such a large oil spill. MODUs could be at risk of an attack that could have significant consequences despite a facility not meeting production or personnel thresholds. For example, such risks could involve the reliability of blowout preventer valves. in an oil-distribution network offers opportunities for improving the resiliency of the network within a given budget. How the Coast Guard assesses offshore infrastructure within the broader set of networks is important. The findings of the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill incident illustrate how examining networks or systems from a safety or engineering perspective can bring greater knowledge of how single facilities intersect with broader systems. The report noted that “complex systems almost always fail in complex ways” and cautioned that attempting to identify a single cause for the Deepwater Gulf incident would provide a dangerously incomplete picture. incomplete picture of what happened. As a result, the report examined the Deepwater Horizon incident with an expansive view toward the role that industry and government sectors played in assessing vulnerabilities and the impact the incident had on economic, social, and environmental systems. Enhancing knowledge about the vulnerabilities of networks or systems with which OCS facilities and deepwater ports intersect could improve the quality of information that informs program and budget decisions on how to best ensure security and use scarce resources in a constrained fiscal environment. The 2009 National Infrastructure Protection Plan, 2010 DHS Quadrennial Review, and a National Research Council evaluation of DHS risk assessment efforts have determined that gaining a better understanding of network risks would help to understand multiplying consequences of a terrorist attack. Examining how such vulnerabilities create strategic opportunities for intelligent adversaries with malevolent intent is central to this understanding. For example, knowing what damage a malicious adversary could achieve by exploiting weaknesses is key to understanding how a network is vulnerable to a diverse range of threats. Potential attack methods against offshore energy infrastructure identified by the Coast Guard or owners and operators include crashing an aircraft into it. Offshore energy infrastructure may face security risks because this infrastructure is located in open waters and generally many miles away from Coast Guard assets and personnel. In addition to our work on energy tankers, we have recently completed work involving Coast Guard efforts to assess security risks and ensure the security of offshore energy Infrastructure. Specifically, we've been working with the National Security Agency to ensure the safety of the nation's energy infrastructure. guidance and would provide information to decision makers that could minimize the likelihood of being unprepared for a potential attack. Coast Guard officials agreed that assessing “network effects” is a challenge and they are examining ways to meet this challenge. The threat of terrorism against energy tankers and offshore energy infrastructure highlights the importance of the Coast Guard having policies and procedures in place to better ensure the security of the energy infrastructure, officials said. The Coast Guard’s work is this area is in its infancy and there is uncertainty regarding the way in which the Coast Coast Guard will move forward in measuring ‘network effects' Energy tankers often depart from foreign ports and are registered in countries other than the U.S. Offshore energy infrastructure presents its own set of security challenges. FBI shares responsibility with the Coast Guard for preventing and responding to terrorist incidents. We found that actions were being taken, internationally and domestically, to protect tankers and port facilities at which tankers would be present in U.N. meetings in 2007. The Coast Guard visits foreign exporting ports to assess the effectiveness of the anti-terrorism measures in place. hijack vessels to more than 1,000 miles from Somalia using mother ships, from which they launch smaller boats to conduct the attacks. Offshore energy infrastructure also faces risks from various types of attacks. For example, in 2004, a terrorist attacked an offshore oil terminal in Iraq using speedboats packed with explosives, killing two U.S. Navy sailors and a Coast Guardsman. This directive provides vessel owners and operators with direction for responding to emerging security risks. The Coast Guard has issued a directive with guidelines for U.s. vessels operating in high- risk waters. has begun to revise its grant programs, but it is too early in that process to determine whether and how performance measures will be incorporated into those revisions. Performance measures would allow DHS to set priorities for funding on the basis of reducing overall risk, thereby helping ports obtain resources necessary to respond. In accordance with federal statutes and presidential directives, the Coast Guard assesses security risks as part of its responsibilities for ensuring the security of OCS facilities and deepwater ports. We continue to believe that the recommendations not yet addressed have merit and should be fully implemented. The Coast Guard faces complex and technical challenges in assessing security risks. The Coast Guard recognizes these challenges and generally has actions underway to study or address them. Coast Guard officials noted that some of these challenges are more complex than others. The U.S. Navy is considering a deepwater port in the Massachusetts Bay. The port is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, the Coast Guard says. It would be the first of several deepwater ports in the United States. Port stakeholders in the United States have taken steps to address vulnerabilities at domestic ports. The Houston Ship Channel Security District is a public-private partnership that was established to increase preparedness and response capabilities. The security district has installed technology, such as night vision and motion-activated detection equipment, and conducts patrols on land and in the water. However, we also reported on challenges that remained in (1) making federal agencies’ protective actions more effective and (2) implementing plans.place. We will continue to work with the Coast Guard to develop solutions to ensure that inspections of OCS facilities are completed as required. I would be happy to respond to any questions you may have. We are committed to working with the U.S. Coast Guard on all matters relating to maritime security and safety. We welcome your comments and suggestions on how to improve OCS operations. We look forward to hearing from you in the coming days and weeks. We hope to hear from you as soon as possible. the Horn of Africa. GAO-11-449T. Quadrennial Homeland Security Review: 2010 Reports Addressed Many Required Elements, but Budget Planning Not Yet Completed.GAO-10-940T. Maritime Security: Actions Needed to Assess and Update Plan And Enhance Collaboration among Partners Involved in Countering Piracy off the Horn of African. GAE-10/10/856. Critical Infrastructure Protection: Update to National Infrastructure Protection Plan Includes Increased Emphasis on Risk Management and Resilience. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the GAO is required for the use of the material. For more information, visit GAO's Maritime Security Program at: http://www.gao.gov/maritime-security-program. for a response to an attack, if a terrorist attack were to succeed despite the protective measures in place. We made five recommendations in our 2007 report, three of which were directed to the Secretary of Homeland Security. The Coast Guard and the FBI have made progress in implementing these recommendations. Two have been implemented, and the Coast Guard is in the process of implementing a third. But actions have not yet been taken, according to the report, which was compiled by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. DHS is in the process of revising this document and did not have further information regarding whether or how the spill and terrorism response annexes may be revised. Further, the FBI has not taken independent action to implement this recommendation. See table 2 for a summary of our findings, recommendations, and the current status of agency efforts to implement our recommendations. to address the remaining two recommendations. To address our recommendation that the Coast Guard and the FBI coordinate to help ensure that a detailed operational plan be developed, see table 2. recommendation, in part because it did not concur with the need to develop a separate operational plan. In the event of a successful attack on an energy tanker, ports would need to provide an effective, integrated response to protect public safety and the environment. Clearly defined and understood roles and responsibilities for all essential stakeholders are needed to ensure an effective response, and operational plans for the response should be explicitly linked, the report says. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security recommends that DHS develop performance measures for emergency response capabilities. gathering these data is a challenge because there are few models or guidance available for doing so. During the course of our review, the Coast Guard started using a tool, called ‘IMPLAN,’ that helps inform judgments of secondary economic impacts by showing what the impact could be for different terrorist scenarios. The tool, however, has limits in that it should not be used where the consequences of a terrorist attack are mainly interruption to land or water transportation. Enhancing DHS’s and the Coast Guards’ ability to assesssecondary economic impacts could improve a MSRAM analyst’’ accuracy in assessing the relative impact of a terror attack. copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the UK, call the national suicide prevention line on 0800 273-TALK (8255). In the Middle East, contact the Syriac Orthodox Church on 020 709090. For more information on the Syriacs, visit www.sriac.org.

ROUGE-1: 76.90, ROUGE-2: 69.14, ROUGE-L: 29.79
BERTScore: 57.08

==============================================
==================== [98/100] ====================
Summary:
Financial stress in 2012 is elevated compared with the lows of 2006 and 2007, but has fallen from the high points of the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009. The TAG program established by the FDIC expired on December 31, 2010, and was replaced on the same day by the TAG program as established by Section 343 of the Federal Reserve Act. The St. Louis Federal Reserve Financial Stress Index is an index composed of 18 data series that provides one measure of financial stress. The index is based on data from the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank. to the program's extension for each calendar year and to collect an amount equal to the expected losses by September 30 of each calendaryear. The assessments would be in addition to the assessments that the FDIC would otherwise collect. The program is expected to be in place for at least the next five years, according to a report by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The report was based on a survey of more than 1,000 people who participated in the program in the past two years. The FDIC says it will continue to monitor the program. NIBTAs constitute one of several cash management tools used by businesses, non-profits, governments, and other entities. They provide depositors with easy access to their money, allowing them to make transfers and to would still have the incentive to monitor the bank for excessive risk-taking. On November 26, 2012, Senator Harry Reid introduced S. 3637 , a bill to temporarily extend the TAG program for two years. S.3637 would instruct the FDIC to estimate the expected losses due to NIBTas. The TAG program created by the FDIC was a voluntary program in which eligible financial institutions were automatically registered to participate unless they opted out. The Dodd-Frank Act, however, made all FDIC-insured banks part of TAG by temporarily changing "the definition of insured deposits to include the entire balance of noninterest-bearing transaction accounts" Since TAG was first established, the amount of deposits insured by TAG has increased, as shown in Figure 2 . On December 31, 2008, shortly after TAG was implemented, the program guaranteed approximately $722 billion.  section 1105 of Dodd-Frank provides the FDIC with authority to institute a widely available program of emergency assistance. The authority appears to be limited to situations involving a liquidity crisis. The FDIC and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed Board) must make a detailed determination that a liquidity event exists and that failure to take action would have serious adverse effects on U.S. financial stability or economic conditions. WSLG37: Extending the FD IC's Transaction Account Guarantee Program Given the Uncertain Economic Outlook? it is possible that since the end of 2010, both large and small banks may have changed their views on the value of the program. It is also possible that deposits may migrate away from those institutions due to regulatory changes made by the Dodd-Frank Act. Some market participants may view the steps taken by the DHS Act to be a threat to financial stability, the authors say. For example, the Act created a special resolution regime administered by the FDIC for failing firms that pose a threat of financial stability. In September 2008, ongoing financial turmoil escalated into a financial panic. Large financial institutions, such as Lehman Brothers and AIG, were failing. The federal government responded with a series of lending and guarantee programs to mitigate the economic damage. Among the many policy responses, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) established the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program (TLGP) on October 14, 2008, to strengthen confidence and to encourage liquidity in the banking system. The TLGP had two parts: a debt guarantee program and a lending program. options, such as commercial paper, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac securities, repurchase agreements, enhanced cash funds, and municipal securities. Money market funds are mutual funds that invest in money market securities. They are short-term financial instruments with relatively high liquidities and short maturities of between several days and about a year. They're the second-most popular individual form of short- term investment according to a survey of financial professionals and will be the focus of this section of the article. Money market funds act as intermediaries between shareholders who demand liquid investments and borrowers who desire short-term funding. Money market funds attempt to keep a stable net asset value (NAV) on their shares, typically of $1.00. A stable NAV gives shareholders the impression of a high degree of safety similar to deposits but offering a higher return. If a money market fund falls below a $ 1.00 NAV, then the fund is said to "break the buck," and part of its value is lost. Money market funds have traditionally earned a higher yield than bank deposits. Money market funds are currently earning historically low returns, lowering the opportunity cost of holding noninterest-bearing deposits. There is also uncertainty surrounding the future regulation of money market funds. The Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), a council of financial regulators that is charged with monitoring systemic risk in the financial system, has identified structural vulnerabilities in money market Funds. It is identified vulnerabilities in funds which could affect financial stability. The FSCO has identified vulnerabilities that could affect the financial stability of the United States. to have more of all three, but face trade-offs. For example, there is a trade-off between safety and yield on an investment. To have a higher return, an investor may have to sacrifice liquidity (the ease with which an asset can be converted into cash) Certificates of deposit, for example, may pay a higher interest rate than a typical savings account, but there are restrictions on when the money can be used. The more at risk an investor's money is, the higher the possible return if the risk does not eventuate. with less concentration in a risky asset class, may be perceived as less likely to fail. Depositors may move their accounts to one of the largest or most interconnected banks if they believe those banks are in practice "too big to fail" (TBTF) A bank is said to be TBTF if policymakers are likely to judge that its failure would cause unacceptable disruptions to the overall financial system and would act to prevent failure. If a depositor thinks policymakers would not allow a particular bank to fail, they may move to another bank. remove TBTF status as credible and think they would recover even less of their uninsured deposits at a large firm than at a smaller or less interconnected institution. In that case, uninsured depositors may move their TAG deposits away from large institutions and use smaller banks. Depositors can effectively "deposit" their money in other nonbank options by buying shares in a money market fund (MMF), by buying U.S. Treasuries, or by choosing one of the many other available options. During the financial crisis, policymakers reassessed the tradeoff between the stability and the moral hazard created by deposit insurance. Extending deposit insurance to some uninsured accounts through TAG may have strengthened the banking system by discouraging some borrowers from withdrawing their deposits during the height of the financial stress. The counterfactual cannot be known with certainty, making it difficult to estimate the costs and benefits of extending TAG. In the context of deposit insurance, moral hazard can manifest itself in two ways: "first, explicit deposit insurance gives insured banks incentives to pursue added risks because they can capture any profits but shift any losses to the government"  Deposit insurance brings stability to the banking sector by giving depositors confidence that if their bank fails, they will not lose the money in their insured accounts. Deposit insurance, however, also reduces the incentive of depositors to monitor their banks and ensure that their banks are not assuming unnecessary risks. The establishment of TAG, in addition to the existing deposit insurance and other measures taken by regulators, may have bolstered depositors' confidence in banks as reliable counterparties. Of confidence in other parts of the financial system, the insured banking sector saw few bank runs during the financial panic. uninsured deposits to various accounts in different insured banks so that each account is under the maximum insured level. Although this option may minimize risk, it would increase the transaction costs for the depositor. Some depositors may attempt to recapture the safety they would lose if TAG expires by shifting their deposits to safer banks, which for some may mean to one of the largest or most interconnected banks. Safer banks, such as those with higher capital levels or higher equity levels, may be more able to cope with the loss of TAG. Depositors' preferences for safety, liquidity, and yield will determine how they allocate their money across the various options they face. NIBTAs have grown by approximately $1 trillion from $1.3 trillion in the third quarter of 2008. Changes in the financial and regulatory environment since 2008 could also result in a different allocation than the pre-TAG levels. If TAG expires, depositors may choose to leave their deposits as uninsured deposits at their existing banks. The options available to depositors can be simplified to two general choices: (1) depositors could leave some or all of their money in the traditional, insured banking sector. The TAG program currently provides unlimited deposit insurance for $1.4 trillion in noninterest-bearing transaction accounts. NIBTAs are accounts that do not pay interest and allow the depositor to make withdrawals without giving advanced notice to the bank. Although the DGP is no longer guaranteeing new debt, TAG continues to apply to new deposit balances. In spite of a loss, the TAG program will continue to provide coverage for depositors in spite of the loss of the Deposit Guarantee Program. quarter of 2008 (before TAG was implemented) to $2.3 trillion in the second quarter of 2012. NIBTAs were used at relatively high rates before TAG and their growth may not be due solely to the guarantee offered by TAG. Changes in economic and financial conditions since TAG was introduced may make NIB tas an appealing choice. The expiration of unlimited insurance may increase the risk of NIBtAs. But even without TAG, the high degree of liquidity offered by NibTAs may incentivize some borrowers to keep their money as uninsured deposits. table 1 shows statistics on TAG accounts by bank size. The largest banks have more accounts per institution and higher average account balances than smaller banks. Approximately 75% of TAG funds are in the 19 banks with more than $100 billion in assets, though those 19 banks account for 61% of total assets in the insured banking system. Even with TAG, if a bank is allowed to fail, then the depositor may view their uninsured deposits as safer than if the deposits were in a bank that would be allowed to failing. The largest banks hold a disproportionately large share of TAG accounts. The expiration of TAG may increase the concentration of deposits in the largest banks. When the FDIC version of TAG expired on December 31, 2010, 31% of banks opted out of the program. The percentage of each group that opted out is an indicator of the different views of large and small banks about the usefulness of TAG. The FDIC's TAG program was optional; at certain points banks were given the ability to opt out. with assets over $10 billion were still participating in TAG. 75% of banks with less than $10billion in assets were in the program. The higher participation rate by smaller banks may signal that they believed they needed the program to attract funds, whereas the larger banks were less likely to view it as necessary. Others may argue that decisions to participate in TAG may not have been driven by the actual usefulness of the program as much as by a possible stigma associated with participating in a program developed in response to the financial crisis. the fund's shareholders' invested principal is in jeopardy. Investors could actually lose money. Breaking the buck is a rare occurrence, though it happened in September 2008. In response, many withdrew their money from money market funds and deposited it in banks, as seen in Figure 5. If one of the reasons that money flowed to deposits was the presence of TAG, it is possible that the expiration of TAG could lead to a loss of money for investors.. Non-financial businesses have increased their. holdings of checkable deposits and decreased their holdings of money market. funds. The FDIC estimates that, for the 108 banks that failed in 2011 and the first quarter of 2012, TAG deposits amounted to 3 percent of deposits on average. Most of the bank failures since January 2011 have been smaller banks which, as mentioned previously, had relatively few TAG deposits. Allocating DIF losses between these deposits and other deposits would result in an estimated TAG cost over these five quarters of about $270 million. If future losses cause the DIF to become depleted, the Dif may have to borrow from the Treasury to protect depositors. Unclear if the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the primary regulator of money market funds, will impose additional regulation. Some have raised concerns about what effect an extension of TAG would have on the FDIC's Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF) For a risk-based insurance system to function effectively, the entity setting the insurance premium must accurately forecast future risk or be able to recoup losses ex post. If FDIC can successfully estimate the future cost that TAG funds would impose on the DIF, then the premiums could be set to cover the expected losses.

ROUGE-1: 79.03, ROUGE-2: 72.87, ROUGE-L: 30.84
BERTScore: 60.62

==============================================
==================== [99/100] ====================
Summary:
tenant agency representatives and officials from FPS told us they met regularly, but GSA officials said they were not invited to these meetings. Survey results indicated that the roles and responsibilities of FPS and tenant agencies are unclear. FPS and GSA fundamentally disagree over how much of the information in the BSA should be, the authors say. They recommend that FPS collect and maintain an accurate and comprehensive list of all facility- designated points of contact, as well as a system for regularly updating this list. FPS, GSA, and tenant agency representatives did not all meet together regularly to make security preparations or manage security operations during construction. FPS officials told us they had not been invited to project meetings, although GSA officials said they had invited FPS and that FPS attended some meetings. In May 2008, FPS discovered that specific surveillance equipment had been removed. As of May 2009, FPS officials tell us they did not know who had removed the equipment and were working with tenant agency reps to recover it. 53 percent of e-mail addresses and 27 percent of the telephone numbers for designated points of contacts were missing from FPS’s contact database. Complete and accurate contact information is critical for information sharing and an essential component of any customer service initiative. FPS needs to improve its services to GSA and other tenant agencies to improve customer service to them and their clients. The agency is working with the GSA to improve the service it provides to tenant agencies and their tenants. The GSA is also working with FPS to improve service to its tenants. station. GSA property manager knew the appropriate screening procedure, but told us there was no written policy on the procedure that members could access. At one location, FPS had received inaccurate square footage data from GSA and had therefore overcharged the primary tenant agency for a guard post that protected space shared by all the tenants. Once GSA was made aware of the problem, the agency obtained updated information and replaced the guard post. BSC members told us that the committee met as needed.. worked with the tenant agencies to develop a cost-sharing plan for the guard post. BSC members told us that the committee met regularly. At one location, members of a BSC told us they met as needed, although even when they hold meetings, one of the main tenant agencies typically does not participate. GSA officials commented that this tenant adheres to its agency's building security protocols and does not necessarily follow GSA’s tenant policies and procedures, which GSA thinks creates security risks for the entire building. GSA is updating a risk assessment tool that it began developing in 1998, but has not recently used. Risk assessments must be completed before GSA can take possession of the property and lease it to tenant agencies. An inefficient risk assessment process for new lease projects can add costs for GSA and create problems for tenant agencies that have been planning for a move. GSA officials told us that in the future they may use this tool for other lease projects, as well as other risk assessment tools. The ability to share security-related information can unify the efforts of federal agencies. In the absence of comprehensive information-sharing plans, many aspects of homeland security information sharing can be ineffective and fragmented. It is critical that FPS and GSA reach consensus on sharing information in a timely manner to support homeland security and critical infrastructure protection efforts, the authors say. They recommend that FPS reach consensus with GSA on what information contained in the BSA is needed for GSA to fulfill its responsibilities. summaries across all regions. GSA wants to receive BSAs in their entirety so that it can better protect GSA buildings and the tenants who occupy them. According to GSA, building protection functions are an integral part of its property preservation, operation, and management responsibilities. In a post-September 11th era, it is crucial that federal agencies work together to share information to advance homeland security and critical infrastructure protection efforts. Information is a vital tool in fighting terrorism, and the timely dissemination of that information to the appropriate government agency is absolutely critical to maintaining the security of our nation. FPS is limited in its ability to assess the effectiveness of its efforts to protect GSA buildings. FPS has identified some output measures that are a part of the Office of Management and Budget’s Performance Assessment Rating Tool. But FPS has not developed outcome measures to evaluate the net effect of its attempts to protect buildings. This is important because it can provide FPS with broader information on program results, such as the extent to which its decision to move to an armed guard was a good one. create building security assessments (BSA) rather than taking a more comprehensive, strategic approach. The current approach provides less assurance that the most critical risks at federal buildings across the country are being prioritized and mitigated. GSA and tenant agencies have concerns about the quality and timeliness of FPS’s risk assessment services and are taking steps to obtain their own risk assessments. For example, GSA officials told us they have had difficulties receiving timely risk assessments from FPS for federal buildings. inspector-based workforce will enhance security at GSA facilities. FPS does not have a reliable data management system that will allow it to accurately track these measures or other important measures. Without such a system, it is difficult for FPS to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of its efforts to protect federal employees and facilities, allocate its limited resources, or make informed risk management decisions, according to the report. The report was published by the Government Accountability Office, which is part of the Department of Justice. For example, weaknesses in one of FPS’s countermeasure tracking systems make it difficult to accurately track the implementation status of recommended countermeasures such as security cameras and X- ray machines. Without this ability, FPS has difficulty determining whether it has mitigated the risk of GSA facilities to crime or a terrorist attack. FPS is taking some steps in each of the key practice areas to improve its ability to better protect GSA buildings. GAO has recommended that FPS implement specific actions to promote greater usage of key protection practices and otherwise improve security. levels are inconsistent, and overall, FPS and GSA disagree over what information should be shared. FPS is only required to meet formally with GSA property managers and tenant agencies as part of the BSA process. FPS believes that this document contains sufficient information for GSA to make decisions about purchasing and implementing FPS’s recommended countermeasures. GSA officials at all levels cite limitations with BSA executive summary saying it does not contain enough contextual information on threats and vulnerabilities to support FPS's countermeasure recommendations. FPS assesses risk and recommends countermeasures to GSA and tenant agencies. FPS’s ability to influence the allocation of resources using risk management is limited because resource allocation decisions are the responsibility of GSA. It is critical that FPS and GSA have well-established lines of communication with each other and with tenant agencies to ensure that all parties are aware of the ever- changing risks in a dynamic threat environment, the authors say. The types of information shared at the regional and building level is important, they say. tool, methodology, and process, potentially leaving GSA and tenant agencies dissatisfied. FPS will continue to rely on its disparate workforce data management systems and CERTS or localized databases that have proven to be inaccurate and unreliable. We recently recommended that FPS provide the Secretary of Homeland Security with regular updates on the status of RAMP including the implementation status of deliverables, clear timelines for completion of tasks and milestones. DHS concurred with our recommendation and stated that FPS will submit a monthly report to the Secretary. the government are facing. Our key practices provide a framework for assessing and improving protection practices. The Interagency Security Committee is using our key facility protection practices as key management practices to guide its priorities and work activities. For example, the committee established subcommittees for technology best practices and training, and working groups in the areas of performance measures and strategic human capital management. The committee also issued performance measurement guidance in 2009. Without greater attention to key protection practices, FPS will be ill equipped to efficiently and effectively fulfill its responsibilities of assessing risk, strategically managing. its workforce and contract guard program, recommending countermeasures, sharing information and coordinating with GSA and tenant agencies to secure GSA buildings. implementing our specific recommendations related to areas such as human capital and risk management will be critical steps in the right direction. Overall, following this framework would enhance FPS’s chances for future success and could position FPS to become a leader and benchmark agency for facility protection in the federal government. Mr. Chairman, this concludes the report on GSA facility protection. physical security activities, such as conducting other types of risk assessments and determining security countermeasures for new facilities. FPS continues to struggle with funding challenges that impede its ability to allocate resources to more effectively manage risk. FPS faces challenges in ensuring that its fee-based funding structure accounts for the varying levels of risk and types of security measures that are needed to protect buildings. This is an inefficient approach considering that tenant agencies are paying FPS to assess building security. It is also difficult to ensure that FPS is able to manage risk in a cost-effective way. FPS charges federal agencies the same basic security fee regardless of the perceived threat to a particular building or agency. In fiscal year 2009, FPS charged 66 cents per square foot for basic security. Although FPS categorizes buildings according to security levels based on its assessment of security levels, it does not account for the level of service provided, or the cost of providing services. of services provided at federal facilities. FPS funds its operations through security fees charged to tenant agencies. However, FPS’sbasic security fee, which funds most of its operations, does not accounts for the risk faced by specific buildings. providing a service promotes equity, especially when the cost of providing the service differs significantly among different users, as is the case with FPS. In our June 2008 report, we recommended that FPS improve its use of the fee-based system by developing a method to accurately account for the cost. We also recommended an evaluation of whether FPS’s current use of a fee- based system or an alternative funding mechanism is the most appropriate. The report was published in June 2008 and is available on the U.S. Department of Justice website. by two high-security locations that, according to FPS officials, would cost around $650,000. While members of one building security committee (BSC) told us they approved spending between $350,000 and $375,000 to fund their agencies’ share of the countermeasure, they said that the BSC of the other location would not approve funding. FPS could not upgrade the system it had recommended. In November 2008 FPS officials told us that they were moving ahead with the project by drawing on unexpended revenues from the two locations’ building-specific fees. Each building’s risk and size, this assessment does not affect the security fee FPS charges. For example, level I facilities typically face less risk because they are generally small storefront-type operations with a low level of public contact. But level IV facilities are charged the same basic security fee of 66 cents per square foot as a level IV facility that may contain high-risk law enforcement and intelligence agencies and highly sensitive government records. We also have reported that basing government fees on the cost of The National Park Service lacks clearly defined security roles and a security training curriculum. The Park Service does not manage risk servicewide or ensure the best return on security technology investments. With millions of people visiting the nation’s nearly 400 park units annually, ensuring their security and the protection of our national treasures is paramount. More emphasis on the key practices would provide greater assurance that Park Service assets are well protected and that Park service resources are being used efficiently to improve protection, the report says. We identified information sharing gaps at several level III and IV sites that we visited. In some cases these deficiencies led to decreased security awareness and increased risk. At one location, we observed during our interview with the BSC that the committee members were confused about procedures for screening visitors who are passengers in employees’ cars that enter the building via the parking garage. One of the tenants recounted an incident in which a security guard directed the visitor to walk through the garage to an appropriate screening. We found that in some cases this led to increased risk and decreased security. Lack of training may have contributed to several incidents where guards neglected their assigned responsibilities. At a level IV facility, the guards did not follow evacuation procedures and left two access points unattended, thereby leaving the facility vulnerable. FPS has limited assurance that its guards are complying with post-emergency procedures, according to the report. The report was published by the Center for Security Studies at the University of Florida. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. high-security facilities where guards neglected or inadequately performed their assigned responsibilities. For example, a guard failed to recognize or did not properly X-ray a box containing handguns at the loading dock at a facility. FPS became aware of the situation because the handguns were delivered to FPS. Because guards were not properly trained and did not comply with post orders, our investigators passed undetected through access points controlled by FPS guards at 10 of 10 level IV facilities in four major cities where GAO conducted covert tests. components for this device, items used to conceal the device components, and the methods of concealment that we used during our covert testing are classified. Of the 10 level IV facilities our investigators penetrated, 8 were government owned and 2 were leased facilities. The two leased facilities did not have any guards at the access control points at the time. The facilities included district offices of a U.S. Senator and aU.S Representative as well as agencies of Homeland Security, Transportation, Health and Human Services, Justice, State, and others. safety during this testing, we took precautions so that the IED would not explode. For example, we lowered the concentration level of the material. To gain entry into each of the 10 level IV facilities, our investigators showed a photo identification (a state driver’s license) and walked through the magnetometers without incident. Our investigators also placed their briefcases with theIED material on the conveyor belt of the X-ray machine, but the guards detected nothing. We did not receive any secondary searches from the guards that might have revealed the Ied material that they brought into the facilities. At security checkpoints at 3 of the 10 facilities, our investigators noticed that the guard was not looking at the X-ray screen as some of the IED components passed through the machine. A guard questioned an item in the briefcase at one of the10 facilities but the materials were subsequently allowed through theX-ray machines. At each facility, once past the guard screening checkpoint, our Investigators proceeded to a restroom and assembled the Ied. At some of those facilities, the restrooms were locked. Our investigators gained access by asking employees to let them in. of our testing. Using publicly available information, our investigators identified a type of device that a terrorist could use to cause damage to a federal facility and threaten the safety of federal workers and the general public. The device was an IED made up of two parts—a liquid explosive and a low-yield detonator—and included a variety of materials not typically brought into aFederal facility by employees or the public. Although the detonator itself could function as a IED, investigators determined that it could also be used to set off a liquid explosive to cause significantly more damage. our testimony. For further information on this testimony, please contact Mark L. Goldstein at (202) 512-2834 or by e-mail goldsteinm@gao.gov. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony include Tammy Conquest, John Cooney, Elizabeth Eisenstadt, Brandon Haller, Denise McCabe, David Sausville, and Susan Michal-Smith. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission. from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For more information on suicide prevention in the UK, visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The Samaritans can also be found on the Internet. related corrective actions and FPS faces implementation challenges as well. FPS is developing the Risk Assessment and Management Program (RAMP), which could enhance its approach to assessing risk, managing human capital, and measuring performance. FPS believes RAMP will provide inspectors with the information needed to make more informed and defensible recommendations for security countermeasures. According to FPS, the agency plans to transfer data from several sources to RAMP to improve the accuracy and reliability of the information that will be entered into RAMP. It is not clear that FPS has fully addressed some implementation issues. is unclear whether FPS will meet the implementation goals established in the program’s proposed timeline. FPS began designing RAMP in early 2007 and expects to implement the program in three phases, completing its implementation by the end of fiscal year 2011. Until RAMP components are fully implemented, FPS will continue to rely on its current risk assessment. The program is expected to be fully implemented by the beginning of fiscalyear 2010, according to FPS officials. It is not clear whether FPS plans to implement a pilot version of RAMP by that time. FPS does not have a strategic human capital plan to guide its current and future workforce planning efforts. Instead, FPS has developed a short-term hiring plan that does not include key human capital principles, such as determining an agency’s optimum staffing needs. FPS has been transitioning to an inspector-based workforce, thus eliminating the police officer position and relying primarily on FPS inspectors for both law enforcement and physical security activities. In the absence of a strategichuman capital plan, it is difficult to discern how effective an inspector.-based workforce approach will be. long-term strategic human capital plan that addresses key principles for effective strategic workforce planning. DHS concurred with our recommendations. FPS did not meet its fiscal year 2008 mandated deadline of increasing its staffing level to no fewer than 1,200 full-time employees by July 31, 2008, and instead met this staffing level in April 2009. FPS’s staff has steadily declined since 2004 and critical law enforcement services have been reduced or eliminated. For example, FPS has eliminated its use of proactive patrol to prevent or detect criminal violations at many GSA buildings. because new directives appear to be based primarily on what works well from a headquarters or National Capital Region perspective. Second, FPS has not completed any workforce analysis to determine if its current staff of about 930 law enforcement security officers will be able to effectively complete the task. In addition, another regional official estimated that his region is meeting about 10 percent of the required oversight hours. Officials in another region said they are struggling to monitor the delivery of contractor-provided training in the region. The new directives are expected to be implemented by the end of the year. example, FPS officials in some of the regions we visited said they implement their own procedures for managing their workforce. Additionally, FPS does not collect data on its workforce’s knowledge, skills, and abilities. These elements are necessary for successful workforce planning activities, such as identifying and filling skill gaps and succession planning. We recently recommended that FPS improve how it collects data to help it better manage and understand current and future workforce needs; and use these data in the development and implementation of a workforce plan. magnetometer training to its 1,500 guards since 2004. X-ray training is critical because guards control access points at buildings. For example, at a level IV federal facility in a major metropolitan area, an infant in a carrier was sent through an X-rays machine due to a guard’s negligence. In that region, a woman with her infant in an infant carrier attempted to enter the building with the infant. She was stopped by a guard and the infant was sent back to the mother. that region could not tell us whether the X-ray machine’s safety features had been repaired. FPS does not have a fully reliable system for monitoring and verifying guard training and certification requirements. 62 percent of the guards had at least one expired certification, including a declaration that guards have not been convicted of domestic violence, which make them ineligible to carry firearms. Some guards were not provided building-specific training, such as what actions to take during a building evacuation or a building building fire. The guard was not paying attention and the machine's safety features had been disabled. FPS investigated the incident and dismissed the guard. The guard subsequently sued FPS for not providing the required X-ray training. FPS could not produce any documentation to show that the guard had received the training, an FPS official said. In addition, FPS officials from the facility could not be reached for comment for this article. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. of its legacy systems, including the Contract Guard Employment Requirements Tracking System (CERTS), into RAMP. FPS subsequently conducted an audit of CERTS to determine the status of its guard training and certification. The results of the audit showed that FPS was able to verify the status for about 7,600 of its 15,000 guards. FPS was not able to explain why it wasn't able to check on the remaining 5,900 guards. In 2008, we recommended that FPS develop and implement specific guidelines and standards for measuring its performance. months. FPS does not fully ensure that its contract security guards have the training and certifications required to be deployed to a GSA building. FPS requires that all prospective guards complete about 128 hours of training including 8 hours of X-ray and magnetometer training. However, in one region, FPS has not provided the X-rays or magnetometers needed for this training. We have noted that the effectiveness of a risk management approach depends on the involvement of experienced and professional security personnel. Further, that the chances of omitting major steps in the risk management process increase if personnel are not well trained in applying risk management. FPS does not have specific national guidance on when and how guard inspections should be performed. Inspections of guard posts at GSA buildings are inconsistent and the quality varied in the six regions we examined. Guard inspections are typically completed by FPS during regular business hours and in locations where FPS has a field office, and seldom on nights or weekends. However, on an occasion when FPS officials conducted a post inspection at night, they found a guard asleep at his post after taking a pain-killer prescription drug. visited, not providing proactive patrol has limited its law enforcement personnel to a reactive force. FPS officials stated that in the past, proactive patrol permitted its police officers and inspectors to identify and apprehend individuals that were surveilling GSA buildings. In contrast, when FPS is not able to patrol federal buildings, there is increased potential for illegal entry and other criminal activity. In one city we visited, a deceased individual had been found in a vacant GSA facility that was not regularly patrolled by FPS. FPS's BSA includes cost estimates but no analysis of alternatives. GSA and tenant agencies have limited assurance that investments in technologies are cost-effective. For example, at one location, an explosives detection dog was used to screen mail that is distributed elsewhere. In 2006, FPS conducted a BSA of the site in 2008 and determined that using an enhanced X-ray machine and an explosives Detection Dog would bring the projected threat rating down from moderate to low. It did not include the estimated cost and risk of the following mail screening options: usage of the dog and the additional countermeasure. recommended, based on the results of its risk analysis, the use of this dog and an X-ray machine. The dog and handler work 12-hour shifts Monday through Friday when most mail is delivered and shipped. The GSA regional security officials we spoke with questioned whether this approach was more effective and efficient than using an on-site enhanced X-rays machine that could detect biological and chemical agents as well as explosives and could be used anytime. In accordance with the GSA's recommendation, the dog was being used at the time of our visit. in a briefcase, our investigators walked freely around several floors of the facilities and into various executive and legislative branch offices. Leveraging technology is a key practice over which FPS has somewhat more control. FPS does not have a comprehensive approach for identifying, acquiring, and assessing the cost-effectiveness of the security equipment that its inspectors recommend. Individual FPS inspectors have considerable latitude in determining which technologies and other countermeasures to recommend. But the inspectors receive little training and guidance in how to assess the relative cost- effectiveness of these technologies. the cost- effectiveness of alternative technologies into FPS’s planned improvements in the security acquisition area would represent an enhanced application of this key practice. We recently recommended that FPS develop a methodology and guidance for assessing and comparing the cost-effectiveness of technology alternatives, and DHS concurred with our recommendation. Another concern is that FPS had planned to implement the program throughout fiscal year 2009, but extended implementation into fiscal year 2010. Until the National Countermeasures Program is fully implemented, FPS will continue. National Countermeasures Program should provide the agency with a framework to better manage its security equipment inventory. FPS officials told us they believe this program will result in increased efficiencies. Inspectors will not have to spend their time facilitating the establishment of contracts for security equipment because these contracts will be standardized nationwide. Although the National Counter Measures Program includes improvements that may enhance FPS’s ability to leverage technology, it does not enhance the agency's ability to Leverage Technology, the agency says in a statement. Security professionals are faced with a multitude of technology options offered by private vendors. Having tools and guidance to determine which technologies most cost-effectively address identified vulnerabilities is a central component of the leveraging technology key practice. FPS officials told us that the National Countermeasures Program will enable inspectors to develop countermeasure cost estimates that can be shared with GSA and tenant agencies. However, incorporating a tool for evaluating the cost- effectiveness of competing technologies and countermeasures has been delayed, FPS officials said. officials, in May 2009, told us that all cameras had been repaired and all monitoring and recording devices had been replaced. As we reported in June 2008, we have found other instances in which recommended security countermeasures were not implemented at some of the buildings we visited. Compounding this situation, FPS takes a building-by-building approach to risk management, using an outdated risk assessment tool to do so. The two BSCs had approved additional upgrades and that FPS was implementing them. FPS officials said they established an X-ray machine contract and that future program contracts will also explore the use of the schedule as a source for national purchase and service contracts. According to FPS, the program will also include life-cycle management plans for countermeasures. The program will include X-rays, magnetometers, surveillance systems, and intrusion detection systems. It will also look at how the program can be used to improve the quality of the nation's military equipment and services. It is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. FPS had anticipated that X-ray machine and magnetometer contracts would be awarded by December 2008. In May 2009, FPS officials told us that the X-rays machine contract was awarded on April 30, 2009. They anticipated awarding the magnetometer contract in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009 and an electronic security services contract for surveillance and intrusion detection systems during the second quarter of 2010. We recently recommended that FPS not rely on individual inspectors to make technology decisions. We recommend that FPS stop relying on individual Inspectors to make tech decisions. immediate actions with respect to contract guard management in response to our covert testing. For example, in July 2009, the Director of FPS instructed Regional Directors to accelerate the implementation of FPS’s requirement that two guard posts at Level IV facilities be inspected weekly. FPS is also taking steps to implement a more systematic approach to technology acquisition by developing a National Countermeasures Program, which could help FPS leverage technology more cost-effectively. According to FPS, the program will establish standards and national procurement contracts for security equipment. FPS inspectors receive some training in identifying and recommending security technologies as part of their initial FPS physical security training. Since FPS was transferred to DHS in 2003, its refresher training program for inspectors has primarily focused on law enforcement. Consequently, inspectors lack recurring technology training. FPS does not provide inspectors with specialized guidance and standards for cost-effectively selecting technology. In the absence of specific guidance, inspectors follow the Department of Justice minimum countermeasure standards. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. 15-minute training video designed to provide information on bomb component detection. According to FPS, each guard was required to read the information bulletin and watch the video within 30 days. Despite the steps FPS has taken, there are a number of factors that will make implementing and sustaining these actions difficult. First, FPS does not have adequate controls to monitor and track whether its 11 regions are completing these new requirements. Thus, FPS cannot say with certainty that it is being done. The FPS regional official says implementing the new requirements may present a number Of challenges, in part, because of the lack of controls.

ROUGE-1: 81.23, ROUGE-2: 74.42, ROUGE-L: 25.98
BERTScore: 62.78

==============================================
==================== [100/100] ====================
Summary:
Practices. GAO-07-597. Washington, D.C.: June 18, 2007. United Nations: Management Reforms Progressing Slowly with Many Awaiting General Assembly Review. GAE-06-711T. U.N.: Internal Oversight and Procurement Controls and Processes Need Strengthening.GAO-05-392T U.S.C: March 2, 2005. United. Nations: Oil for Food Program Audits. Washington,. D.c.: February 15, 2005, and April 25, 2006. in New York. We obtained and reviewed official reports of the Secretariat and the Office of Internal Oversight Services. We also interviewed senior officials from UN departments in New York City. During the course of our review, we discussed the status of UN management reforms with officials from the Department of Management, OIOS and the General Assembly Office of the President. In addition to the reports, we also reviewed General Assembly resolutions, Secretary-General bulletins, Web sites, related budget documents and statements from UN officials. addition, we spoke with UN officials in New York. These included officials from the Office of the Deputy Secretary-General, the Department of Management, ACABQ, and OIOS. We also interviewed outside observers of the UN system, including nongovernmental organizations and members of academia. Many cost estimates for the proposed reform initiatives are preliminary, and detailed longer-term cost estimates are being developed. However, we did not analyze the assumptions underlying these estimates to determine whether they are reasonable and reliable. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. To identify and examine the progress of UN management reforms, we reviewed key documents proposing United Nations (UN) management reforms. GAO staff who made contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9601. had with State, UN, and other officials. After we made our initial assessments of progress, three other GAO staff members not involved in this review used the evidence and the categories to make their own assessments independently of each other. These staff members then met with each other to reconcile any differences in their initial assessments. Finally, they met with us and confirmed that we were all in agreement on our assessments. To identify factors slowing the progress of the UN reforms, we reviewed reports and documentation of the Secretariat, General Assembly, OIOS, and the ethics office. UN member states agreed to continue a review of UN programs and activities (known as mandates) in 2007. Member states continue to disagree on the scope and process of the review. Consultations among member states on how to move forward on the issue will continue into the 62nd session. New parameters for the continuation of the mandate review process have been proposed, but progress remains to be seen.. Various factors have slowed the UN’s efforts to improve the management of the Secretariat. Many remaining UN management reforms cannot move forward until these factors are addressed. 15 of the 17 delegations told us that the number one challenge to continued progress on management reform efforts is member state disagreements on the priorities and importance of the remaining reform efforts. For example, member states continue to disagree on the scope and process of the review of UN mandates. Some member states are concerned that mandates important to them will be eliminated. For that reason, no mandates have been eliminated or consolidated as a result of the reviews—two of the goals of the process, according to State. efforts because of the recentness of their implementation. Little or no progress: There is evidence that few or no steps have been taken on the reform effort. Substantial progress: The reform effort has been mostly or fully implemented. The management reform decision-making process at the UN involves multiple entities. For example, when a management reform has budgetary implications, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth Committee are involved in the process. The UN has made little or no. progress in establishing an independent bid protest system for UN procurements. transparency in the UN’s procurement award process. However, per our methodology, we categorize this reform effort under “little or no progress” because there was evidence that few or no steps had been taken towards actual implementation of the system. State said it understood that this assessment was consistent with our evaluation methodology. State and the UN Secretariat provided technical comments that we have incorporated into the report, as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees, the Secretary of State, and the U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations. The UN is composed of 192 diverse member states that have differing views on a wide array of issues. In October 2006, we reported that disagreements between G-77 and developed countries over the broader implications of management reforms may affect the UN’s ability to fully implement them. Four member states have launched the Four Nations Initiative in an effort to provide new ideas and perspectives on governance and management of the UN Secretariat. A State official told us the process appears to be a “credible effort” by member states. reforms: (1) disagreements among member states on UN management reform efforts, (2) lack of comprehensive implementation plans for some management reform proposals. (3) administrative policies and procedures that continue to complicate the process of implementing certain complex human resource initiatives. (4) competing UN priorities, such as the proposal to reorganize the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, that limit the capacity of General Assembly members to address management reform issues. Disagreements within the General Assembly continue to limit the implementation of management reforms. Calls to reform the UN began soon after its creation in 1945. Despite cycles of reform, UN member states continue to have concerns about inefficient management operations. The United States, through the Department of State in Washington, D.C., and the U.S. Mission to the United Nations in New York, continues to advocate reform of UN management processes. In July 1997, the Secretary-General proposed a broad reform agenda to transform the UN. The UN is the largest contributor of 192 member states. In October 2006, we reported slow progress in five key UN management reform areas. Numerous reform proposals were either awaiting General Assembly review or had been recently approved. Many of the proposed or approved reforms lacked an implementation plan with time frames and cost estimates for the goals stated in the 2005 outcome document. The UN has taken steps to improve organizational ethics since the of State in Washington, D.C., and the UN in New York. But the UN has not adopted specific ethics guidance and.a commitment to improving its procurement workforce. State endorsed the main findings and conclusions of our report and noted that our assessment of UN progress on management reform efforts was accurate and balanced. State agreed with us that more could be done to ensure credible oversight at the UN. State also agreed fully with the need to keep Congress informed of the effectiveness of management reforms, adding that the department will continue to monitor and inform Congress, as we recommended. The UN Secretariat did not provide written comments.appendix II, along with our responses to specific points. documents and our discussions with UN and U.S. officials. We focused our work on management reforms that began in 2005 and did not specifically address the 1997 and 2002 reform agendas. The 2005 reforms applied to the Secretariat and the UN’s governing bodies, including the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, and the Security Council. We did not include in our review reforms targeted at UN specialized agencies or UN funds and programs. We also excluded efforts such as the UN Peace Building Commission and Security Council and governance reforms. In September 2005, world leaders gathered at the UN World Summit in New York to discuss global issues such as UN reform, development, and human rights. The outcome document from the World Summit, endorsed by all members of the UN, outlines broad UN reform efforts in areas such as oversight and accountability. Successful management reform requires that its components are ultimately effective in modernizing the management functions of the United Nations. We requested comments on a draft of this report from the Department of State and the UN Secretariat. Completion of the reform agenda will require overcoming several factors, particularly disagreements among member states. Some past reform efforts remain incomplete because they did not get sustained and broad support. The current effort faces this same risk. While implementation is a necessary element in meeting the goals of the 2005 World Summit outcome document, it is not in itself sufficient. It is important to ensure that the reforms are implemented in a way that meets the needs of the world. The reform agenda should be completed by the end of the year or early 2015. of the approximately 20 cost-benefit analyses and other assessments of management reform issues that the Secretariat had planned to complete by March 2007 have not yet been submitted to the General Assembly. The total long-term costs of the reform efforts, including the U.S. government’s share, remain unclear. The UN currently has no formal plan to evaluate the effectiveness of its management reform efforts to determine whether they have achieved the goals set out in the 2005 World Summit outcome document. In addition to the contact named above, Phillip Thomas, Etana Finkler, Grace Lui, Amanda Miller and Jena Sinkfield provided technical assistance. In May 2000, we reported that while the Secretary-General had substantially reorganized the Secretariat’s leadership and structure, he had not yet completed reforms in human resource management and planning and budgeting. In September 2002, to encourage the full implementation of the 1997 reforms, he released a second set of reform initiatives, some expanding on those introduced in 1997 and others reflecting new priorities. In February 2004, we. reported that 60 percent of the 88 reform initiatives in the 1997 agenda and 38 percent of. has not developed comprehensive long-term implementation plans for some management reform proposals. Establishing implementation plans is a practice that increases the transparency and accountability of the reform process. We previously recommended that State work with other member states to encourage the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to include cost estimates and expected time frames for implementation and completion of each reform effort as it is approved. During our current review, we found little evidence that time frames, completion dates, and cost and savings estimates for completing the long- term implementation of specific management reforms had been established. The UN expects to have provided the training to all field staff by the end of March 2008. The UN Procurement Division has made some progress in its efforts to develop a risk management framework. In July 2007, a Planning, Compliance, and Monitoring Section was established and a chief was appointed to establish tools to detect potential transaction problems and minimize risks. Also, a proposal for implementing the concept of best-value-for-money is under development. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The UN Department of Management is in the initial planning stages of establishing a UN-wide risk management framework. As of September 2007, the concept is still in the planning stages, time frames and costs for its implementation have not been established, and risks associated with procurement activities remain. For example, the OIOS Procurement Task Force reported in October 2007 that it had found multiple instances of fraud, waste, and mismanagement—including 10 instances of Fraud and Corruption. The concept is expected to be put into practice by theprocurement Division in March 2008. The UN Secretariat has made some progress in strengthening the operating procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers. In December 2006, the Secretariat issued a bulletin on postemployment restrictions for former UN staff involved in procurement. The bulletin was issued following several incidents in recent years in which UN officials and former officials were involved in unethical and improper procurement activities. Former UN staff members, for 1 year following UN employment, are prohibited from accepting employment or compensation from any UN contractor. For 2 years, they are prohibited to act on behalf of UN contractors. A proposal to increase the minimum threshold for contracts required to be reviewed by the Headquarters Committee on Contracts from $200,000 to $500,000 has not been approved. The UN also issued, in May 2007, a revised supplier code of conduct. The code requires that suppliers are responsible for adhering to the postemployment restrictions by not employing former UN staff members for at least 1 year following a staff member’s separation from the UN. OIOS previously recommended that the threshold be increased, and, according to Procurement. been made in strengthening the procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers, developing a comprehensive training program for procurement staff, and developing a risk management framework. The UN has made little or no progress in establishing an independent bid protest system and creating a lead agency concept for procurements. In addition, since our October 2006 report, other organizational issues have arisen that may affect the UN’s procurement reform efforts. In a report on procurement reform submitted to the General Assembly in June 2006, the UN projected that implementation of the leadagency concept would take 6 to 12 years. The UN Procurement Division has made some progress in developing a comprehensive training program. The program is not expected to be formally in place until early 2008. The training is part of a development plan to provide a career path for procurement staff. Those who complete the training will be eligible to be certified by internationally recognized procurement institutions. In addition, according to UN procurement officials, all procurement staff will be trained in contracting, acquisition, and other specialized subjects. It is expected that the training program will be completed by the end of the year. vendor to protest the outcome of a contract decision to an independent official or office. Such a system would provide reasonable assurance that vendors are treated fairly when bidding. The draft process, which includes an emphasis on best practices from public- and private-sector procurements, is expected to be finalized by the first quarter of 2008. Officials told us that, in the meantime, they have enhanced communications with vendors, including developing a more systematic debriefing procedure for vendors. The UN Procurement Division is based in Geneva, Switzerland. Since our October 2006 report, the Secretariat has issued several reports on management operations that the General Assembly is expected to consider during the current (62nd) session. The UN has made some progress in improving human resource functions. Little or no progress has been made in reforming the UN’s internal justice system, reforming certain budgetary and financial management functions, and improving the delivery of certain services. Such guidance, some of which has been in existence for decades, is part of the UN's existing resource management framework. human resource issues such as recruiting and staffing, conditions of service, and contractual arrangements. The General Assembly did not consider these issues, which are currently rescheduled for consideration during the 62nd session. According to U.S. and UN officials and most of the 17 member state delegates we spoke with, reforming these and other human resource functions is likely to continue to be difficult because of long-standing disagreements among member states. The UN has made some progress in improving information technology, according to officials. has issued several reports with proposals that, if implemented, could improve some human resource functions. The proposals are, in large part, still awaiting General Assembly review. In late September 2006, the Secretary-General released a report entitled Investing in People that included a human resources management framework aimed at strengthening the UN’s human resources goals. The report included discussions of several human resources issues and specifically stated that staff mobility is essential to creating a more-versatile, more agile workforce. The UN has not completed reviews and analyses of other human resource reform proposals. multiskilled, experienced staff capable of handling the UN’s operations, which have changed dramatically in the last 20 years. An effective career development policy serves both the UN and its staff members by building and maintaining an international civil service. A one-time staff buyout could enable the Secretary-General to realign staff to meet the UN's changing priorities, while facilitating retirement or separation of staff who can no longer meet their career aspirations. The General Assembly considered the report during its meeting in New York. 62nd session, on topics such as the implementation of the ERP and governance of information and communications technology. UN has made little or no progress in reforming its internal justice system. Report concluded that effective reform of the UN is not possible without an efficient, independent, and well-resourcedinternal justice system that safeguards the rights of staff members and effectively helps ensure the accountability of managers and staff members. Although the General Assembly agreed in 2006, there has been little progress since then. The General Assembly has agreed that the UN’s internal Justice system was outdated, ineffective, and compromised. Many issues involving organizational relationships, personnel, and funding of the new system are still unclear. The UN has made little or no progress in improving certain budgetary and financial management functions. According to the Secretariat, member states aim to implement the newSystem by January 2009. The General Assembly had yet to decide who would be covered by the new System. The Office of the Ombudsman would be nominated and selected, and what resources would be needed. The Secretariat said the system would be in place by the end of 2009. Secretariat had not selected the firm that will implement the new system. According to UN officials, the Secretariat is expected to announce a decision in 2008. The Secretary-General did not submit a comprehensive report on information management, including cost estimates, in March 2007, as requested by the General Assembly. The report was not submitted because the ERP planning process was ongoing, a CITO had not yet been named, and the secretariat was still collecting data on information technology and other issues. whether certain UN services could be improved. Among the services are internal printing and publishing processes; medical insurance plan administration; information technology support; payables, receivables, and payroll processes. Subsequently, the Secretariat initiated several projects to address these reform proposals but has not completed its analyses. The Secretariat has not issued a comprehensive report on public access to UN documentation, which the General Assembly requested be submitted during the 61st session. It is currently collecting data from staff participants in the UN medical plan and reviewing alternative delivery methods for payroll and other functions. The UN is in the process of developing a new organizationwide information system. Creation of the ERP has been in the planning process for several years. The new system, when implemented, will adequately support the global functions of the UN, including an ever-growing number of peacekeeping missions. As of October 2007, the UN had a total of more than 1.2 billion documents in its system, up from about 1.1 billion in 2003. The UN has a turnover rate of about 1 in every 1,000 people. The position of chief information technology officer (CITO) was created by the General Assembly in August 2006. The leadership of a CITO is necessary to help ensure greater integration of the Secretariat’s workflow and knowledge management. The goal is to allow program objectives to be integrated with budgetary and financial data into one process, with the goal to act more transparently and efficiently in managing staff and procuring goods and services of greater quality and quantity, at lower levels of risk.  Phase I of mandate review covered all mandates 5 years old or older and not renewed that originated from the General Assembly. Member states disagreed on which mandates to include in the review and what to do with any savings generated by the potential elimination or consolidation of mandates. No agreement was reached on the remaining mandates, and no mandates were consolidated or eliminated as a result of the review. The planned approach was to review mandates by thematic cluster. The initial goal was to have all mandates reviewed by the end of 2006.  Phase II was delayed by the lack of a co-chair on the Informal Working Group on Mandate Review from January 2007 to April 2007 and again from July to October 2007. In October 2007, the process was far from complete, with only one of the nine clusters addressed. The General Assembly adopted an oral decision to continue consultations among member states on how to proceed with mandate review in the 62nd session. State officials told us that a mandate review committee would be formed in the fall of 2007. The General Assembly did not consider several procurement reform issues during the recently completed 61st session. The UN has taken actions to improve some of the management operations of the Secretariat, but many reform proposals still have not moved forward. Some progress has been spring 2007 session, as planned. Although there has been some progress, many issues are still unclear, the U.S. government says. The U.N. General Assembly is expected to meet in New York on September 14. The meeting is expectedto be the first since the September 11, 2001 attacks. the 61st session and, in large part, postponed making decisions on key issues. The General Assembly has not taken steps to redefine the role of the Deputy Secretary-General to assume formal authority and accountability for the management and overall direction of the operational functions of the Secretariat. The Secretariat submitted reports to the General Assembly, as requested, from March to May 2007, on the performance of the secretariat from 2006 to 2007. In January 2007, a resolution postponed decisions regarding streamlining contractual arrangements and harmonizing conditions of service. for certain administrative services, such as payroll processes, staff benefit administration, and information technology support. The overall restrictiveness of these policies and procedures continues to complicate the management reform process. Since our October 2006 report, competing priorities within the Secretariat and General Assembly have limited the capacity of General Assembly members to address the remaining management reform issues. In February 2007, for example, several procurement-related reform issues were not taken into consideration by the General Assembly during the General assembly during the month of February 2007. retaining budget surpluses for use in subsequent periods, charging interest on arrears of member states’ assessed contributions, and creating a separate account to cover certain unanticipated expenditures arising from exchange rate fluctuations and inflation. The UN has made little or no progress in improving the delivery of certain services. In May 2006, the General Assembly asked the Secretary-General to conduct several cost-benefit analyses to determine the best course of action. The Secretariat has prepared a number of reports that the General assembly is scheduled to review during the current (62nd) session. Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions consists of 16 members appointed by the assembly in their individual capacity. The functions and responsibilities of the advisory committee include advising the General Assembly concerning any administrative and budgetary matters referred to it. Figure 6 depicts the typical management reform decision-making process at the UN for issues requiring General Assembly approval. We reported in October 2006 that the Secretariat’s estimated costs for implementing management reform were in the region of $1 billion to $2 billion per year. General Assembly has rejected some proposed reforms and taken no action on others. For example, to improve cash management and operational flexibility, the Secretary-General proposed that peacekeeping accounts be consolidated. In July 2007, the General Assembly rejected this proposal. The Secretary-general also proposed to improve strategic budgetary planning and implementation by reducing the number of sections in the budget from 35 sections to 13. However, as of October 2007,  the General Assembly had not taken action on the proposal. Other financial management reform proposals that have not been adopted include  Steps have been taken to improve UN oversight capabilities. Member states established an Independent Audit Advisory Committee (IAAC) in June 2007. The committee is not expected to be operational until January 2008. UN funding arrangements continue to constrain OIOS’s ability to audit high-risk areas. The General Assembly has not authorized OIos’S financial and operational independence. In June 2007, member states established IAAC to provide an external, independent assessment ofUN oversight capabilities based on best practices in the private sector as well as the experiences of other international institutions. 5 individuals, preferably from a pool of at least 10 candidates proposed by member states, based on regional and geographical representation and selected by the General Assembly. An evaluation process for candidates through consultations with an external relevant institution, such as the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions; and membership appointment for a term of 3 years, with the possibility of one- time re-election. The guidelines and requirements represent a compromise among the member states. Member states disagreed on some of the initially proposed responsibilities of IAAC. states disagreed. In addition, State wanted IAAC to be responsible for assessing the work of all UN oversight bodies, including the UN Board of Auditors and the UN Joint Inspection Unit. Both of these bodies strongly resisted having IAAC oversee their respective functions, and it was ultimately decided that IAAC would focus primarily on OIOS. State Department officials told us they were satisfied overall with the creation of IAAC despite the various compromises. The five members of the newly created IAAC were elected. OIOS faces two conflicts that have been impeding its independence. Without operational independence, OIOS is constrained in its ability to prevent or mitigate risks to the UN’s resources and personnel. These risks include fraud, waste, abuse, inefficiencies, and mismanagement. The UN does not yet have a formal and structural internal control framework that would provide reasonable assurance that its financial resources are being handled effectively and that its objectives are being achieved. Some progress has been made in improving the UN procurement process. In April 2006, we reported on weaknesses in the UN’s oversight and procurement systems. The document also called for the Secretary-General to submit proposals for implementing reforms to improve management functions of the Secretariat. We found that UN funding arrangements constrained the ability of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) to operate independently and direct resources toward high-risk areas as needed. In addition, we found serious weaknesses in procurement internal controls. Specifically, the UN lacked an effective organizational structure for managing procurement. reported that UN funding arrangements adversely affect OIOS’s budgetary independence and constrain its ability to audit high-risk areas. Discussion of the revision of OiOS”s funding arrangements was deferred from the 61st to the 62nd session of the General Assembly due to a lack of consensus on funding issues. State and OI OS generally agreed with our overall findings and recommendations, according to the report. The report was published to coincide with the 62th session of UN General Assembly. UN has made some progress in strengthening the Office of Internal Oversight Services. Office has strengthened the capacity of its internal audit, investigation, and evaluations and inspections sections. Funding arrangements at OIOS continue to impede the independence of internal auditors. In order to reduce some of its multiple responsibilities and focus more directly on its oversight responsibilities, the office has shifted several nonoversight related functions to the UN Department of Management. In 2006, the evaluation section was strengthened by the addition of two posts to increase the number of evaluations that can be undertaken. OIOS argued that such a shift would significantly diminish the UN’s oversight functions. Since 2006, about 16 new posts have been created for the investigations division. OIOS has established a separate special investigations task force for sexual exploitation and abuse. The UN has made progress in reducing its range of functions and improving the quality of its investigations, says the report. The report was based on an external evaluation of the UN Office of Legal Affairs, which is part of the Secretariat. OIOS established a professional practices section that is responsible for implementing OIOS’s risk assessment framework. Member states decided to keep investigations in OiOS rather than move it to a single division. OIos also established an information and communication technology section, which has developed an audit strategy and conducted risk assessments for various departments at headquarters. Several steps have also been taken to improve OI OS’S investigations division. The group is currently working on a report on how to improve the efficiency of the European Union. The report will be published in full in September. In the past year, the UN has made substantial progress in staffing its ethics office. In the fall of 2006, we reported concerns of UN experts that the newly created UN ethics office was insufficiently staffed. As of October 2007, the ethics office had made some progress in developing and circulating ethics standards and guidance. The office reported that it had received 287 requests for services from staff at different levels of the Secretariat between August 2006 and July 2007, including ethics advice on issues such as potential and actual conflicts of interest. training within the organization, including half-day ethics training workshops for over 3,000 staff members at all levels of the Secretariat. The office has also developed new ethics standards, such as postemployment restrictions standards. The ethics office has begun to develop a systemwide code of ethics for all UN personnel, including those of UN bodies and agencies other than the UN Secretariat as requested by the General Assembly in the 2005 World Summit outcome document. The director of the ethics office told us the development of a system Wide Code of Ethics was one of his top priorities and would be undertaken in 2007. fall of 2006. In the past year, the ethics office has hired a permanent director and additional staff. The office has begun to enforce a whistleblower protection policy. Concerns have been raised about the policy’s lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and programs. The UN has made some progress in collecting and analyzing financial disclosure forms for 2005 and 2006. The primary purpose of the financial disclosure program is to identify potential conflicts of interest arising from staff members’ financial holdings, private affiliations, or outside activities. A private contractor developed an online e-filing system in liaison with the ethics office to simplify and expedite filing requirements. The ethics office plans to review the online financial disclosure form and accompanying guidelines in consultation with other UN offices to decide whether modifications need to be made. The process for the 2006 review was ongoing, and, as a result, the compliance rate was not finalized as of September 2007, according to the UN ethics office. The online financial Disclosure Form is available online at www.un.org.uk. declaration of interest statements for 2005. About 98 percent of staff complied, and the remaining 2 percent were referred to the Office of Human Resources Management for disciplinary action. A total of 2,548 staff members were required to file forms for 2006. The office reported that the increase in staff required to filing likely reflects an increased awareness of the program by the heads of departments and their staff members. In addition, as a confidence-building measure, the current UN Secretary-General and Deputy Secretary- General voluntarily made their recent financial disclosure forms public. a private contractor and analyzed to determine any potential conflicts of interest between the staff members’ confidentially disclosed private interests and their official duties and responsibilities. In May 2007, the contractor identified potential conflicts. of interest in 17 of the cases reviewed, or about 1 percent. Of these cases, 14 staff members accepted the advice of the private contractor to address the potential conflict and 3 cases were referred to the ethics office for final resolution. The 2006 review is not yet complete. The deadline for submitting forms for 2006 was delayed until May. in cases with an aggregate value of over $610 million—resulting in misappropriation of resources or the unjust enrichment of vendors and their agents in excess of $25 million. The task force reported that a number of cases have been referred to national authorities for criminal prosecution or to the UN for consideration of subsequent legal action. It has also recommended civil recovery of monetary damages. As of October 2007, an independent bid protest system had not been established. The lack of an independentbid protest system limits the transparency of the procurement process. justice system that effectively executes corrective action in cases of retaliation or threatened retaliation, staff may not submit cases to the ethics office. 2. State notes that the General Assembly’s approval of the creation of an independent bid protest system was a critical first step toward enhancing transparency in the UN's procurement award process. Per our methodology, approving the creation. of a protest system, while demonstrating intent, is not equivalent to actual implementation of the system, which has yet. to be implemented. The annual activities report of the ethics. office states that protection against retaliation is linked to the internal justice system. need for the UN to establish a formal internal control framework. State notes that the General Assembly’s approval of the creation of an independent bid protest system was a critical first step toward enhancing whistleblower protection. State did not agree with our statement that successful whistleblower protections cannot be established without substantial reform of the UN's internal justice program. During our review, we found that UN and nongovernmental organization staff had concerns about weaknesses in the UN internal justice system. We agree with these concerns. believe that the cost estimates and the associated funds that the General Assembly has appropriated to date for reform efforts are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. We conducted our work from March to November 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. During our review, we found that UN and nongovernmental organization staff had concerns about weaknesses in the UN internal justice system and the potential impact of these weaknesses on the implementation of a successful whistleblower protection policy. We agree with these concerns. The UN has made substantial progress in enforcing a whistleblower protection policy. The ethics office has begun receiving complaints of retaliation, and several concerns have arisen during the handling of cases. Between August 1, 2006, and July 31, 2007, the ethics office received 52 complaints of whistleblower retaliation. The office was copied on six complaints that were primarily addressed to other offices or departments in the UN. In these instances, the office keeps track of and follows up on any pending action by other offices. UN and State officials have raised concerns regarding the UN’s whistleblower protection Policy. UN and State officials told us another concern about the whistleblower protection policy is its lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and programs. In August 2007, after initially reviewing a whistleblower retaliation case of an employee at the UN Development Program, the ethics office and the Office of Legal and Procurement Services concluded that the UN’s whistleblower Protection policy applies only to employees directly under the Secretary-General. The Government Accountability Project has criticized the effectiveness of the current UN whistleblower protectionpolicy. In his August 2007 report on the activities of the ethics. office, the secretary-general recommended that the General Assembly consider broadening. the scope of the office. The success of the UN’s whistleblower protection policy could be, in part, dependent on successful reform of the internal justice system. Some UN staff members might not trust the current system to be fair or impartial and, consequently, might not come forward with claims of retaliation. In its August 2007 annual activities report, the ethics office expressed a concern that it had not had an opportunity to provide input into its role in the proposed new internal Justice system. The Government Accountability Project is a non-profit public interest group.

ROUGE-1: 78.25, ROUGE-2: 72.98, ROUGE-L: 26.15
BERTScore: 58.56

==============================================
