Borat: I want to talk about my favorite part of the Second Discourse, a book that never grows old. Borat: Inequality is for Rousseau far more what we might call "the moral and psychological injuries of inequality" than the material aspects of the phenomenon. He says Rousseau very much takes the side of the poor and the dispossessed but it isn't property, or poverty rather, that rouses Rousseau's anger as it is the attitudes and beliefs shaped by inequalities. Rousseau like Plato finds his voice when discussing the various complexities of the human soul. So what is the chief villain in Rousseau's Second Discourse and his account of the beginnings in development of inequality? Real inequality begins in a faculty or a disposition that is in most editions of the book rendered simply by the French term because it is really untranslatable into English. It is amour-propre, the first term I put on the board, which is the first and most durable cause of inequality for Rousseau. Rousseau: Amour-propre only arises in society and is the true cause, he believes, for our discontents. He distinguishes it from another disposition that he calls amour de soi-meme, a sort of self-love. "Amour- Propre is merely a sentiment that is relative," he says, "artificial and born in society which moves each individual to value himself more than anyone else" The desire for recognition is at the root of our sense of justice, he says. For Hobbes, and this idea of pride, vanity, what Hobbes called vainglory, was a very important part of Hobbes' political and moral psychology in Leviathan. For Rousseau by contrast amour-propre is something that could only come about after the state of nature, a state that Hobbes had called solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short. But how could pride have arisen in such a state? Rousseau speculates about this and, again, this is part of his hypothetical or conjectural history. "From that gaze, from the look or gaze of another, that the passion of vanity was born," he says. The one who sang or danced the best, the handsomest, the strongest, the most adroit or the most eloquent became the most highly regarded. From these first preferences were born vanity and contempt on the one hand and shame and envy on the other. "The fermentation caused by this new leavens eventually produced compounds fatal to happiness and innocence," he writes. Rousseau: Acts of revenge became terrible and men became bloodthirsty and cruel. Does this sound familiar? I think it should. The Danish cartoon controversy. Do you remember that, about the cartoons of the prophet Muhammad and the outrage and the protests, often violent, that occurred about that? To some degree, Rousseau might argue, the protests were about disrespectful cartoons. But he would argue, I suspect, that the deeper cause seemed to be that the protesters believed was disrespect being shown. them, to their beliefs, to what it is they held sacred in some sense. It is their beliefs that were being disrespected and were the cause of the protests. To some degree, I think, Rousseau would believe the protesters over those cartoons had a point. Their views were not being respected and to which you might say a Lockean or a liberal formulation of the problem or response would be, "Well, so what?" The task of government, according to Locke or the liberal view, is to ensure the basic entitlements or views are not beingrespected. Government's job is not to impose a gag order on what can and cannot be said, he says. This is a respectable, sort of liberal line of thought going from Locke to John Stuart Mill, he adds. But there is something powerful and true about what the government is supposed to do, he writes. It is to protect you from harm and provide you with the freedom to practice what religion you like, consistent with others' freedom to do so too, he argues. The Danish prime minister has refused to apologize for the cartoon. Rousseau has to say about it, about this kind of issue. To tolerate simply means not to persecute, to leave alone, while respect for something requires that we esteem it. This is a vast topic. I think that amour-propre, the desire to be esteemed, recognized, and to have your values and points of view esteemed by those around you is very different from what Locke talked about. It doesn't require us to censor, self-censor, our own views on the ground that they may be disrespectful or hurtful to others. about the assertion that men who were once free and equal are so easily, as it were, led to consent to the inequalities of property and to rule by the stronger, which government brings into being. The social contract, as he presents it in the Second Discourse, is really a kind of swindle. Government is a con game that the rich play upon the poor. Political power simply helps to legitimize economic inequalities. How else can one explain why the rich live lives that are so much freer, so much easier and so much more open to attack? Rousseau describes the dilemma of the bourgeoisie in the penultimate paragraph of the Second Discourse. He says, "The savage lives within himself. The man accustomed to the ways of society, the bourgeoisie, is always outside of himself and knows only how to live in the opinions of others" "From this distinction there arose grand ostentation, deceptive cunning, and all the vices that follow in their wake," he says. "Being something and appearing to be something" are two different things, Rousseau says. that he draws the sentiment of his own existence." Think of that sentence. It comes from the next to the last paragraph of the book, that in society we only live through the opinions of others, through the gaze of others. Such a person is duplicitous, hypocritical, and false. This is why this is the true, you might say, discontent of civilization. It is what our perpetual restlessness and reflectiveness have made of us. We are constantly our own sentiment of existence, he says. Only a very few people, Rousseau writes, are capable of finding their way back to nature. He is one of those rare aristocrats of nature, you might say. His claim to superiority is not based on a higher understanding but a superior sensitivity, less on wisdom than on compassion. But it requires you, in some way, to distance yourself severely and psychologically from all of the possibilities of society, to return inward, and it was that inward journey that Rousseau took and that he writes about so powerfully. of civilization is responsible for all of our miseries. He denies that we can, as a practical solution, return to simpler, more natural forms of political association. But how then do we resolve the problem that he leaves us with? And his answer to it, his political answer, is contained in his book, yes, called the Social Contract, Du Contrat Social, published in 1762, seven years after the Second Discourse. It is not his only or final answer, but one such answer to the problems of inequality and amour-propre. In the state of nature, we are born free, equal and independent. Only in society do we become weak, dependent, and enslaved. How did this take--how did this change take place, Rousseau asks. I do not know. What can render it legitimate? I believe I can answer this question. In the Second Discourse. I take it he means the chains as in--that states man is born free and is everywhere in chains. It is what follows after that sentence in a way that is the shocker. The work begins, even before the famous sentence about man being born free, the work is prefaced with a statement that could have come directly out of Machiavelli's Prince. "Taking men as they are and laws as they might be," Rousseau says, "I will try in this inquiry to bring together what right permits with what interest prescribes" Let us look at the effectual truth of things, not what is imagined to be but the way people actually are, he says. Each of us has a desire to preserve his or her own freedom and that social order will be rational or just, that allows us to preserve that freedom. The state of nature quickly becomes a state of war based on conflicting desires and conflicting again means of liberty preservation. This is the question that the Social Contract sets out to answer and to which his famous formulation of what he calls the general will is the solution. I'm going to end on that note today and Wednesday I want to talk about the.of preserving it and protecting it. general will and how Rousseau sees it as a sort of collective answer to the problem of the securing of individual liberty. So meditate on that if you like for the next day. If you like, you can read the rest of the book tomorrow. It's a great read and a great way to start a new day. I hope you'll join me for a cup of tea and a glass of wine in the next few hours. I'm looking forward to seeing you in the morning.