When we talk about complement and substitute, we have to be clear whether we are talking about the demand side or the supply side. So, what do we mean, when do we say a good is complement in production or complement in supply? Let me write it. Good X is a complement inSupply to good Y, good good Y is a substitute in supply to good X. That is the way to look at it. That's the way we look at supply and consumption. We need to distinguish between the two. X is a complement in supply to good Y, if an increase in price of good Y increases the supply of good X, and similarly good X is a substitute. We are talking about supply side not the demand side. One example let me give you from very low tech to high tech, the simple let us take plastic chair to iron chair. Can you give an example, first substitute think about it? Student: Plastic chair toIron chair like, plastic chair, iron chair, like. let us say that here supplier of milk, the milk man he supplies milk. Let us say there is market for cow dung also, earlier when our economy was not developed. So, let us say if there is an increase of price in cow Dung, what would happen? Your willingness to supply milk at the same price would increase. More cows mean more. More milk means more. So of course, herecow dung and milk are complement in production. So that is that. a very low-tech example. Let us talk about a very high-techexample Boeing Company. Boeing is a manufacturer of airplanes; it makes civilian airplanes as well as military airplanes. So, if there is an increase in price of military aircraft, what would happen? Boeing devote more a space to. manufacturing, to manufacture military aircrafts. What would happen to the supply of civilian aircraft? It would go down. Boeing willingness to supply civilian aircraft at the same price would decrease. That is why here civilian aircraft and military aircraft are substitutes in supply or substitutes in production. So, now we have enough knowledge. So that, to talk about the factors affecting the supply schedule or supply function. So, now that we have that knowledge, we can talk about how to get the most out of the resources that are available to us. That's what we're trying to do here. We're going to try and get the best of both worlds. We'll see how it goes from here. It'll be interesting to see how we get on with it. We've got a long way to go, but we're getting there.