The planet is kind of a storage device. It's an energy storage device for that thing over there, right, and so like if you think about all the energy flows that go on on planet Earth, well, then you've got-- there's a picture I like. It kind of shows you the different energy flows, right. You've got the sun, so you'veGot like solar radiation. There's the tides, there's the sun. You're in the solar system. moon, you've got wind. You've got all these kinds of energy happening on the planet, all the way down to life happening, rock formation, right. And then sometimes those things, you know, rocks can form alloys over millions and millions of years. The problem is that it's like 10, 20, 30 million year old sunlight, right, and it'll happen again, but the question is how do we store energy on timescales that matter to us? And so you can draw this line and then think about what that means. less, right. OK, so now why electricity? Why electricity, right? So the thing is, electricity is more and more important in our lives, and if you look at just sort of like the major sectors, so you have the power generation, you have transportation. You have industry, you Have buildings, and this is a plot of these sectors and the CO2 emissions. You can plot all sorts of things about these sectors. This is CO2 versus time. These are kind of the major contributors. The thing is electricity, because of things that are happening as well, the opportunity. is that electricity, as you know, in an electric car it's not going to be useful if you have to have it plugged in all the time, right. So storage of electricity is clearly really, really important. And so we get to sort of how do you think about storage technologies, and again, I just want to kind of gently introduce us to energy storage and we'll go into batteries. Now so the kind of plot that I'm showing you here, talking about Ashby plots, but this is actually a different kind. It's a special kind because it has to do with energy storage. the watts. If you plot energy storage technologies on plots like this, then these diagonal lines are one number of time. It's like if you had a given density and you're using it at a given rate, a giving power, then that's how long it would last. So these plots are really convenient. They're really convenient ways to compare energy technologies. OK, so those are the power plants. The next step is to find out how much energy is being stored in each plant. would be like, I've got energy storage technology and it's got this much density, this much power-- well, then it's going to last if I use it at that power for 41 days and so forth. Why don't I just want high and high? That sounds like a good thing, right, so shouldn't we be pumping water up hills all over the place? Well, obviously, if you think about it, you don't do that in your phone. You don't evenDo that in a town. Why? Because pumped hydro is extraordinarily limited. very constrained, so we can't use this in most applications, pumped hydro. Compressed Air, CAES. That's got a whole lot of limitations as well. We've got, just to give you the abbreviations, Superconducting Magnetic Coils. Superconducters, right, just keep it going. And then you draw the [MUMBLES] and it just keeps going forever. All of these things exist. They're interesting, important, electrical energy storage devices, right. rotating something heavy really, really fast. I don't want to be in that building, but they do build flywheel energy storage device where you slow it down and then you generate electricity from that. So these kinds of plots are really,really, really helpful for comparing one energy technology with another. Now, the thing is as I said, there's a whole list of these and it goes on and on. They've all got a lot of limitations, all right, and so capacitors have a low density. You can convert energy into some fuel and store it and then combust it. That's got low round-trip efficiency. There are challenges there too. There is an advantage about using electrochemistry. It's the relationship between electricity and chemical reactions. We're getting to the point where we're electrifying everything. We need electricity almost everywhere, even in your combustion car. You need electricity a lot more than you used to, than 20 years ago. And so as we electrify our society, we need to make sure we have the right technology to meet the needs of our society. And this isn't just one type of thing, it's this broader definition. world, and then I said I've got to store that energy, you start to think about what Carnot did. Carnot said that the second law of thermodynamics makes you pay a penalty of energy if you convert it into heat and then back into electricity. Well, even if you just have heat in the first place and now you want to generate electricity from that, you're limited. We talked about this before, right, like that the energy density of gasoline, it's so high and it's such an amazing energy storage material. most of that gasoline's energy is going into waste. Most power plants at best are around 50% efficient in terms of converting the thermal energy into electrical energy. electrochemistry is one of the reasons why electrochemical is needed. A power plant gets up to a higher temperature so the penalty is less, but still most power plants, you lose about 50%. Most of the world's power is generated by chemical reaction to heat. That's how we power most of our world today. But there is another way to do it. energy storage is so appealing, because you don't really pay a penalty. I can go back and forth without the second law hurting me. Averill has a beautiful chapter on batteries, chapter 19. I'm sure you know. It's really well written. This is what he says about entropy, though, and for now we can state that entropy is a thermodynamic property of all substances that is proportional to their degree of disorder. So people people people, let me ask you guys a question. Entropy is not about smoothness and it's not about disorder. Entropy is about accessibility to states. A messier room does not have higher entropy, and in this case, it's just simply the rules of the algorithm. It's about how many states you have to be in. Now, that can appear to be like disorder, right, but a messier Room does not has higher entropy. I love that you guys are blown away. I have rules here about entropy. the dots being able to touch each other. That means that those dots had fewer possibilities. They had fewer states that they could be in. This system has much higher entropy. It's about the number of states. There's a lot of reasons why this is so appealing. No penalty on the second law of thermodynamics is no penalty on second law is. There are a number of reasons electrochemical storage is a good idea. It can be used to store energy in a variety of ways. one of them. You can have transport easily, right. We drive electric cars. We see that. No pollution at the point of use. Also, the batteries can be charged by renewable technologies like solar wind, and they're very highly efficient. Electric cars, for example, have a very high efficiency depending on the car, but upwards of 90% in terms of converting that electrical energy back and forth. These are the things that matter in batteries, but so many other things matter, and this is why this is a complicated problem. change not going from your computer to your phone but from your car to a grid. And so the needs are all going to be different, and then which ones of these things you care about is going to depend on what chemistry you think about. It all comes down to the chemistry as we're going to see. And just to put a few numbers down, the cell phone has a few watts of power. Light bulb is 10 to 100. Needed to drive a car 200 miles, 100 kilowatt hours. Powering your house, 40 kilowatts max. is this many watts as of a few years ago. So if you had, I think it's something like 20,000 billion AAA batteries, you could run the world for an hour-ish, something like that. These numbers are just fun to play with, so I wanted to put a few examples down. So where'd it all begin? It all began with an argument. And it was Galvani who was a physiologist, and he really loved the topic of why animals move. Theory of electricity was similar to theories for motion of the human body. Galvani wanted to make a connection between things that move and electricity. He hooked up his lightning rod to a frog. The frog was not alive. The motion of a frog, and all motion of all living creatures, generates electricity. That's what he said. He deduced that the motion itself is something that generates electricity, and that's how he came up with the theory. It was like, ah-ha, motion, electricity. little article about this debate, because in Galvani's case, if you have two metal wires hooked up to a frog, like we say, ifyou close the loop, then what he said is that the charge that was already in there moves around the loop and back and makes the leg move. Volta got really interested in this and he said, you know, let me study this. So I think this is about the metals, not the frog, and they had a big huge argument, right. win that argument, and we have the volt named after him, and he also created the first stable battery, the voltaic pile. Galvani on the other hand really opened the doors to the idea that we have electricity in our bodies, which is pretty cool. He also is the reason why the story of Frankenstein was written. It's actually true because they went around and took all sorts of things and electrocuted them and showed that they moved, and often they weren't alive. Mary Shelley, I think, saw that. There's over a billion people who can't read at night because there's no access to electricity. $25 billion liters of kerosene are used to meet the needs of the world's population. This is already making a big difference in millions of people's lives. You just press this and you can reading at night, right. That doesn't happen unless you've got electrochemical energy storage, right, and there's some stats up here. It's a really cool program. basic lighting needs in a lot of these places. That releases tremendous amounts of toxic fumes, and you can make a huge difference. So the challenge is, but you don't cook. If you have a solar cooker, that's great except that most people don't cooking during the day. They cook at night or in the morning, right. And so you've got to store energy to make these things actually useful, right, and I really like this program so I wanted to make that one of my, why this matters. lots of metals. That's what he did. And he showed that the frog moved with most of them, so it's the metals. So let's take these two classic metals and show what happens. You've got copper and you've got zinc. Now, in this case, I'm just going to have a zinc. This is the zinc piece of metal, and this is a piece of zinc, and I put it in a solution of copper ions. And we got them sort of bonding. The zinc that goes into solution is 2 plus and 2 electrons. And the copper in the solution plates onto the zinc, plus those 2 electrons goes to copper like that. The zinc is leaving the solid and it's becoming 2 plus. But the thing is that now, you've got to be careful here. What about those two electrons? Where do they go? A zinc atom leaves its metal strip and goes into that beaker of zinc ions. But now you have two charges, two electrons on the strip because it left a zinc 2plus. in solution plus copper solid. That's the trading. Now it turns out that when something loses electrons like that we call it oxidation, and when something gains electrons we call this reduction. And so when two different materials-- in this case, these two metals-- trade electrons and one of them is oxidized, that's also got a name. It's called a redox couple. Those are a redot couple, redox, Redox, right. So these are aredox couple, is what they're called when you trade electrons. and the zinc is coming off of the strip. All right, why is that happening? Because if you put that strip in there and the thing just heats up, this is exothermic. That means that this reaction will go. This is spontaneous. Where can I write that? Nowhere. But all that's happening is you're going down in energy. You're giving energy away and you're heating up the environment. Now the question is, how can I not let that happen? How can I stop the heating from happen and instead take advantage of this electron trading to do work? Fundamentals of a battery is this kind of thing, but now instead of allowing this plating to happen, I'm going to construct it in such a way that those electrons get traded through some wire that I can do work with. So what you saw wasn't a battery because I wasn't stopping the electron flow and doing anything, but if you construct it like this, is called a galvanic cell. That's the difference. So let's go through this. So on the left, Zinc has zinc ions in solution, right. Now, copper, copper is in a solution of copper ions. On the left I've got zinc nitrate. In this case it's a nitrate, not a sulfate. It doesn't matter. The whole point of the solution is that I get these ions in a beaker. So you've got the copper ions on the left. Got to get these ion in aBeaker, so you'veGot the copper ion on the right. away. What's so cool about batteries is that it's all about neutrality. If I just build this charge up here, I can't have another zinc atom go in so the charge has to go somewhere, but that's what that wire is for. This wire allows the charge to go over to the other place, the cathode, where the copper is sitting there saying, you know what, if I had two electrons on the copper strip then I could use those as a way to lure in a copper 2 plus ion, right. just one other piece of it that you've got to understand to understand how a battery works, and it's this thing here. So up here, this is my conduit for electrons to go. Each time it goes, I can plate. But notice if I lose 2 plus-- so I've got these 2 plus. It's not charged. Copper sulfate goes in a solution, it's not a charged solution. These things are balanced, right, 2 plus, 2 minus. So now I'm taking only a 2 plus out of solution. No way. This is an ACL, so for every copper 2 plus that plates onto the copper electrode, two NA plus atoms go into this beaker from the bridge. Dissolved salt, sodium chloride is in water, so I got all these sodium ions. And when a charge imbalance happens because something plates here, I can draw sodium atoms out of the salt bridge and I canDraw chlorine atoms from that side. That completes your circuit. That's an iron neutralizer, the salt Bridge, and this is allowing the electrons to keep everything neutral, and that's how you get the current. It's pretty cool stuff. You can do this yourself. That's why I bought these for, is that you can-- somebody sees the the potato battery. I like the human battery. So these are just volt meters and these are set to the right thing, yep. And what you'll find, you can see what happens, right. Like when you touch the two electrodes, yeah, and sometimes you've got to squeeze. Oh, look at that current. You have electric-- you are providing electricity. You are the salt bridge. have lots of items on the table tomorrow maybe at a dinner, and I'm just suggesting that you play around with this idea, because look. This is literally what the name of that device, the guy that that's named after, this is what he did. He hooked up two different metals. I just put some paper clips in there, it works. It can be almost-- not almost, but lots of different metals will work. We'll get to that in a sec. The power isn't coming from you as Galvani thought. No, the power is coming from the difference in potentials of those metals wanting or not wanting electrons. Just that now we're talking about the metals and whether they're more interested than the other metal in having those two electrons. That's what a potential is. And you know, when you look at this, you might say-- this is from Averill so he actually is missing the f's because this is just taken right from the textbook, but anyway, so that's the potential. Look at this. This is like an energy diagram but these aren't electronics. These are just potentials, but the potential is related to which one wants the 2 electrons more. is yes, but I'm taking 2. I'm not taking 1, I'm talking about the oxidation state of 2 plus. That's going to be harder here. It's harder to take a 4s1 in a 3d from that beautifully filled 3d shell than it is to take these 2s electrons. So what you can see is that the potential difference is all about chemistry, right. The delta v is allabout the chemistry. It is more than that because of these solutions, so it's more complicated than that. here would be 1/2. And you can sort of look at the table and think about why that is. Cobalt has a 4s2 but it's got less d electrons, and so is it going to be easier or harder to pull them out? Well, it's going to been easier than copper but harder than zinc so it goes in the middle, right. And so the potential difference is less for cobalt and zinc but you still get a potential. And that's what Volta did, and he did all sorts of different metals. The standardization in the world of batteries is hydrogen. You can only get the changes in potentials. You could write reduction, you could write oxidation. They're just a flip of the sign, right. It's just a flipped sign of the potential, but what you write these down with respect to a common electrode, and it's the standard. it's called the hydrogen standard. It doesn't matter. I'm not going to go the other way, right, so nothing happens when you do that. standard hydrogen electrode. So sometimes you'll see it as the SHE in the battery world. And what it is it's just a very nice platinum electrode that doesn't change. So it doesn't plate or lose atoms. And it's a reaction that on that electrode happens with hydrogen, hydrogen gas. And so what you do is you hook this up on one side, and then you put all the metals against that. And you measure their potential. So hydrogen electrodes gives you that ability to standardize it and create huge tables. The Nobel Prize was given to the development of lithium ions as a storage technology. The reason is this. You saw-- it was the highest one on the list, too. Look at that. So now, I don't know what the potential of a lithium something battery is going to be, but I'm starting out with a pretty negative voltage with respect to hydrogen. That makes you think you might get high voltages. Yeah, but you have another thing that's really cool about lithium is how light it is. And those things combined make it a beautiful battery technology. energy density versus volume. And a lithium battery works much the same way in the sense that you have the separator here. That's the electrolyte. But now it's rechargeable. And I don't have time to go into rechargeable batteries versus what are called primary batteries, which is the one I showed you. But all the chemistry is the same. You're shuttling ions back and forth. You've got that external circuit. And what I wanted to-- and there's a whole bunch of chemistry. This is the grid now. So we went from small to very big. The growth in solar and wind has been incredible over the last 10, 20 years. The problem, as I think I've shown you, is the variability. And so here's the question. I said, well, OK, how do you fix this? You got to store it. There's no way to use it. And that was my last Why This Matters in the last 2 and 1/2 minutes. renewables at large scales unless you store it. In fact, we're really at essentially the tipping point. If you look at-- this is Germany, now. Huge penetration-- these are these six years, seven years of adding PV. They're now at 7%. 2016 is 7%. This is how much the price of electricity was in Germany when they added. They can sell it for a lot of money. But as they add more of this renewable to the grid, its price goes down when it's available. need. So that's a real challenge for chemistry. I hope you guys have a great Thanksgiving and maybe hook up some different metals. And I'll see you all next week. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @cnnireport. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the CNNOpinions page.Back to thepage you came From. Back from the CNN Opinion page. Back in the page, click here for the latest from CNN.