Professor Steven Smith: I want to talk today about Aristotle's discovery of America. He says Aristotle's mixed constitution differs from ours still in certain important respects. Smith: For Aristotle, it is not the liberty of the individual so much as the functioning or functional well-being of the city that is the highest priority. In these parts of the Politics, Aristotle is very sketchy here about the structure, institutional structure, the make-up of the best regime, acknowledging the best men where the best rule. Number 10, the remedy for the control and containment, so to speak, of faction. You remember, many of you if not all of you who have read the Tenth Federalist Paper, that Madison outlines a scheme for an extended republic. Aristotle's proposal for a mixture of oligarchy and democracy seems, in many ways, to anticipate, 2,000 years before the fact, Madison's call for a government where powers must be separated and where, he says in Federalist Number 51, ambition must be made to counteract ambition in order to avoid, in other words, the extremes of both tyranny and civil war. any sensible reader of Aristotle would reach is that Aristotle, in fact, discovered the American Constitution 1,500 or 2,000 years before it was written. This may seem surprising to you, since of course Aristotle lived long before. But that may simply be our own prejudice to think that my friend at the CUNY Graduate Center, Peter Simpson, has argued in a paper that I found quite convincing. I say, it may just be our prejudice that he didn't, but it may be true. In Book II, Aristotle criticizes at considerable length Plato's Republic for the excessive unity it demands of its citizens. He clearly understands, in many ways, the virtues of private property and of commerce. Yet, despite his awareness of the importance of commerce and of property, the aim of the city, he tells us, is not the production of wealth. If wealth were the purpose of politics, Aristotle writes, the Phoenicians, you might say, in the ancient world, would have been the commercial leaders. people par excellence--the Phoenicians would be the best regime. Aristotle could never endorse the view stated by a famous American president that the business of America is business. The political partnership, he says, must be regarded for the sake of noble acts performed well. He would have been critical of the American tendency to organize into clubs, what we call political parties. These political clubs or parties use their influence to incense the populous, using their power to whip up dangerous passions that tend to make politicians closer to demagogues than to statesmen. to war, but in fact to peace. The citizen of the best regime, he says, must be able to sustain war if duty requires, but only for the sake of peace and leisure. Leisure does not simply mean rest or inactivity, but leisure is necessary for education or what he sometimes calls by the term philosophy. By philosophy, he seems to suggest not so much the capacity for abstract or speculative thought, but rather a kind of liberal education that he regards to be the preserve of the megalopsychos. Aristotle's best regime differs from Plato's intransigent demand for the rule of philosopher-kings. The megalopsychos, the gentleman, whatever else he is, is not a philosopher in the strict sense. He is a person of some inherited wealth, chiefly landed property, but whose way of life will be urban. The gentleman may lack the speculative intelligence of a Socrates, but he will possess that quality of practical rationality, of practical judgment necessary for the administration of affairs. Aristotle tells us he is slow to act, unless something of great importance is at stake. He repays favor with interest so as not to be under any obligations to others. He speaks his mind without fear or favor, somewhat like the New York Times, because to dissemble would be beneath him. He may occasionally hurt others, but this is not done out of deliberate cruelty. He will possess beautiful but useless things, suggesting the possession not only of wealth, but of a kind of cultivated aesthetic sense. same thing, obviously, as speculative or philosophic intelligence. The phronimos is the person who is able to grasp the fitting or the appropriate, the appropriate thing to do out of the complex arrangements that make up any situation. Such a person embodies that special quality of insight and discrimination that distinguishes him or her from people, again, of more theoretical or speculative cast of mind. How is this quality of judgment, of practical wisdom, of horse sense, how is it acquired? Aristotle tells us that this kind of knowledge is most appropriate to politics. knowledge of how to act where the purpose of action is acting well. This kind of knowledge entails judgment and deliberation. We only deliberate, Aristotle says, over things where there is some choice. We deliberate with an eye to preservation or change, to making something better or to preserve it from becoming worse. It is the skill possessed by the greatest statesmen, you might say, the fathers of the constitutions, as it were, who create the permanent framework in which allows later and lesser figures to handle change. The quality of practical judgment phronimos, practical wisdom, was developed, I think, in a beautiful essay, without any explicit reference to Aristotle, by the English political philosopher Isaiah Berlin. Anyone here ever heard of Isaiah Berlin? Not one of you? Famous, famous English philosopher, died a number of years ago in the late ‘90s. He wrote a wonderful essay called Political Judgment. In it he asks, "What is the intellectual quality that successful statesmen possess that distinguishes their knowledge from all other forms of rationality and knowledge?" Like Aristotle, Berlin distinguishes a kind of practical skill possessed by the greatest minds, political minds at least. He says it's quite different and from what he calls the great psychological novelists, from that possessed of the greatest philosophers and scientists. "What are we to call this capacity?" Berlin continues. "Practical reason, perhaps is a sense of what will work and what will not. It is a capacity for synthesis rather than analysis, for knowledge in the.public life, which successful statesmen have" sense in which trainers know their animals or parents their children. Aristotle describes this political knowledge as phronimos. How is this knowledge acquired? Are we just born with it? Do some people just have it or is it a product of experience? Aristotle doesn't say, but I think the answer is clearly some of both. It is a quality, as I agree with Berlin, possessed by some of the great psychological novelists. I mention the names of some of them in this article. animal means first to possess speech or reason that allows us to participate in a community or a way of life governed by shared standards of justice and injustice. It is our logos, our reason that makes a community possible and also expresses or creates a certain latitude or indeterminacy in how our behavior distinguishes us from other species. To be a political animal, for him, is to engage or to engage in conflict and conflicts over justice. It's precisely, he believes, this latitude that makes political communities not only sites of agreement over shared standards, but also, as he says, sites of moral contestation. Aristotle: To be human is to be part of that conversation. Most people today are attracted to the study of politics because they are interested in things they've read about in newspapers or seen on TV. To refuse to participate in that conversation, to declare oneself an outsider to it, he says, is either to be below humanity or above it. It is a debate over the very nature of justice, to refuse to engage in that debate is to deny humanity's right to know. strong connotations. What are the attributes of the statesman? I've spoken a little about the attributes that Aristotle believes are essential to the megalopsychos. This will be quite different, for example, from the qualities we will see beginning on Friday and next week that Machiavelli and later Hobbes or Locke, believe are necessary for the great founders or statesmen. So if Aristotle's political science is an education for statesmanship, you might say what are its methods? What are its distinctive methods? These four questions are intended to guide inquiry, to shape and direct inquiry. They are not intended to yield sure or certain results, but to guide and inform statesmen and citizens in the U.S. The political scientist must have a grasp of the best regime, given the most favorable circumstances. He must also know something about the techniques of reform and persuasion, what we might call the area of political rhetoric by which existing regimes can be brought closer to the best. And he must have some knowledge of how to render any regime, no matter how imperfect, more stable and coherent. Most contemporary political scientists tend to be liberals. Their values are liberal values. This raises a question. Whether the relation between contemporary political science and liberalism is merely accidental or whether there is some intrinsic, some necessary connection between them. One might do well to ponder which political science is really more scientific--Aristotle's, which is explicitly and necessarily evaluative or that offers advice and exhortation to the statesmen and citizens about how to care for their regime, says Julian Zelizer. the back door. On Friday, let me just remind you, Il Principe. We'll study Machiavelli. On this very partisan note I conclude. On Thursday, we'll study the life of the Italian statesman and play a game of chess with him. We're going to see how well he can play the game of poker. I'm looking forward to it. I hope you'll join us for the game on Friday night at 8 p.m. ET on CNN.