HMG-CoA synthase is a key enzyme in central metabolism responsible for making the five carbon building blocks from which all sterols, such as cholesterol and steroid hormones are made. It catalyzes the following reaction. In this process, the one molecule of CoA is lost, and the other molecule is combined with another thioester to create acetoacetyl- CoA. The reaction takes place in the central metabolism, and is called Problem 2 of Problem Set 4. It takes acetyl- coA, which we're going to encounter a lot, and combines it with aceto acetyl CoA to create a new molecule. we get the product hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA or HMG-CoA, as you notice the initials H, M, and G are part of this name. We are also given an additional hint and that is the acetyl CoA substrate provides the CH2CO2 CO2 minus moiety in the HMG -CoA product. So the hint is telling us that these two carbons, which I'm going to label in blue from acetoacetyl- CoA, are, in fact, these twocarbons, CH2 COO minus in hydroxyl-glut Daryl CoA. Now, let's take a look at the crystal structure and see what information we can gather there. The reaction will start by forming this thioester between the acetoacetyl-CoA carbons and the cysteine in the active site of the enzyme. The reaction first involves activation of the cy Steine, is deprotonated, and then cysteines can attack the thioesters and form a tetrahedral intermediate. Angstrom: The reaction may also be involved in the catalyzing of the reaction with the enzyme serine 307, which is a type of protease. sufficient information to say for sure which are the key interactions to stabilize these tetrahedral intermediates. A lot more work, a lot more experimental data is necessary to figure out which are. the key hydrogen bonds and interactions that stabilize the tetrahedra. The three general mechanisms by which enzymes accelerate reactions are binding energy, general acid/general base catalysis and covalent catalysis. Now let's take a look at our structure and figure out how each one of these mechanisms might be operating. pretty obvious here the acetyl-CoA substrate first reacts and forms a covalent bond with the cysteine of the HMG- coA synthase. So this covalents attachment to the enzyme allows this residue to be positioned just right so that it can react with the other substrate. Now, general acid/general base catalysis, we've seen all these residues that participate. Obviously, in order for this to react, we need a base to deprotonate the cystine. Then we need an acid to stabilize and form this hydroxyl group that will be developing on this oxygen. energy contributes to this reaction. Both of the substrates need to bind to the enzyme. In order to do that, they need to be desolvated, that is to remove all the water molecules that surround them. The binding energy is also derived by when we align the substrate in the active site of the enzyme, we align them so closely the right geometry and within a few tenths of an Angstrom so that the right orbitals overlap and allow the reaction to happen. So also the ability to align this residue so closely that also contributes to the binding energy. a look. Here is an oxygen ester that shows a proton in alpha position. And as you know, the lone pairs on this oxygen can conjugate with the carbonyl group and form certain resonance structures. So the electrons can move like this, and then we're going to have a negative charge here and a positive charge here. And this is possible because the electrons on both oxygens are found in orbitals of comparable energies. By contrast, in the case of a thioester, we have a sulfur. better electrophile to react as nucleophiles behaves more like a ketone. For the same reason, when we are to deprotonate the alpha position on a thioester, the density on the carbonyl is there to stabilize the enolate much more so than it would be for an oxygen ester. Therefore, the pKa, the acidity constant for this hydrogen on the thioesters is close to 18. This sums up Problem 2 of Problem Set 4. experimental work and evidence. The study of the effects of drugs on the human body was conducted in the 1970s and 1980s. The results of the study were published in a book called "The Effects of Drugs on the Human Body" The book was published by Oxford University Press in 1989. It was the first of its kind to be published in the U.S. and is published by Simon & Schuster, a division of Simon and Schuster Inc. in New York. The book is available in hardback and paperback.