Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov, AKA Lenin, was one of the most influential figures of the 20th century. He helped overthrow the Russian tsar Nicholas II in 1917 and founded the Soviet Union. But was he a hero who toppled an oppressive tyranny or a villain who replaced it with another? It's time to put Lenin on the stand in History vs. Lenin, on CNN at 10 p.m. ET/PT on Sunday, July 8. For more, visit CNN.com/History. "Remember what happened in 1905 after his troops fired on peaceful petitioners?" "Yes, and the tsar ended the rebellion by introducing a constitution and an elected parliament, the Duma" "While retaining absolute power and dissolving them whenever he wanted." "Perhaps there would've been more reforms in due time if radicals, like Lenin, weren't always stirring up trouble." "Your Honor, Lenin had seen his older brother Aleksandr executed by the previous tsar for revolutionary activity" sound like such a capital fellow." "Your Honor, maybe Nicholas II did doom himself with bad decisions, but Lenin deserves no credit for this" "The Duma formed a provisional government, led by Alexander Kerensky, an incompetent bourgeois failure" "It could have succeeded eventually if Lenin hadn't returned in April, sent by the Germans to undermine the Russian war effort and instigate riots." "Such slander! The July Days were a spontaneous and justified reaction against the government's failures" in his cause, living modestly and working tirelessly from his student days until his too early death. "He saw how power-hungry Stalin was and tried to warn the party, but it was too late." "But these advances could still have happened, even without Lenin and the repressive regime he established." "Yes, and I could've been a famous rock and roll singer. But I'm not that kind of singer." "You could call it that. But it was Lenin's efforts that changed Russia in a few decades" how would I have sounded?" We can never be sure how things could've unfolded if different people were in power or different decisions were made, but to avoid the mistakes of the past, we must always be willing to put historical figures on trial. We must never forget that history is not an exact copy of the present, but it can be a guide to the future. It can be used to learn from the mistakes made in the past and to make better decisions in the present. It is never too late to put a historical figure on trial for their actions.