The Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics is one where the operators, the Schrodinger operators, acquire time dependence. It's a pretty useful way of seeing things, and makes the relation between classical mechanics and quantum mechanics more obvious. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu. Back to the page you came from. We'll find the Heisenberg equations of motion and solve them for a particular case today. We start with the time evolution. We found that, whenever we declare that states evolve in time in that way, they satisfy a first order time differential equation of the Schrodinger form. We discussed that in recitation on Thursday. This unitary operator you've been seeing that from the beginning of the course in some sense, that you evolve energy eigenstate. It's an interesting thing, and really that will be good enough. The Schrodinger equation is there. OK so now let's solve this. We'll go through three cases. Case one, h is time independent. So H of t is really H like that. So what do we have? ih bar. Let's write dU dt is equal H times whole thing is the same. So this is something very useful and we'll need it. One more comment, expectation values. We just say the expectation value of As is equal to the Heisenberg expectation value. U. use equal to e to the minus iHt over h bar times U0. Does that work? Well, we can think du dt and ih. When I take dU dt, I have to differentiate this exponential. And now in this exponential, this full operator H is there. But we are differentiating with respect to time. And H doesn't depend on time, so this is not a very difficult situation. You could imagine the power series expansion. the right. It cannot be to the right of U0 though, because this is a matrix, a constant matrix that we've put in here as a possible thing for boundary condition. So so far we've taken this derivative, and then i's cancel, the h bar cancels, and you get H. But this whole thing is, again, U. So the equation has been solved. So try this. And it works. So having this solution we can write, for example, that U of t t0 is going to be e to the minus iHt over h bar. is just the function evaluated at the eigenvalue. A little time dependence is an idea, the sign to make it possible for you to solve the equation. So you could have Hamiltonians that are time dependent, but still have a simplifying virtue. So H of t is time dependent. But assume that H at t1 and h at t2 commute for all t 1 and t2. So what could that be? For example, you know that the particle in a magnetic field is minus gamma B dot the spin. You could have a time dependent magnetic field. The magnetic field is time dependent, but its direction is not time dependent. And the Hamiltonian at different times commute because Sz commutes with itself. So if you have a magnetic field that is fixed in one direction but change in time, you can have a situation where your Hamiltonian is timedependent. And you will discuss such case because it's interesting. But later on as we do nuclear magnetic resonance, we will have the more interesting case in which the magnetic field isn't time independent. a magnetic field rotates and therefore it's not that simple. So what happens if you have a time dependent Hamiltonian that actually commutes? Well, the claim is that U of t t0 is given by a natural extension of what we had before. You would want to put exponential of minus iHt, but the reason this worked was because the derivative with respect to time brought down an iH over h bar. So one way to fix this is to put t t 0 H of t prime dt prime. So this is an answer to try this. the derivative of this quantity with respect to time. Well, when you differentiate an integral the upper argument, you get just the integrand evaluated at the time. So this is H of t. And now here comes a crucial point. This U is really e to the R. And you're trying to differentiate to see if the equation holds dU dt. Would be d dt of 1 plus R plus RR plus 1 3 factor RRR. You, would have one half R dot R plus R R dot. And then 1 over 3 factorial, but three factors. R dot depends on H, and R is an integral of H as well, but the H at different times commute anyway, so this must be true. Since the Hamiltonians are assumed to commute, R dot commutes with R. And this becomes like a normal derivative of an exponential in which you can move the R dot to the left everywhere. So actually that means that we've got pretty much our answer, because R dot is minus i over h bar H of t. And e to the R is U, so we got dU. dt equals this, which is the same as this equation. The only reason a derivative with respect to time will not give the usual thing is if R and R dot fail to commute, and they don't. So you could put the R dot here. You can put R dot on the other side, because it commutes with R, but it's better here. And therefore you've got this very nice solution. So the solution is not that bad. So that's case-- there was a 1, a 2, a 3 H of t general. something that makes sense. So here it is. U of t and t0. I'll write the answer and explain how it looks, and then you will see that it's OK. It's interesting. But it probably is not the most practical way you can solve this problem. There's an acronym for this thing. T it's called the time ordered exponential. This operator does something to the exponential function. So I have to say what this time ordering exponential is, and it's the following. You take the exponential and just begin to expand. You see, this thing is the solution when the Hamiltonian at different times commute. In fact, it's not the solution. So what is the next term here? The next term is you think of the exponential as you would expand as usual. So you will have here plus one half of this thing squared. One half minus i over h bar squared. And you would say, well, t0 to t dt prime H of t prime. Well, that would be just an exponential. of this, you will get H times that thing. So since it's a power series, you'll differentiate the first term, and you'll get the right thing. Then the second term and you will start getting everything that you need. It's reassuring that something like this success, but in general, you would want to be able to do all these integrals and to sum them up. So it's of limited usefulness. But when you have a practical problem, generally that's not the way you solve it. We will try to figure out the solution some other way. But in terms of completeness, it's kind of pretty in that you go from the exponential to the time ordered exponential. And I think you'll see more of this in 806. So that's basically our solution for H and for the unitary operator U. And what we're going to do now is turn to the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. Yes, questions? AUDIENCE: Why does R dot [INAUDIBLE]? PROFESSOR: Because that's really a property of integrals. T is not an operator in the usual sense of quantum mechanics or anything like that. It's an instruction. Whenever you have an exponential of this form, the time ordered exponential is this series that we've written down. So at this stage, this is a definition of what t on an exponential means. If we have operators in differential equations, do we still get unique [INAUDIBLE]? Yes, I think we do. I think that's a good question. Yes, it is. solutions? PROFESSOR: Yes, pretty much. Because at the end of the day, this is a first order matrix differential equation. So it's a collection of first order differential equations for every element of a matrix. It's pretty much the same as you have before. If you know the operator at any time, initial time, with the differential equation you know it at a little bit time later. So I think it's completely analogous. It'm just that it's harder to solve. Nothing else. function out of this. What really is happening is that you have learned how to calculate this operator given H. And therefore now you're able to evolve any wave function. So you have solved the dynamical system. If somebody tells you a time equals 0, your system is here, you can now calculate where it's going to be at the later time. So that's really all you have achieved. You now know the solution. If you know it at any time, you've solved problem. OK, so Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. picture. So basically the Heisenberg picture exists thanks to the existence of the Schrodinger picture. The motivation comes from expectation values. Suppose you have time dependent states, in fact, matrix elements. So you could ask what is the matrix element of A between these two states. So it all begins by considering a Schrodinging operator As hat, which is s is for Schrodingers. And the motivation comes out of expectation values, which are the same as the time dependent state alpha of t. two time dependent states, a matrix element. But the time dependence has already been found, say, in principle, if you know U dagger. And then you can speak about the time dependent matrix elements of the operator As or the matrix element of this time dependent operator between the time equals 0 states. This operator is sufficiently important that this operator is called the Heisenberg version of the operators s. Has time dependence, and it's defined by this equation. So whenever you have Schrodinger operator, whether it be time dependent or time independent, whatever the Schrodingers operator is, it has time dependence. I have now a definition of what I will call the Heisenberg operator. And it is obtained by acting with a unitary operator, U.S. And operators always act on operators from the left and from the right. If you have an operator that's on another from theRight only or from theLeft only, I think you have grounds to be suspicious that maybe you're not doing things right. And as you can imagine, there's a lot of things to be said about this operator. the Schrodinger operator? PROFESSOR: You have to speak louder. OK, comments. At t equals 0 A Heisenberg becomes identical to A Schrodingers. When t is equal to 0, U of t-- of 0 0 is the operator propagates no state, so it's equal to the identity. So if this is happening, the two Hamiltonians are identical. And we'll have the chance to check this today in a nice example. And this goes Hs of t1 and t2 commute with each other. U t 0 dagger 1 U t 0. But 1 doesn't matter. U dagger with U is 1. This is a 1 Schrodinger, and therefore it's the same operator. So the unit operator is the same. It just doesn't change whatsoever. OK, so that's good. But now this is something interesting also happens. If I try to figure out what is CH, I would put U dagger-- avoid all the letters. It's supposed to be t 0 Cs U. But that's equal U dagger As Bs U, which is equal to 1. equals 0. So you can use either form of this equation. The bottom one is one that you've already seen. The top one now looks almost obvious from the bottom one, but it really took quite a bit to get it. How about conserved operators? What are those things? A time independent As is set to be conserved if it commutes with a Schrodinger Hamiltonian. If As with Hs is 0, Ah with Hh is 0. And therefore by point 1, by 1, you have to dAh dt is equal. to 0. The Heisenberg operator is actually time independent. It just doesn't depend on time. So a Schrodinger operator, it's a funny operator. It doesn't have time in there. It has X's, P's, spins, and you don't know in general, if it's time independent in the sense of conserve of expectation values. But whenever As commutes with Hs, well, the expectation values don't change in time. But as you know, this d dt can be brought in, because the states are not time dependent. Solving for the time dependent Heisenberg operators is the same as finding the time evolution of all states. So you have this. And then you write Xh is equal to A cosine omega. t plus B sine omega t where A and B are some time independent operators. At time equals 0, the Heisenburg operators are identical they to the Schrodinger operators. So any expectation value of any power of X and P that you will want to find its time dependence, just put those Heisen Berg operators, and you will calculate things with states at time equals0. variables in, it just becomes identical to the Schrodinger Hamiltonian. All right, so that's all for today. I hope to see in office hours in the coming days. Be here Wednesday 12:30, maybe 12:25 would be better, and we'll see you then. [APPLAUSE] We'll be back at 12:50 on Wednesday, and be here at 1:30 on Thursday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from.