Sparta was the first state to be in command, or in control, or to be the leaders of a coalition of states. The Spartans gained a reputation of being--because they often fight against tyrants--they gain a reputation for being hostile to tyranny. The Spartan alliance most of the time was not clear how it came to exist, but perhaps the place to start is around 570C. The Peloponnesus suffered a defeat in the region of Arcadia to the north of Laconia in the seventh century. mentioning that that assembly--you want to distinguish that assembly from what I'll describe shortly about the Athenian Assembly. In this assembly, it is true that all adult male Spartans were participants, and let me also say that they came to the meeting dressed in their military uniform. When a question was put to the Spartans, the way they responded was by shouting and banging on their shields. Whereupon, the presiding official would try to determine which side had the loudest noise. It's like a voice vote in one of our own meetings, only a little bit more colorful. It looks as though the debates in the assembly were probably infrequent. Some scholars go far too far in suggesting that there never was a debate. There are debates reported to us in Thucydides, which make it perfectly clear that they did. But it is worth pointing out that there is no evidence that there was ever a debate at the assembly in the first century BC, as some scholars have suggested. It's possible that the gerousia and the kings, in other words, the upper groups in society, if they agreed there would be no need to go. The average Spartan did not ever speak in the assembly, it appears. So it's not a democratic assembly, even though every single citizen is there, if he wants to be. Let me turn now to the ephors. These, according to Spartan tradition, were invented somewhat late in the development of the Spartan constitution. Although we don't have a clear picture of the way in which they were chosen, it is clear that there's a strong element of chance involved in selecting who was going to be an ephor. might be an offer of an alliance or it might be an order to do something or else war would follow, or a negotiation for peace, any of those things, first they would come to the ephors, of which there were five. I would say, in most cases, they would, unless it was very, very serious, give some sort of answer to it. But when it involved something fundamental like war and peace or alliances, then they would have to go to the assembly to get their approval. about this accidental element in who becomes an ephor. All the Spartiates that there are, whether they are ordinary citizens, all the way up through king, are a small minority of all the people who are under the control of the Spartans. People try to guess from the evidence that we have what percentage of the entire population of the Peloponnesus the Spartans were. The number of Helots may have been something like seven Helots to every Spartan. Then you have to add to that the number of perioikoi who were also not Spartiates. It's a very important state for the Spartans, not just because it's the neighbor right to the north of them, but because remember what I told you, if you want to get to Mycenae from Sparta you can't go across those mountains. So, its strategic importance is very great. The Spartans got into this war with Tegea and they claimed to have discovered the bones of the great Homeric hero, Orestes and taken it away. Also, there was a legend that maybe they propagated that showed up in some poetry we have. connect these Dorian Spartans with the legends of the great men of the Achaean world described by Homer. King Cleomenes who was one of the aggressive Spartan rulers who expanded the power of Sparta, said on one occasion, "I am no Dorian, I am an Achaeans" It looks like as the Spartans begin to extend this league that I will be telling you about in a minute, they want to reduce the amount of resistance that they're going to get into. also take the island just off the southeastern edge of the Peloponnesus called Cythera, which gives them a good strategic base there as well. The character of the alliance, certainly in the full fledged history of the Spartan alliance--we can't be sure whether the words I'm going to speak to you now were all there in the original oath that the Spartans made their allies swear, but it was there by the end of the fifth century anyway. I think something like it, either was in the oath or was understood. Athens is located in the southeastern portion of the Greek peninsula. The city is Athens; the region in which they live is Attica. The people are Athenians and that's an important point I think I made too. Everybody who is a citizen who lives in Attica is an Athenian, no matter if he lives sixty five or seventy miles away from the city. He's still an Athensian. So the rich-born, because they are pretty much the same in the early days of the polis, run the state in this official way. in the early days to grow wheat and other grains, but more to the point, it was very good for olive trees and for grapevines. As we will see when the Athenians begin to exploit all of their land, not just the bottom land that works for grain, but also the less desirable land and produced wine and olive oil, that was a source of agricultural wealth that would play an important part in their history. They, unlike the other inhabitants of southern Greece, according to their story, never experienced a Dorian invasion. Now, the Dorians did come down and sort of bang at the door of Attica, but they were driven by the Athenian and never made their way into it. Greeks and they went to great lengths. One of their stories claims they were, as the Greek word goes autochthonous, that is, they were sprang from their own soil. They said they were in Attica before the creation of the moon. Guess you don't have to believe that, but on the other hand, it's their picture; we were always here, the original indigenous people. Their tradition, and this one is surely right, is that at an early time in their history, Attica became a refuge for people escaping what they would have regarded as the Dorian invasion. There's a tradition in Athens of an event called synoikismos. These exiles, we are told, were brought into the Athenian people and lived among them as Athenians. Similarly, there is nothing like the helot class in Athens. There are no serfs, there's no suppressed population waiting to get at their rulers, so that there's a kind of a historical good fortune, which says Athens is going to be without internal strife. I don't mean totally but to a great degree compared to the other Greek states. There is no set of local rebellions against the major city, no need to go to war. But in neighboring Boeotia, the chief city of Thebes, traditionally was at war trying to subdue the other major cities. Compare that to Sparta where it's obvious Sparta gained control of the Peloponnesus through war and that many of the people there were very unhappy with them, not to mention the Helots. It really, if you take the word apart, it means the bringing of households together. of Boeotia, in order to make themselves the boss and they never were fully successful in this. So, Boeotian is torn, to some degree, by this internal conflict, which makes it harder for Thebes to achieve the kind of power in its own home territory. Let's take a look at the earliest society of Athens as first we come to know it. The society we're talking about, this earliest society, is aristocratic. Aristocratic implies means ruled by the best, and best in that time means simply best by birth. and that means if you're going to be in the ruling group, in a dominant, aristocrat--the only way to get there is if your father was an aristocrat. Doesn't matter how rich you are, doesn't matter what a magnificent warrior you are. All that matters is birth and that is different from oligarchy which gives rule to a few but that usually means, I would say just about every case, that wealth plays a role. I don't mean that they didn't have aristocrats within an oligarchy, I'm sure that they did. as we see Athens move out of the aristocratic condition and into one that is more based on wealth, than it is merely on birth. Well, we are told that in the earliest times, Athens was divided up; the people of Athens were divided up into four tribes just as were all the other Ionian cities and the Athenians of course were Ionians. Most Ionians lived on the coast of Asia Minor or on the Islands of the Aegean. They sort of were an interesting middling group between the Dorians of the Peloponnesus and the Greeks of other types elsewhere. tribes contained, according to this tradition, three subdivisions that were called phratres. An easy way to translate phratmes is brotherhood. Notice it's again about family and birth. You are in phratre; you're in that phratrs, because so is your father and you inherit it, and these phr atres were very important. I should have mentioned that the tribes had important religious functions that also the army consisted of four regimens, one for each tribe. terms of the place where you sort of established your belonging. The phratres, because it was established by birth and tradition, was an aristocratic stronghold. Everywhere you can imagine, tribe, phratre, and so on, some aristocratic family or families would have had a leading role by tradition. The Greek religion is a very important part of the history of the city of Athens, and of Greece in general. It's a very interesting time to be an Athenian. did have priests, but it didn't have a separate priestly class and during the aristocratic period, and I would say probably throughout its history, Athenian religion had the priesthoods. The chief religious places in the state were held by aristocrats, which in a primitive society in itself, gives them tremendous prestige and a lot of clout. Probably, although I'm not sure we have hard evidence on this, probably the phratres fought side by side in the tribal regiments as well. chief jobs in religion, they were the government, because as early as we can tell that there was a regime after the legendary kings are gone. The number one governmental organization, you might call it, is the council of the Areopagus; gets its name from the place where it meets. We don't know enough to know whether it was all noblemen or just the leaders of the clans or whatever, but that's where decisions were made. It's important though to realize that in these early days of the polis they probably had very little power. Little to decide and very little to do. Most of the real life of the state in the earliest days would have been out in the countryside where the overwhelming majority of the people lived. These noblemen would typically have held a lot of land and have been well to do, have had all the powers I've described, and were looked up to and were listened to. They would have led the military units into battle when that was necessary. If there was a quarrel between a couple of guys, they would bring it to a court. There was nothing like a written law code until the seventh century. Before that, if you wanted to get justice you went to a nobleman. If you want to go beyond that, you go to the Areopagus, which is made of noblemen. That's the picture in the earliest polis as best we can reconstruct it. It was pretty clear that it was right to have the noblemen do it, not just because they're aristocrats but because they would know what the law was. early seventh century, the date he gives us, of course we shouldn't put too much credence in it, it's too precise, but it's 683 B.C. On that occasion, we are introduced to a new thing, magistrates are chosen from the aristocracy to do various jobs in the city. In Athens, the magistrates were called archons. It means, in the most technical sense, rulers but it means really important magistrates in the state. One of these was called the War archon, polemarch, presumably he led the army. Next came the archon who was actually the most important archon. they named the year after the leading archon, the leading magistrate of the state. Mesopotamian cities did the same thing. So that archon was called the archon eponymous, the one who gives his name to the state and was the most important. His responsibilities were mainly religious, but I should point out that all the archons, whatever else they did, every one of them also did justice, that is, they had courts to which people could come to get their quarrels settled. than a year. The only thing in town that has continuity, that can develop power and influence over a period of time, is the council of the Areopagus. Aristocracies love equality; equality among aristocrats, and then tremendous inequality between them and everybody else. Yalies are very nervous about anybody sticking his head up above the crowd, because the question is always why not me? You have high expectations of yourself and so sometimes unless you're invaded by later religious ideas that the Greeks didn't have, you's not humble, you're vying for honor. what we have, not a monarchy, but a republic. Dominated insofar as it's dominated by anybody but individual aristocrats, by the areopagus. At some point in the history of that institution it consists now of men who have been archon. The year after their archonship they automatically go into the areOPagus and remain areopagites for life. Well, that gives the counsel of theAreopagus even more power and influence, because they consist now, exclusively after awhile, of people who've been chosen for their individual qualities. begins to engage in commerce to a greater degree than before, and in ancient handcrafted manufacturing. It leads to new wealth and new class distinctions, which are now based not on birth but on wealth. We hear new terms, not all of them new, a couple of themnew that come into the picture. The Eupatridae, the well-born, that's the old story and they were really only two, those who were and those who weren't. Now we hear about people called hippeis, and it means horseman, cavalryman. Hippeis are people who are not necessarily aristocrats. They are the poor; they don't own land. They live at the mercy of chance; they work for other people. The new thing, people called zeugitai, means yoke fellows. These were men who were sufficiently well off that they could own a team of oxen, two oxen who were yoked together to pull the plow. That would make them respectably well off farmers. We are talking about people of the hoplite class. Another theory is that they were indeed named that, because they were hoplites. It hardly matters which of the stories you prefer or whether you choose both; we're talking about the same people. This new class of independent family farmer has arrived in Athens, and as in other states is not satisfied with his position in the state, as his own importance to the state becomes greater and greater. We will come back to this story when we talk about Solon, but think about these changes as happening, as the next change that I want to tell you about occurs. in the year 632, an Athenian nobleman who had married the daughter of a very wealthy and powerful tyrant in Megara, right next door to Attica. Cylon, attempted a coup d'état trying to establish a tyranny in Athens, just as his father-in-law had established one inMegara. Well, as the story goes, he tried his best to gain control of the city. But he couldn't, he was resisted by enough of his. opponents that he was defeated. The leader of the resistance was the family known as the Alcmaeonidae. They went up there, locked up Cylon and his supporters in the Acropolis, in a temple. You couldn't go into the temple for the purpose of killing somebody, that would be sacrilegious. Still if you're inside that temple and trying to avoid being killed, you still need food and drink. So, how could they manage it? Well, they took a cord, tied it to the temple, held onto the cord, and went down to the well and got their water. The Alcmaeonids were declared accursed and driven from the city. Later on we will hear they're back again and they're very important. But the curse continues to be attached to the family, and as we get to the last end of the last third of the fifth century and the Peloponnesian War is about to break out, the enemies of Pericles will pull out the curse of the AlcMAeonidae to use against him. For the moment, what we're talking about here I think is here's the first sign that we see of trouble in paradise. that there are the kinds of discontents that we have been talking about which find the leader in the form of a man who is an outstanding figure for some reason, who is willing to try to establish a tyranny. That it fails, I think, is an indication that the same forces haven't reached the power in Athens that they had reached in Megara, Corinth, Sicyon, and places like that. It's a warning about troubles ahead and I'll turn to those troubles in the next hour.