An independent set in a graph is a subset of vertices with no two adjacent. An important question in graph theory is given a graph, what can you say about the size of its independent sets? The following theorem, due to Caro-Wei, says that every graph G contains a large independent set. It contains an independent set of size at least the following quantity, summing over all v among vertices. For example, if the graph is this cycle on four vertices, an example of anindependent set would be two vertices like this. G, 1 over the degree of v plus 1. So let us prove this theorem first, and then we'll see an application and some ways to interpret this result. The proof of this theorem applies the probabilistic method. So we are given this graph G. And the first thing we'll do is order the vertices of G uniformly at random. So the edges are 1 to 2, 2 to 4, 3 to 4 and 1 to 3. What because one of them would appear before the other in the order, and that would violate the condition. I claim that I is always an independent set. It will be impossible to have two vertices in I that are adjacent to each other. But in more complicated graphs, it can pick up additional vertices. I would pick out is a set of vertices such that-- so let's see if each vertices would belong to I. The first vertex appears before all of its neighbors. So we put the first vertex in I. But the second vertices do not appear before one of their neighbors, 1, so we do not put it in I as well. And the third vertices here also does not appears before its neighbor. And we don't put them in I, either. that induces an I so there is some I with the size of I at least the quantity that we just produced. So that finishes the proof of the Caro-Wei theorem. Again, it says-- the way to think about this theorem is that if you are given a graph g such that typically one does not have large degrees, then it must contain a large independent set. By considering the complement of this graph G-- by considering the graph complement, we switch, flip the edge and non-edges. Turan's theorem is a foundational result in graph theory. It says that every n-vertex. graph G contains a clique on at least this many vertices. So here's the example. Let us take the n vertices and split them into equal parts. And there are r parts, so here in this illustration r equals to 3. And let's put in all the edges between parts, but no edge within a part. So this is called the complete r partite graph.