So, the first we learned rationality, rationality axioms - completeness, reflexivity and transitivity. And when our when someone’s preference exhibit these three properties, what does it mean that he is able to completely rank all his choices all his potential choices, with also possibility, with possibility that there are more than one bundle at some ranks this is a possibility. One thing also I should add that he will be able to rank only if he has finite consumption set and also what we have learned that this will translate into a utility function. consumption good, fine. Next we add I am not saying just continuity implies this, but continuity in addition to earlier three axioms that we have learned, continuity. And what do we get? What we get is continuous utility function and now we do not have to impose the restriction that our consumption set is the consumption set of this individual is finite. What else, what does it mean continuity? No, break indifference curve, can I say that, no break in the indifference curve would be continuous. non-satiation, but let us take example of your monotonicity, monotonicism, and what would it imply? In other words, let us say that is clear that, that is through definition, but it if we translate it into indifference map what we will get that the indifference curve has to be a downward-sloping curve. So, from here we learned that indifference curve have to be downward sloping. What else? Anything else themonotonicity would tell us? indifference curve has to be very thin, fine, it is clear. And now we have convexity plus conveXity. Let us say a person’s preference satisfies all the other axioms, and I draw let us say this is his indifference curve. Can I say it is bowed out? As opposed to this what you here, if convexy is not satisfied you get something like this. When we have satiation or in other words when we have bliss points. How would the indifference curve look like? Concentric circle around like this why I am talking about it good 2 and good 1. All the bundles here are preferred over the original two bundles, why because here at this point utility is increasing in this direction. So, it is convex. Convexity is satisfied, continuity is satisfied. rationality axioms are satisfied. What is not satisfied here is monotonicity or local non-satiation is satisfied everywhere except at this bliss point, is it clear? So, now, what we will do we will start talking about mathematical problems, optimization, and all.