RAFAEL JARAMILLO: Today we're going to discuss the many D's of thermodynamics. The D's indicate exact differentials, which is equal to infinitesimal changes in state variables. In materials thermodynamics, the most common transformations that we talk about are transformations that take place at constant pressure and constant temperature. So of the three D's-- lowercase d, lowercase Greek d, and uppercase Greek D-- this is the first one. Greek D is often the hardest for students to understand when you first encounter it. So we're going to take some time to draw out what is meant by transformations and transformation quantities. To illustrate the concept of transformation quantities, it helps to draw state function surfaces. For a given phase and composition, we can draw state functions of two-- that is, state function of two independent variables. So, for example, we could have the entropy of phase alpha drawn as a function of temperature and pressure. In thermodynamics, we have many different transformation quantities that we keep track of. In material science, our most common independent variables are pressure and temperature. But for any transformation quantity, you can at least imagine, if not draw out on a piece of paper, state function surfaces corresponding to the quantity that you're trying to measure, independent variables corresponding to. the variables you're regulating, and a vertical distance, which is the vertical distance between these two surfaces. So this is illustration for an isobaric, isothermal transformation, and we're illustrating this for entropy. is a function of those independent variables that measures the transformation quantity for the transformation between two different phases. For example, in the case of water, the quantity of water in the solution is the ratio of the water volume to the volume of the solution. For the example, the total water volume is the sum of the volumes of the solutions of the two phases. The total water content is the product of the proportions of the different water volumes. For more information, see the Wikipedia article on water.