Aluminum copper stainless steel cast iron and carbon steel aluminum pots and pans are the ubiquitous pans that you'll find in most every kitchen. copper is one of the best conductors of heat it heats and cools rapidly whenever necessary and it's fairly heavy weight. Additional cooking materials include things such as non-stick coatings like teflon terracotta which is used in cooking things like tangents glass such as corning ware enamel wear which is also used in things like crock pots. Stainless steel is the preferred cooking utensil for most kitchens it's heavy duty easy to clean surface typically clad which we'll discuss later resists pitting and metal reactions with acidic foods works with induction cooktops and holds its heat well if clad however it's much more expensive than the aluminum varieties cast iron has been preferred for many years it's very heavy duty if seasoned correctly it can also be non-stick it gives a unique flavor to foods and promotes browning better it holds onto its heat very efficiently but it's somewhat fragile. Carbon steel is heavy duty if seasoned correctly can be non-stick it'll provide a unique flavor to foods and promote browning better. It holds onto its heat very efficiently and is less fragile than cast iron and is relatively inexpensive. The cons may require seasoning or re-seasoning before use and just like cast iron you should never soak in water and follow the same cleaning instructions. Allcloud is an amalgam of several different metals cladware sometimes referred to as allcloud because of its brand name is using different layers. interchangeably in many ways but believe it or not though there is a difference between these two does it make a difference in your cooking if you use one instead of the other. A saute pan or satwa is one with the straight sides and has a larger surface area which makes it ideal for tasks like searing meat or reducing a pan sauce. A sawtooth or skillet has a slope side and is used mainly in sauteing the slope sides providing the ample and perfect angle for flipping your food. similar to a stockpot or dutch oven but not nearly as deep the pan has slight sides that are straight usually has two loop handles for easy carrying and nearly always comes with the lid generally it is made of stainless steel copper or combination of clad metals. Part of the rondo's allure is its versatility its shape lends itself well to searing brazing oven roasting frying poaching pan roasting and simmering or boiling this shape is deep enough to hold liquid for poaching or braising but shallow enough that it can evaporate. oven also make sure the pan is not too wide it should not be more than a couple of inches in diameter larger than your burner or it won't heat properly like stock pots or dutch ovens rondos come in a variety of sizes choose one that will accommodate the number of servings you usually prepare a six quart or seven quart version should be sufficient for preparing four to six servings a saucepot is a cooking utensil that is round and shaped with high straight sides and a longer handle equipped for a tighter fitting lid. There are various different kinds of specialty pans including crepe pans which are shallow and thin and flat and used to make a crepe using the method of smoothing out the batter across the bottom roasting pans are used for roasting meats and vegetables they're heavy duty and can accommodate multiple pieces in large quantities whole turkeys and whole cuts of meat can easily fit into these pans. paella pans are specialty pans from spain used to making a spanish dish called a paella this is a cooked rice dish usually with seafood and woks are used to cooking and chinese cooking and asian cooking and are typically designed for a much higher much faster heat process. Large stock pots are taller than they are wide and have a capacity of at least eight quarts with two strong grab handles. This pot is great when you need to feed a crowd or make large quantities of food like potatoes or corn on the cob. A small saucepan is really versatile you can use it for cooking smaller portions steaming or reheating when shopping for pots there are a few common features to look for in a set of pots and pans. You don't have to purchase the most expensive brands to have a good quality set that will last. to look for these are stainless steel pots with thick bottoms they allow for even heating without scorching or burning. In any good quality set of pots you want tight fitting lids the lid helps bring things to a boil much faster which saves both time and energy when buying pots and pans pay attention to the handle i prefer a metal handle that way the pan can go from the stove top right into the oven just be sure to use a pot holder when you take it out now for saute pans commonly called frying pans. pancakes in this smaller pan maybe two eggs again the metal handle is great for moving from the stovetop to the oven to cook omelets or frittatas you should also have a good sized roasting pan this will hold about two maple leaf primed chickens a pan this size is also good for a roast or a turkey so these are the basic pots and pans you need to get started in the kitchen there are a lot more you could add but the best rule of thumb is quality over quantity. Polycarbonate's trade name lexan or by the company trade name cambro consists of large food boxes. They come in round or rectangular designs ranging in size from 4 6 8 12 18 and 22 quarts and they often come with matching or size lids to accommodate them. They wash well by either hand or dishwashing and can stand up to years of usage. They also have drain pans that can be used in conjunction to prevent water from draining product such as when icic fish ingredient bins are used. Polycarbonate and stainless steel containers called hotel pans are designed to be used to store small amounts of ingredients on a refrigerated make table such as a sandwich station. Polycarbonate will not react with acids and foods like metal containers will and they will not get so cold as to damage the food. stainless steel will not reacts with most acid foods and are often used where the temperature needs to be kept very cold since metal is better conductor of cold than polycarbonate. They come in sizes ranging ranging.of different shapes and materials they are often on casters so they can move around. From full size hotel pans two-thirds pans half pans third pans fourth pans six pans and ninth pans and various other sizes each size is available in six six inch four inch and two inch deep models the name of the pan refers to how many of each would it take to equal a full size pan for example the nine it takes nine of the one-ninth pans or ninth pans to make one full-size hotel pan here you can see various different configurations depending on the usage needs many of the configurations require the use of a spanner bar to prevent the pans from falling in. notice that this two inch hotel pin will fit directly into this and it'll fit snugly. This is because you'll have water underneath in your four inch hotel pan that will be simmering. You do this by using sternos and these sternos will go in those little indents on the bottom and you'll fit this whole thing into a stand. You also have perforated hotel pans which are basically hotel pans with holes in them. These can be used as steamers you can use them to drain things in a steam steamer setup. no hole on the side that traps in steam and then you have a lid with a lid that will allow a spoon to stick out. You'll commonly see this on either buffet lines or like half brows any restaurant that is executing off of a steam table now we also have service pans also called mise en place pans. They come in the two inch four inch and six inch depth and so here we have a sixth pan because you can fit six into a hotel pan the same with the nine pans or ninth pan. Sip top bags are an indispensable storage device for kitchens. They allow the storage of dry goods and other small quantity items. They can be used in the freezer or refrigerator as easily as they can be in dry storage and they can even be used for sous-vide cooking. They come in a variety of different sizes but most common sizes are the full size and half size. The speed rack is essential for storage and movement within the restaurant. The ziploc can be left open wrapped with plastic for transportation and air protection or draped with a plastic bag. Not all cookie medals are identical cheap cookware often translates into cheaply made and burnt product. Specialty cooking surfaces allow for more versatility in the cooking process and different results. The right size storage bin is essential why store two quarts of stock in a 22 quart container it simply doesn't do the right job.specially designed shrouds are essential for the right size stock pot or pan to be used for the job. You should never use a rondo to simmer stock for a long time because evaporation will be more significant use a stockpot. it takes up too much room in your coolers and takeaway number six you can never have enough hotel pans no matter what size you have. This presentation will attempt to give an overview of the different small wares and pieces of equipment that you'll experience in a restaurant environment. It's not an exhaustive list for more information i suggest ktom.com which can be accessed at the link on the screen. For more information on the different types of hotel pans, visit hotelpans.com.