elizabeth the first is considered one of the greatest rulers in england's history if not the greatest for women. She never married can you blame her i mean look at what she grew up with around her dad and all of those moms and stepmoms she never had any kids which that causes a problem come her end time okay where we have i don't have an heir so she eventually does set on a cousin up in scotland which is the country on the same island of england but right above it uh james king james of scotlands she names him as the heir. okay so in referencing england in that area in those countries it's the united kingdom and that's because we have um uh the uh where we are here the stewards so we went from the family of tudors to theFamily of stewards. That's where we start with james and his son and and we'll talk more about that when we get to uh the next unit and so on the king james bible page 414 415. um i'm not as i told you i's not going to go through necessarily what it was about but there was some more example of parallel structure here towards the beginning. know how to read latin or french you were stuck by solely getting your material this is what the bible says solely from your clergy solely from the church so you were kind of a mindless robot with regards to comprehending the the word of god or whatever the bible said on your own. Now that something is in english and if you can read english you are able to read it over and over and make your own decisions. So you were less mindless page 414 is a really nice page that if you need to come back to review the significance of this or you can't remember um it's pretty good. widely read english book but the most widely read excuse me hold on for centuries. The bible was not just the most important or the most read but in english around the world. The highest distributed book in the world is the bible or you know some stat like that i i wonder if i could find that again or see if i's updated see if it's still if that stat is still legit but um because people are like oh man no the the da vinci codes the the biggest circulated book like the bible. the da vinci code is not the biggest circulated book in the world. i'm like i i can't speak to don quixote so um that's something i might just have to look up because that's interesting to me. oh no you know don Quixote or something i'm just like i don't know what that is. that's an interesting thing to think about. i may have to do some research on that. i might have to find out more about it.