"Unlockable" is ambiguous. It can mean either it's possible to unlock it, or it is not possible to lock it. So it can be a desirable property of a lock or not. I have this desire to put an extra oomph on "un-" -- an extra little demi-stress beat on "Un-" if I mean the thing on the right. I want to pronounce it a little differently depending on which of those things I say. "It's unlockable," means it cannot be locked. in the following way. To say that something is singable is to say that it's possible to sing it, right? That's what that means. So there's a "-able" suffix that changes verbs into adjectives. And then, we said, there are two "un-"s. There's an "un-" that combines with verbs and makes verbs. That's something like undo the effects of, or change something so that it is no longer in the state that it would have been if the verb had applied to it. "untie" means "take something and do things to it such that it is no longer in the state it is standardly in after you have tied it" There's an "un-" that applies to verbs, and has a reversitive meaning. "Un-" number two combines with adjectives and makes adjectives that mean more or less "not (adjective)." So "unkind," or "unfamiliar," "Unfortunate" These all mean not the adjective, whatever it is. horrible thought, and it's random. If I untie a shoelace, first of all, it has to start off tied, is that right? So if I have a Shoelace which is not tied, I can't untie it. But if it's tied and then I take scissors and I cut it into many small pieces, have I untied it? No, surely not. When Alexander cut the Gordian knot, he wasn't untying it. could imagine that it would, but that's not what it means. Joseph, did you have a-- AUDIENCE: Yeah, I was going to-- based on what Raquel said, does the final-- after you "un-" something, is that going to be able to be redone? So if I untie a shoelace by cutting it up, now-- NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. It can't be tied again. Well, let's see. If you undo an operation on a computer, does it have to be possible to do the operation again? "Unlockable" is ambiguous because there are two "un-"s. "Un-" can combine with either a verb or an adjective. " unlockable" consists of three morphemes, a prefix, a stem, and a suffix. It's not a complete description of what's happened either, but it is also those trees, or those trees represent something, namely the order in which you did things. "John walked up the stairs," "Mary looked up the stairwell," "John" and "Mary" are sentences. can go after the "-able," and so we get this ambiguity. And the ambiguity is what we would expect it to be. Go ask some people whose minds have not been contaminated by linguistics. Go harass your roommates or whoever. You'll make yourself popular that way. And if you are going to try to learn from me how to make himself popular, then boy, are you in the wrong class. OK, is this all clear? So the important part of the story is to say, yeah, "unlockable" you last time was, effectively what we're going to want to say is, there was an operation that created the substring "up the stairs" in that first sentence. That's what we call a constituent. And there is no similar operation creating a substring 'up the reference' in the second one. And again, this is review, but it's review from the first day. What I convinced you, I think, I hope, I tried, was that there are various syntactic phenomena, various things you get to do with sentences. It's a strange way to ask the question, but you can say it. As opposed to, "Up which reference did Mary look?" which is gibberish. So we're going to draw a distinction. This is maybe the first time that I've shown you a case where syntacticians have to care passionately about the difference between one sentence and another. There's a fair amount of great syntax that's built on those kinds of distinctions. The point is, just as with "unlockable," Theory of syntax would divide sentences into three kinds. There are sentences that you've heard a zillion times before, like "We're going to class" And on the other hand, sentences you have possibly never heard anyone say, but that are fine. So if I say, "My anteater is hula dancing," you may never in your life have heardAnyone say that. Maybe you have. Some of you may have had more exciting lives than I have. But it's an OK sentence. This three-way distinction is worth highlighting, because if I had only given you the first sentence and the second sentence, "We're going to class," you might be thinking, well, that first sentence, it's a sentence I've heard lots of times before. But the existence of the second class of sentences shows that that's hopeless. So you're not just remembering things you've heard people say when you're deciding which things deserve the black star and which things don't. I guess that makes a little more sense. You're not just categorizing sentences into sentences you've heard before and sentences you haven't. You've got this intuition about which sentences are acceptable. We're going to try to figure out what that is. But I'm giving you these three sentences to slay a hypothesis that you might be entertaining. Stop entertaining that hypothesis. Make it go home. It's not a good hypothesis. It won't do you any good. Is that clear? Are people clear on the hypothesis that I'm attempting to slay? Yeah? There's a fairly stupid hypothesis, which says, all you're doing is remembering things people have said, and that's what distinguishes grammatical sentences from interpretable sentences. That's false. You can take a sentence you've never heard before and accept it. We're going to have to be explicit about which subparts count and what exactly we mean when we say that. But you're right, there could be a better version of that hypothesis. Good point. Other questions? Did I successfully answer your question? Yeah. a living? How I answer depends on whether I feel like talking to the person or not. If I would like to get them to leave me alone so that I can read a book or whatever, I tell them I'm a theoretical syntactician. That usually ends the conversation fairly quickly. But when it doesn't, when they say, "Oh, what's that mean? What do you work on?" Then I will say, well, I'm trying to figure out why some sentences are grammatical and others aren't. what does that mean?" "We're class going to." Maybe that's what's wrong with it. It doesn't mean anything. But the problem is we're capable of distinguishing grammaticality. So this is a famous example of Noam Chomsky's. In fact, I think if you look him up in like Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, you'll find this first sentence, "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously." He actually offered that sentence as a part of a pair of sentences. "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously" is meaningless if you don't mess with the meanings of the sentences. If the words meant something else, the sentence would be fine. "furiously" is an adverb and it's trying to modify "sleep" When I say it's meaningless, what I mean is you can't sleep furiously, he says. "I wonder if it just has to do with the idea [INAUDIBLE].. NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. then there's a verb, and then there's an adverb. "Big green monsters snore loudly" that would be fine. "Oh, what's wrong with 'We're class going to' is that it's a meaningless sentence" If I'm really, really desperately trying to end the conversation, I bring out these kinds of pairs. So it's not about meaning. We have this intuition that there are sentences that are OK and sentences that're bad. It's separable from our intuition about what means something and what doesn't. that certain types of words are categories that you can add more words to. And like, "This house is very [blope?]" That's grammatical, even if you don't know what it means, or you can't make that. We were talking about open class and closed class morphemes. So Jabberwocky is a poem that you could write, changing all the lexical items to nonsense words, but you couldn't do that with functional items. Yeah, that's right. right? And things can't be both colorless and green. And if they could, well, ideas couldn't have those things. They're abstract, right? That's the sense in which this is a meaningless sentence. I think you're raising the point, which is a good point, yeah, it's meaningless, but the words in it are fitting together the way they should. The adjectives are going where adjectives go. They go before the noun, that's what they're supposed to do. And in the second sentence, they're not doing that. are sentences that are meaningful, but ungrammatical. It's clear what "I put on it" would mean, but there are facts about how English pronouns work and how English particles work that mean that you don't get to say that. The only point of these few slides has been it's possible to study syntax independently of meaning, where by independently, it's not a meaning thing. It is something about how these parts get to combine. You want to try to understand that. I just mean the facts of syntax don't just reduce to facts about meaning. That's what I've been trying to show you. Here's another thing you might think about what's wrong with "We're class going to." It ends in a preposition. Where any of you taught in school you must not end sentences with prepositions? Some of you were-- AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. I was beaten by English teachers for ending a sentence. In many languages, including Latin, you have to say, "About what are you talking?" In English, you always bring it along with the question word to the beginning of the sentence. "Who" is supposed to be the direct object of "you are talking to" this person, so it's like, "to whom are youtalking"? "To whom areyou talking?" sounds fancy and snobbish, but still right, according to the linguist, who says it's not his go-to way to say this. your English teacher? Yes? AUDIENCE: Is this another example because that's how it's done in Latin? NORVIN RICHARDS: Yes. Yes. Your English teacher told you to do that because Latin, actually, among many other languages, doesn't allow you toDo this. You have to do this. English is quite rare in being able to doing this. Most of the languages of the world can't. Some time in the 15th, 16th century, a number of grammarians decided that English would be way cooler if it were more like Latin, and so they began declaring that it was. like that. There should be a stranded preposition, a preposition at the end of the sentence. So yeah, no reason English has to be like Latin. Or like I say, a zillion other languages. Most of the languages of Europe, French, or German, or Italian, or whatever, you can't leave prepositions at the ends of sentences. None of those kids would ever do that. But in English, we can. We should be proud of that. grammar. So what we are doing in this class is trying to figure out what people actually say, what the rules are for putting sentences together in English. We're not going to talk about that stuff, except to mock it the way I did just now. So prescriptive grammar is the study of rules that your teachers might have taught you in school about how to speak. Some of which, just to stop mocking it for a second, your teachers may have tried to tell you things that would genuinely improve the quality of your writing. that were valuable. But they also taught you some things that became popular around the 15th, 16th century because people thought that English would be better if it were more like Latin. So we're not going to try to improve your writing in this class, except insofar as the writing advisors can do that. So this is going to be a study of descriptive grammar and not prescriptive. Yeah? AUDIENCE: So for that second sentence on the board, "What are you talking about?" NORVIN RICHARDS: Oh, this one? Yeah? other people have this intuition, that "About what are you talking?" is worse than "To whom are youtalking?" I have that feeling, too, I think. There are examples that are really quite bad. And other examples which get better. So things like "We left despite her warnings." And then consider two kinds of questions you could ask about that. "What did you leave despite?" And "Despite what did you left?" Is either of those acceptable at all? Who prefers "What Did You Leave?" and "Despite What did you Leave?" a fruitful area of research here. English is happy to leave prepositions at the ends of sentences. But in which cases is it happy to do the Latin thing? And in some cases, it's happier than others. Another distinction to make. So we've drawn this distinction now between meaningless on the one hand and ungrammatical on the other. That sentence can be both meaningless and un grammatical, but it can also be meaningless and grammatical. We've drawn a distinction between prescriptive and descriptive statements. here's another useful distinction. It's sometimes called competence versus performance. Imagine that I'm standing up here talking to you and I say, "This is the--" and then I Inhale a fly. And then imagine that this experience is so traumatizing for me and also for the fly, that I just I never complete that sentence. That's the sentence that we could have to me having uttered that sentence, and that's the attitude that we can have to each other. I uttered. "This is the cough, ugh, puh." That's something I said. And I'm a native speaker of English. So there are two kinds of things we could say. One would be to say, we're developing a theory of all of the kinds of sentences that Native English speakers can say. And that was one. And so we want a theory that allows that to be a sentence of English, and that's one kind of thing we couldsay. "This is the cough, hack, splutter" is not going to be one of the sentences we're going to try to get. Flies, sudden heart attacks, and then other kinds of things that are maybe less clear to think what to say about them. What about if I forget what I was going to say in the middle of a sentence. I know that's hard to imagine, but imagine that I did something like that. I'm in themiddle of a sentences, and I'm talking, andthen I just forget where I am. was going, and-- where was I going with that? Who knows. So what we're going to have-- so this is a different approach, and it's the one that you might imagine I'm recommending. What we'regoing to have is the idea that we's going to develop a theory of what English speakers say, but we're Going to imagine the kind of English speaker who never inhales flies, and never forgets what they were going to say, and only speaks in completely grammatical sentences. Journalists know that the best way to make someone look like a complete idiot is to quote them accurately. What journalists, in fact, do is to clean up all that stuff so that people sounded like they were talking in complete sentences. So we're going to develop a theory of what English speakers say, but it's going to be a theory that's divorced from reality to a certain extent. We're Going to Imagine what English Speakers Say is going to look like to you and me. people would be like if there were no distractions, and no flies, and. no sudden homicides, no falling asleep in the middle of your sentences, all of that stuff. So the distinction here is competence versus performance. We're imagining a speaker who's kind of like a frictionless plane, that there are various kinds of complications, and there's no air resistance or whatever else. That's the study of what people actually do. And we want to study that, sure, but we're going to develop a theory of competence on the theory that it'll be simpler. There is no bound on the length of English sentences. For any sentence in English, it's always possible to create a longer sentence. You can always say, "She thinks that S," where she maybe refers to different people in every clause. When we say it that way, you can tell that I am talking about competence because no matter how long you say it, it can keep going arbitrarily long. It's a possible sentence of English. "Mary thinks that John thinks that it's raining" is a possible English sentence. many recordings of English speakers you go through, you will never find an infinitely long sentence. Nobody actually says these things. But the reason nobody says an endlessly long sentence, the idea is going to be, it's a fact about life. And we don't care about life in this class. We're not going to try to find out what's the longest sentence anybody ever uttered and try to get that fact to be a fact that we want our grammar of English, our theory of the possible sentences of English to be. begin doing some syntax? Here's the sentence, "I will find the red book." grammatical sentence. It's clear what it means, although we've just said it doesn't matter whether it means anything. I said early on we're going to want to have a way of saying which parts of this sentence were put together as units, like with "unlockable" We wanted to be able to say "unLockable" is ambiguous because it can consist of a unit "unlocked" to which you've added "-able" will find the red book" for example, we'll see that syntax treats that string, "The red book," as a unit. It's OK to take a substring like that and put it together with another similar substring conjoined with the word "and" so you can say things like, "I will find thered book and the blue pencils" But "find the red I will book, leave the blue I will pencils." No. Can't do this with just any random three-word string. saying before about things you can say if you're astonished. You can say "the red book" as, basically, a sentence under the right circumstances. So I can rearrange the words of the sentence in a way such that there is a word, "is" before that string "thered book" It puts a special kind of emphasis on " the red book." It's called clefting. Contrast that with-- so this is not just a test. Yeah, this is atest. Yeah? AUDIENCE: What color do I need to find? NORVIN RICHARDS: "Find the red" Really? Oh, I see. You mean "What color book do Ineed to find?" RICHARD: "The red book" Yes. But yeah, I take your point about-- to the extent that you can use "the red" But if I tell you that I will find the red book and you're amazed, you're not going to say, "FindThe red?" I think. "Find the red" is an acceptable answer to a question that you're finding this-- suppose you have this fictional-- this children's game where there's a bunch of little tiles. So we have some cases where we have things that you certainly-- should be adjectives, that either we're getting to use them as nouns, or we're using them as adjectives. It's kind of the same thing-- "land of the free," "home of the brave," NORVIN RICHARDS: Oh. as with "unlockable" we were taking pairs of things and putting them together to form larger things, larger units. We'll do the same thing here, only with words. And similarly here, what we're going to do to create a sentence like "I will find the red book," we'll start with just the end of it. And then we'll take that unit that we've created by putting together "red" and "book" and we'll put that together with this word, "the" a unit that we created in the course of putting things together in pairs that is just "the red book" it's the unit that I've circled there. Do people see that in this tree? So there's a node in the tree, if you want. It's the one that I circled in red that consists just of the words "thered book" But there is no thing that I could circle that would consist just of "find the red" There are other things I couldcircle. the fact that it contains a noun. So when we put together "red" and "book," what we get has properties that are determined by the fact that they contain a noun, if there were no noun, it wouldn't have those properties. Similarly, with "the red book," the things that can go in that slot, there are various kinds ofThings that can be larger or smaller. What they all contain is a noun; we're going to name that thing after those kinds of units. We'll give it the label "noun" Kind of like when we added "un-" to "lock" and got "unlock" is that it contains a noun. "Find the red book" we're going to give that the label verb, because having a verb is the important part for that. "In the garage" is a unit, it's a constituent. It's the kind of thing syntax gets to care about. And again, if I say, "I will find the book in the garage," and you're amazed, you can say "in the garage?" It's a prepositional phrase. just contain a preposition, like, "I will look up," where, again, you can say, "Up?" (Why will you look up?) "I said I would look up, and up I will look"-- Maybe. Adverb is a funny word because there are a lot of things that can be used. If by adverb, we mean thing that modifies the verb, there are many ways to use it. It can also be used to describe prepositional phrases, like "I'll leave in a chariot" "the day after tomorrow" sure looks like a noun phrase. It's got a noun in it, "day," and then "the" before that, but we know that can go at the beginnings of noun phrases. So there are probably-- so the word "adverb" can be used to cover a bunch of things, including things that we don't have any other word for. And so I think you might be right that this is an adverb in the sense that it modifies the verb. my goal in discussions. There are a bunch of things that look like prepositions that combine in an interesting way with verbs in English and a lot of other Germanic languages. And "wake up" is one of those. And this is actually the actually the topic of a new book, "The Power of Prepositions," by Neil Richards. The book, published by Simon & Schuster, is based on a book of the same name, and is available in paperback and e-book. kind of example that I was exploiting in the first slides I was showing you about syntax. Notice, for example, that if I say I will wake up the cats and you're astonished as you might well be, you can't say "Up the cats?" You cannot say, "I will walk the stairs up," I think. So "up the cats" is not a prepositional phrase. We need different structures for these verb phrases, and we will develop them. I was a way, waking the cats up, it's a little bit like painting the cats red. don't want to think of "up the cats" as a unit that has the cats as an object. Relatedly, "I will wake up the cat" is OK. "Are you up for lunch?" or " are you down for lunch? They mean the same thing. And so we are learning-- this is why I'm glad I'm not a physicist, yes. If I were a physicist,. then if NASA were to hire me, the spacecraft would have all kinds of problems. You can't say, "I will walk up the student to her room," can you? NORVIN RICHARDS: No. That implies you're walking on the student, which is not the case. For "walk up them" we want "up" and "them" to combine to be a propositional phrase. For these other two, we want something else. We're going to want to circle around and try to find out what that other thing is. Do you have a suggestion? Share it with us at CNN iReport. modifying "to her room." We want there to be a constituent "up to her room" Notice that if I say, "I will walk her up to her. room" and you're amazed, you can say "Up to. her room?" which suggests that that's a constituent. So it's kind of like, I don't know, an adjective, in some sense, is describing [? state. ?] But at the same time, it's not an adjective. It's describing a verb. "I will paint the cats red" "I will walk her up to her room" "You can also wake the cats." "You shouldn't, but you can. You shouldn't," "you shouldn't" "That was a very nice example. Did you have a question a while ago? No. Joseph?" "Yes. I think that that does fit" "Yes, you can." "Yes," "Yes." "No. I don't think [? so. ?] her room. I will-- but similarly, you can walk the student-- so I keep going to the student from her, because there's a difference between pronouns and non-pronouns. You can't walk up the student, unless the student is lying down and you're walking on her. But if you mean you're going to walk with the student so that the two of you are up, so we want "walk the student" up to be different from "wake the cats up" also different from "walk up the stairs." Yeah, it's a third kind of thing, which, as we work further on this, I'm glad that we're running out of time because it means that I have a week to create slides about this. But we're going to want different structures for this. So we've got now three kinds of examples to talk about. There's "wake them up," there's "walk her up," and there's 'walk up them' Just like you can walk up to your room, you can climb a ladder. The ladder isn't the stairs. And similarly, to the extent that you can say "He's walking the stairs," which I think you can sort of say, it means he's on the stairs, walking. I think that's what you're doing there. I hate to do it, but I want to ruthlessly squelch everything else you guys want to say. And then maybe we can unsquelch you and come back. up with a structure like that. Notice that if I say, "I will find the book in the garage," it's OK. That's a unit that topicalization gets to make reference to. So our tests get to tease this out now. Now I'm regretting us being almost out of time because there are many things to say. What we're going to see next is that when we go to the next level, we'll be able to combine things in a different way. construct syntactic trees for strings of words. It's often the case that we get ambiguities like the "unlockable" ambiguity. There is more than one way to combine things. And what we'll do is develop tests that allow us to see which way we've combined words in different ways. And we'll find cases where, depending on in what order you combine things, you get different meanings, and our tests will combine with that. All right. We will do this again on Tuesday.