CNN's John Defterios takes a look at the U.S. government's fiscal policy. He looks at three different views of fiscal policy and how well it works. Defterio: We have expansionary and we had contractionary and in our expansion area fiscal policy we saw that taxes were going down or government spending was increasing. With our contractionary fiscal policy it was the exact opposite here we had taxes increasing or spending decreasing such that if you had a deficit it was getting smaller or ifyou had a surplus it was growing larger. it doesn't work so let's kind of look at them in the atas model right we have this Keynesian view. We have our kind of a classical view and we have our what would be called supply-side view. There's more views than that obviously but we're just gonna look at these these three stir them the three main ones. We're at some full employment level of output YF and here we are initially we're in some recession right we're at output level say y1 and some price level just call it P l1. YF price level equals po2 car cane says though hey this could take a long time and he's famous for saying in the long run we're all dead meaning yeah eventually everything is gonna work out but why wait for that why not go ahead and fix it now. He says let's just change aggregate demand to go to point a because there's no difference between point a and Point C anyway other than the fact that the price levels higher takes more green. cane says well if you're in this type of situation what we can use is we'll go out and we'll borrow money. We'll make aggregate demand increase right. right because we see here at y2 employment is greater than the natural rate of employment the unemployment rate is lower than a natural rates of unemployment. Over time almost workers have to compete with themselves to get workers how do they do that raise wages right nominal wages are increasing. Eventually this short-run aggregate supply curve is going to decrease to this guy and so we'll have some price level for because here we are at say price level five or whatever we know that we're going to return to this full employment level of output. aggregate demand decrease and so what we get is we get aggregate demand doing something like this. Keynes says we can change aggregate demand in such a way that we can make. We can make that guy be exactly where we want him to be. We don't have to guess we can know we can. know we don't need to touch my tie anymore and remember Keynes says don't let me touchMy tie anymore. Keynes: We can't wait for nominal prices to increase why not just engage in some contractionary fiscal policy. exactly right with that Marg propensity to consume and thatMarg propensity to import and knowing all of that lets us know the multiplier and we know how large autonomous expenditures are and all that stuff. We can essentially just it's just an Excel spreadsheet you just plug in the number that you want for these changes and taxes or these changes in government spending now you've got a political problem here which is that once you actually start spending money it becomes difficult to take money away once you start giving people something taking out money away now becomes very very difficult. change the demand for loanable funds so you have this market right if you're gonna have the government go out and borrow money they're going to borrow the money. There's a market out there for people borrowing and lending the money and that can be for us savings bonds. When you guys put money into your savings account your parents put money aside for college. They're the suppliers you guys are borrowing money to go to school and you're now demanders you're the ones taking money out. bond to your kid all right not twenty-five dollars or fifty bucks or a hundred bucks or whatever that they gave to the government back in 1997 when you guys were born. Money that could have gone to something else right it could have been used and somebody else could have borrowed the money. So you have this change in the demand for loanable funds all right so here would be demand of both private and public and we get something up here we get this and just right up here queue to get this interest rate here. yeah it's less than q1 it's a way over here I'll call this guy q0 here's your public here're your private so you see that private investment private borrowing goes down. interest rates went from i1 to i2 so let's think about what this guy's says because here's the total borrowing that was occur used to have total private borrowing of this now we have let's see we'veGot public borrowing here we've got private borrowing here in essence what this increase in the interest rate does is it makes consumption go down and it makes investment go down. get over here we wanted to get the YF right and we said oh look we can just easily program the number into the our Excel spreadsheet and so exactly how much to increase government spending. We're just gonna change it by this much so here's this increase of G but if that increase in G changes interest rates and causes these guys to go down the guy doesn't become this guy what does he do he doesn't shift to this guy he's down alright because Gees gone up but consumption or investment I've also come down. plus G Plus XM right this guy's going up alright this is what the aggregate expenditures war is all about. Shortland implication is is that you can't just plug in the number from here and get to where you want to be. The change in interest rates causes consumption and investment to come back down so we don't see it going out here 282 we actually see them coming here to say 83 right he doesn't quite get us there all the way that's the short-run implication. if this guy's going down what does that mean for the long-run do what well of investments decreasing what else is decreasing investment goes down. We don't build the factory your interest rates are too high I'm not building a factory in 2017. The factory doesn't exist right. The quantity and quality of resources and the level of technology are what determines this guy right so here's our guy in 2017 and it had we built the factory out here in 2025 the guy's gonna be out here. red not the guy in blue because this decrease in investment made you say I'm not going to the increase in the interest rate made investment go down. If investments going down the quantity and quality of our resources are smaller. The capital stock is smaller the future output will be smaller. You will have less stuff in the future and here's what's really interesting how are people going to know that here they are on the red line and they could have been at the blue line you see what I'm saying because we'll be like they won't even know that it's there. this here we are in 2025 are on the red line but we could have been on the blue line but people won't even know it. People argue okay a you got this crowding out effect you're not even going to get all the a change and output that you want to anyway. Even if you could all that you're doing is sacrificing future output for today. You're just making people invest less today you're making the economy worse in the future. The new classical view or the classical view kind of says that people are rational so here's our long-run aggregate supply curve. F and basically this guy says look we know eventually the short-run aggregate supply curve will increase and we go to the full employment level of output if you guys engage in this type of policy over here. The deficit today means that at some point in time in the future you're going to have to increase taxes so you can kind of think of it as the budget deficit over two different time periods. In fact thanks to interest it won't be 20 that you have to borrow or in raise taxes for it'll actually be like say 30 all right. opposite they're going to have to raise taxes and cut expenditures so even though the aggregate demand curve could in theory do this if people know that this is going to occur they're gonna save back for the higher taxes. The alternative way to think of it is this and this is especially true if it's a closed economy if you're not borrowing the money from outsiders from foreigners if were the government if we're the economy and I'm the government and I say you guys aren't spending enough money lend me money to spend. you're spending a thousand or you can spend anything I'm spending a hundred all right that's the way it currently is right now and then I say to myself you guys aren't spending enough money we need to spend more right. So I'm gonna borrow from you you guys lend me two hundred so now I can spend three hundred but you guys now have two hundred less so now you're spending eight 1,100 1, 100 right G is going up hey I'm going to borrow money and I'm  gonna spend it this guy's going up but where am I gonna get the money from to borrow fromYou? The new classical view says essentially fiscal policy doesn't make any sense it's worthless it's not gonna work in a long run. The third view is the supply side view. The supply side of you looks at this and says look here's tax revenue. If we have a tax rate that's equal to zero how much tax revenue will we collect zero? And if we have an tax rate equal to 100 percent howmuch tax will we get? And so on and so on. That's the classical view. And that's the third view. revenue will we collect how many guys are going to work later today okay what's what's your name again Paige okay what do you do again okay. So here the supply-side view this is called the Laffer curve. It's not what you spend it's what you tax and it's not even necessarily the amount that you tax it's the marginal tax rates that are important. If tax rates are 20% if the government takes 20% of my pay they are in essence taking all of my. labor every Monday right Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday 20 40 60 80 100 % I don't teach on Saturdays all right and so if they're taking 20% it's like every single Monday that I come to work I'm essentially not doing anything. I do all the day's work I deal with all the emails I deal. with all of the kids IDeal with all. of the crap from Memphis you would deal with. everybody else and I got nothing for it it all went to somebody else right. If you keep them low enough people have the incentive to save and invest right because in essence the taxes. are a form of taking their taking your labor they're taking your time and giving it to somebody else so their idea is that here we are at this full employment level of output say YF and here you are some price levels say PL one the only fiscal policy that's important is this guy these marginal tax rates it's that guy that'simportant. If you keep these guys are low enough and like I said we don't know what that number is they have no idea people have an incentive to save and invest in work. term low in parentheses because it doesn't necessarily mean that it's like 12% it just means that it'm lower than this guy right here whatever this number is as opposed to here would be our PPC curve and say 2025 with the high marginal tax rates right in essence people wouldn't work and save and invest as much because it wouldn't be worth it. They're taking more of a long-term view of things rather than a short- term view the fiscal policy in the short term. run doesn't really matter it's the long run stuff that matters is their view and there's some evidence that people respond to these incentives right. If you think about it like this think about like this somebody makes somebody who's on welfare they're getting a check % thousand dollars and you say that's bad we don't want you doing that go get a job and so they go and they get a jobs and that job pays some amount whatever that number is like ten thousand dollars or it earns nine thousand nine hundred and ninety nine dollars. their real income they went down right because here it was they had nine thousand nine hundred ninety nine dollars in wages they had a thousand dollars and say food stamps could be anything right so here they have actually ten thousand nine nine nine they go out and they earn two more bucks to go above ten thousand this guy falls to zero. They're actually facing marginal tax rates that are above a hundred percent to see what I'm saying they take not only the dollar that you were earned in welfare not only do you lose that but you also now have to pay taxes. doesn't make any sense I'm not gonna do that I'm gonna goof off. I don't want it because they're facing a marginal tax rate that's really really high so which view is Keynesian new classical supply? I'll write the paper and win the Nobel Prize and I can go to Sweden and get the nice little bitty gold medallion that I couldn't wear around my neck for the rest of life at such a such recession. alright this is the end of test three material I will.