Professor: In almost all cases when you address atoms, you do two photon courses because a photon is scattered. You may think it's absorbed and emitted, but in reality, it is a two photon process. If you have any doubts about some subtleties about how is light absorbed and emits, the correct answer is always obtained from the two-photon picture. The lecture is part of MIT OpenCourseWare, a free online educational resource. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu. And it is exactly the same perturbation theory we've used before. It's just-- there's one difference. Namely, we have two optical fields at frequency omega 1 and omega 2. So for the case of two-photon absorption, that means both photons are used or stacked up to go up in energy. We derived this result, and this was the end of lecture last week. And what we obtained in perturbative theory for the excited state, it's the same structure you have seen before. many terms do you get if you write down the Hamiltonian? No approximation without. How many do youget? AUDIENCE: Four. PROFESSOR: You have a plus dega for the electric field, sigma plus plus sigma minus for the atom. And then you have four combinations, two are co-rotating,. two are counter-rotting. OK. What we are doing here is second order perturbation theory with two optical fields. If you would not do any rotating wave approximation, how many terms would we get? if we don't make an approximation, we get 64 terms. But they're just all combinations, all combinations of frequencies. I said I'm only interested in the near-resonant terms. And then when we say we want to go up in energy in two steps, we absorb two photos. We don't have any emission of photons. These are all the counter-rotating terms. You have only the absorption of photons, and then we have four possibilities. Yes, I mean, you have a term where two photons are emitted from the ground state. just tell you what is special about two photons. I focus now on a situation, and that's the most common situation in the laboratory. There is a near-resonant intermediate state and that is sort of now filtering out one of the terms. If this intermediate state is resonant with omega 1, then we only want to consider now the process where the first step to the intermediate step is driven by the field e1. So therefore, we have only one term, which dominates out of those four, or dominatesOut of those 64, which we would have gotten without any approximation. lowest order perturbation, second order perturbedation theory, in two steps. But if you're asking, what is the transition probability? The transition probability, we have to get the probability to be in the excited state. And when we divide the probability, the amplitude squared by t, we get a rate. And this is Fermi's Golden Rule. It is exactly the same you have seen probably more than 100 times. But then-- and this is the only difference. signal photon-- the relevant matrix element is, because we have two steps, is the product of two matrix elements squared for step one and for step two. Because we have an intermediate step, we have to divide by the energy mismatch by the detuning in the intermediate state. But remember, in the one photon picture, Fermi's Golden Rule is the Matrix elements squared times the spectral function. So in this matrix element squared in frequency units, neglecting factors of 2, was the Rabi frequency. So therefore, very naturally, we want to define this as a two-photon Rabi Frequency. We've just cleverly defined our quantities. The rate to go from a to b is Rabi frequency squared, but it is the two photon Rabi frequencies. So therefore, our result looks almost indistinguishable from the result built on single photons. So in other words, if you were interested just in the physics of two levels-- Rabi oscillation, you name it-- you can just say the same thing happens. The only difference is that instead of having a coupling, we have stacked up the two photons. directly by a matrix element, we are now coupled by this two photon Rabi frequency. And all your equation, you know, everything-- you can consider line shape, spontaneous emission, saturation-- all the phenomena we have discussed for single photon are analogous. You just have to use the density of state calculated for the two photons. OK. So I started out by telling you about two photon processes, two photon absorption. But what is maybe even more important in the way how it is used in experiments are Raman processes. the atom-- the same hyperfine state-- but with two different momenta. Then it is a Raman process only in the external degree of freedom, in the motion away function. The only change is you change the momentum. We need our intermediate state, which is often an electronically excited state. We are detuned. And now we have one photon going up and one photonGoing down. Historically, people distinguish between the situation where the final state is lower or higher in energy. But as long as you use laser beams to stimulate it, you don't even care. or from an excited state b. OK. So actually, everything for the Raman process is completely analogous-- is completely covered, actually-- by what I wrote down for you in perturbation theory. So in other words, I mention it to you and it's just getting too messy to write it down, when we have e to the i omega t and omega t to the omega t, the near-resonant process is that one. It's just if you had kept all the 64 states-- to go up with one photon and down with one photons one was one of them, but we discarded it because we were only interested in going up. e to the minus i omega t, I mentioned once to you is the sign plus or minus means whether we absorb a photon or whether we emit a photon. If you use a fully quantized picture with a and a degas, the a for the quantized description becomes an e to thei omega t. In the semi-classical description of the a dega has a minus sign. So therefore, if you look at all the combinations between plus and minus, for this Raman process we want to select e. And that means we are focusing on this process. photon is emitted in a stimulated way and not absorbed. And therefore, our detuning is the detuning from the Raman resonance. The rate in Fermi's Golden Rule is the matrix element squared times the spectral density indicated by the delta function. The delta function is now at the frequency, which is given by the two-photon detuning. It would be an amazing coincidence if accidentally it would be in resonance with another one. But I would say, if you had a situation-- let's say, let's go to the moon. say in a molecule, which is a high density of state, the Raman process would be a rotation or vibration. And if you're unlucky and don't choose your lasers wisely, the two laser photons could get you high up into an electronically excited state. This may have some detrimental effect, depending what you want to do. But in general, I would say if you have more than one process, there is no interesting interference term. You just get two different rates. And you just have both simultaneously. They're not leading to the same final state. coherence. I want to now take it one level higher, where we talk still about two-photon processes but we are allowing one of the photons to be spontaneously emitted. Again, we don't have to learn new things. We just have to map it to knowledge we already have. I just want to sort of give you a clear understanding what this expression for the two-Photon rate is. Any other questions? OK. We can say the photon omega 2 cannot be absorbed by the initial state. It can only be absorbed because omega 1 mixes in. In perturbation theory with the field one, the state a has now a probability, given by this term, that it has now an admixture. And now, if we have sort of-- we have dressed up our state a with admixing for the near-resonant field some probability of state k into it. And this stressed state now has sort of a stepping stone here. And from this stepping stone, it can now absorb the photon omega 2. So that's how we should think about it. the virtual state-- to the final state b. And let me just point out what this virtual state is. Well, you know already everything about it because everything which can be known about it is what we have derived in our formula. I'm just interpreting the perturbation theory I've written down. And if I now call it a virtual state, there is nothing more you can ever know about this state than what was in this formula. But it's maybe helpful to summarize it. Because we have a resonant with frequency omega 2 in this situation. and such? Well, it is exactly the intermediate state k. And what is the population? If you had a two-level system, we sort of start with 100% amplitude in state 1. But here, our population is diminished by the probability at which we have it admixed the state. I think the picture I've just drawn for you is sort of helpful when we discuss now two-photon emission-- spontaneous emission. With two lasers, it's sort of simple. But with two-Photon emission, we have the situation that we start in. an excited state b. We have one laser, omega 1, and that's it. But we will find out that, eventually, the system populates the ground state. One possible process is that it was first emitting a photon in a stimulated way, but the second photon, since we're not offering any extra stimulation, had to be emitted spontaneously. And this admixutre can now decay by a single-photon process. So in other words, you don't need to re-derive anything. use analogy to write down what is the spontaneous emission rate out of the state k. And now you should sort of be amazed about the beauty of concepts you have learned. We are talking about something which maybe before this lecture-- wow, one photon stimulated, one photons spontaneous. That must be complicated. But it's just that, except for one thing. And this is the following-- remember, you should always remember how we derived the formula for state a. And then we have to multiply with the probability that this state is present in the state b. spontaneous emission. The physics of spontaneous emission is that you can put one photon in each of the empty modes and you have to sum overall modes. And what was important was the density of modes at the frequency. And now the frequency is omega. So when we calculated the spontaneous rate-- emission rate-- the decay of the excited state k, we had an omega cubed dependence at the resonance frequency-- at the resonant frequency for the transition ka. But now we are interested in thedensity of states at frequency omega. factor. This may be even more relevant at least in the research which is done in my group and in other groups at MIT, are again Raman processes. If you can't reach the upper state with a single photon like people in [INAUDIBLE]-- they may just use two photons. But this is more limit because they don't have the laser, which can bridge the gap. In situations where you work with alkali atoms, we are often very happy with-- we have one resonant line and we can do all the laser cooling, everything we want. what we're doing with the atoms, cannot be done on the d1 or d2 line. And therefore, we often use a two-level system, which consists of two hyperfine states because then there is no broadening to do spontaneous emission. But I think you get the gist now, and it will become even clearer later on, that often when you do a transition between two ground state levels, a lot of the physics is the same as of a single photon. You just replace your single photon Rabi frequency by two-photon Rabi Frequency. But now with the benefit of having a very narrow resonance. most important aspect of two-photon processes 99% of the research people in our field are involved is actually in the form of Raman processes. I think as you realize when you go from the two- photon absorption to Raman process, there's nothing you have to re-learn. You just have to be careful with the signs of omega 1 and omega 2. And this probability is just re-writing in a different way what we are doing. So if I would ask you now what is the rate-- what isThe rate of the spontaneous Ramanprocess, well, it is the probability to be in the intermediate state. have used, is the Rabi frequency of the first step squared, divided by the detuning squared. So this is the probability to be in the excited state. Now, the spontaneous emission occurs with Einstein's a coefficient connecting the intermediate state to the ground state. And then, of course, as we just learned, we have to correct the spectral density and such, or use for the calculation of the density of modes. This is actually also-- this kind of spontaneous Raman process-- has been very important historically. you know, stack up two light bulbs and have enough spectral power to excite to a certain state. But look here-- you could still, with a strong light bulb, create an admixture of the excited state. This virtual line was terribly broad because of the width of the light bulb. But then this spontaneous photon was just compensating for it. So in other words, it should be obvious-- this process only depends on the power for the first step. And it doesn't really matter if the power is delivered by a laser or a light bulbs. The rate for this process is the same. cycling transition. Well, when the atom goes up and then emits a photon, there is recoil involved. So actually what you're doing is on the cycling transition, you cycle it through many, many spontaneous Raman processes. So this is the correct description of resonant fluorescence and Rayleigh scattering. Any questions? Good. I've just mentioned that when we do Reyleigh scattering, we have to consider that the photons have momentum, and this takes us to another state. Let's now be a little bit more careful and consider what is the role of the momentum in the transition. now is I want to talk about recoil and Doppler shifts in a two-photon process and see how it will affect the line shape. All we have to do is-- or maybe let me back up. You should maybe consider what I've discussed so far, is the situation of an atom which has no motion. We could just fully focus on the internal degree of freedom. And just to remind you, we have discussed two ways how you can eliminate motion out of the picture. One is assume the atom has infinite mass. well, you give the atom an infinite mass by tightly connecting it to the laboratory. And this is what tight confinement in an ion or atom trap does. But now, we are kind of going beyond this restriction. We are now saying, OK, now we allow the atom to move. And we can deal with that by simply saying when the atom has a velocity v, we can transform-- we can just use the Galilean transformation. However, the atom, due to its velocity, sees a slightly different frequency. So therefore, we have our Lorentzian. If you have a single photon, you always transfer momentum to the atom. But if you have two photons, the two momenta can cancel. This is actually a powerful method to avoid Doppler broadening in spectroscopy. For two-photon absorption, if the two laser beams are counter-propagating, the total momentum transfer is zero. If we arrange for the two photons to be absorbed from opposite directions, we reach the situation where the Dooppler shift is really zero. two-photon absorption or Raman processes-- so any kind of two- photon process-- they are like single-ph photon transitions. It is as if we had a super photon, which drives one transition, but the momentum of this super photon. But what we see now from the Doppler shift formula, that we can apply the same also to the momentum. It's just we have to use the suitable definition of the two-photons Rabi frequency. The frequency of the super photon is now either the sum or the difference off the two frequencies, depending on the process. of methods of practical importance for eliminating the first order Doppler shift. Since hydrogen is of methological importance, measurements of-- fundamental measurements of the Lamb shift, comparisons with QED calculations, measurement of the Rydberg constant-- these are all done by hydrogen spectroscopy. But you cannot, of course, suppress the process where you absorb two photons from the left or from the right. And therefore, you have sort of a broad pedestal. So the pedestal is where you take one photon-- both photons from same side, whereas the Dooppler free peak is whereyou have photons from counter-propagating directions. line width-- so what is the delta, the line broadening you to the second order Doppler effect, in relation to the transition frequency? So just give me a second. Then this omega cancels and we have an expression which is sort of interesting. It is mv squared. It's the energy-- the thermal energy-- but since we have normalized it to the Transition frequency, it becomes now the Thermal energy relative to the rest mass of the atom. You would think, well, this must be really tiny. Well, it is tiny. The lifetime of the 2s state is actually due to two-photon emission. Two photons in series. This is the way how the2s state decays. You can't know for certain that the velocity distribution of the atoms in your laser beam is exactly at room temperature. You really have to go to low temperature, go to cryogenic temperatures. Or ultimately, if you can't correct for it, you would not be able tocorrect for it at roomTemperature. It is not limited at all by the natural lifetime of 2s transition. for the lifetime, which is a fraction of a second. They cool the hydrogen by collisions with liquid helium, cooled vaults, to maybe a Kelvin or so, three hundred times below room temperature. And this has been important to reach this precision. And still, I think, even at Kelvin temperature, the second order Doppler shift is one of the important-- is oneof the important systematics. OK. Any questions? Yes. Just-- very lightly-- I would have thought [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: That's correct. line, which is sufficiently sharp, sufficiently narrow, and also insensitive to magnetic fields and electric fields. But people who want to measure fundamental constants-- the Rydberg constant-- want to compare lame shift with first principle QED calculations. This is the case for hydrogen. And, actually, with some advance in the numeric calculation of wave functions and all that, it may also be possible to do it with helium. I think so far it hasn't kind of-- helium has not replaced hydrogen. It's still a big part of the universe. Audience: Going back to the two-photon Raman process where you had the second spontaneous emission, I just want to clarify. In all atoms other than helium and hydrogen, you would be limited by the infeasibility of many electron calculations. This is off resonance scattering. And if you ask me, when do you have a situation where you first absorb the photon and then emit it? I would like to know that. You always-- you should always use a two- photon picture. the only situation, if you press a little bit harder, where I think you can think in first absorption and then emission, is if you have a gas with lots and lots of collisions. But in all other situations where you don't have any loss of coherence or something in between, you're never really going to the real state. You're always going to virtual state. It's all two-photon. And, I mean, we discussed that. Remember that. And yes, for this atom, it will now simply spontaneously emit a photon. The spectrum of the emitted photon is a delta function at the drive field. If you allow in your head any picture of first absorption then emission, that's where all the wrong answers come from. This is really the picture behind it. Photon in, photon out-- should be described together, unless you have some form of de-coherence which decouples the two processes. OK. That's a wonderful opening to our next chapter, namely coherence. To what extent-- we just discussed one aspect of it and we come back to this in this chapter-- to what extent is the photon. Coherence exists if there is a well-defined phase between two or more amplitudes. We can only observe it if else than the time integral over the energy difference between two levels. So therefore, when we are talking about coherence, how can we maintain longer coherence between energy levels? How can we create coherence in three level systems? This is actually intricately related to the fact that we can obtain more precise information about the energy levels. This is a very general introduction to coherence. The first form of coherence I want to discuss is the coherence involved in exciting atoms. qualitative features which come into play when we have three levels-- like lasing without inversion, like electromagnetically-induced transparencies, for those of you who have heard about it. On the other hand, I can reassure you, I don't think there's anything fundamental to be learned by going to four, five, and six levels, so we will stop at three levels. We can have-- so this is a single atom. But we can also have coherence between different atoms. And phenomena we want to discuss is superradiance. those amplitudes interfere. And like in Feynman's double-slit experiment, you don't know which intermediate state was taken. So that means when we observe an interference, that means we obesrve. One observes a physical quantity, the population in a certain quantum state, total electric field emitted, but this quantity is usually proportional to the square of the total amplitude. That means we get an interference term. So coherence is important. Let me provide one additional motivation that coherence can be important. Atomic spectroscopy is an important technique and important tool for measurements. Energy levels can tell us something about magnetic fields through Zeeman shifts. But this is very deeply connected to coherence and the phase because the relative phase between two states is nothing. It's subtle but trivial at the same time. We want to get the most precision in a reproducible energy level. This is the situational of atomic clocks. We are interested in the energy levels. But pretty much when we use atomic Spectroscopy for any application, we areinterested in theEnergy levels. of spontaneous emission. The system involves with the following operator, and this is the operator which completely describes the interaction of an atom with the electromagnetic field. The fact that we have a unitary evolution with this operator is 100% or 110% true. But this operator will actually lead to final states of the photon field, which may not have a specific phase. And this is actually what I want to work out with you in-- maybe even today, I think ten minutes may be enough-- what is really the information-- the phase information-- which we have in a photon, which has been spontaneously emitted. If you ignore the position where the atom has scattered the light, then you have maybe optical path length differences. The photon from the laser hits an atom here. It goes to your detector. But from another atom, the photon has accumulated a different spatial phase. If you ignore that, then the photon is not perfectly phased coherent. It's not reproducing the phase of the laser who has created them. Is it always the fundamental reason or is there no fundamental reason? It's only a kind of reason of ignoring information, taking a partial trace. When we scatter light for many, many atoms, we're not even asking for the phase. You immediately perform an incoherence sum because you sort of know deep in your heart that there won't be any interference. So it's always possible, of course, to lose the phase by not controlling every aspect of your experiment. So B is always possible. But for so many reasons that I don't want to discuss it, but the measurement process is very relevant. And so, therefore, I would have answered C here. infinite mass-- no Doppler shift, we just put it. And we put it in a cavity that it can only interact with a single mode of the electromagnetic field. So this is a fundamental situation. And a lot of the general situations, you get by just summing up over many modes. It just messes things up. And this is more in the spirit of answer B, that you perform partial trace and average over many states. But let's now pinpoint what I think is intellectually the most important one, the pure situation where an atom is just talking to a one mode. pulse which has a pulse aimed between zero and pi. Depending what the pulse angle, it will admix something of the excited state. And in case of a pi pulse, we have 100% in the excitedState. So our atomic wave function is this. The excited state-- let's just assume the photons are in resonance. So therefore, the phase evolution is e to the i omega naught t. But now, and this is what coherence is about, there is a very specific phase. This phase phi comes from the laser. driven by the operator-- the dipole operator, e-- and e, the electric field, has the phase of the laser beam. Sure, there may be-- and kind of all other trivial factors I've set to one here. But there is the phase, which directly is imprinted into the wave function. So we have now an atom which is partially excited. And now after the laser pulse is over, the photonic part of the wavefunction is a vacuum. We have no photon in our cavity. Now we wait and we allow spontaneous emission. one is we know for sure the atom is in the ground state. However, the excited state with zero photon will actually do Rabi oscillation. And it has just swapped excited zero to ground state one photon. So what I suggest is when we, really at the fundamental level now, discuss spontaneous emission, we allow this part-- excited atom, empty cavity-- to undergo half a vacuum Rabiscillation. I just allow half a cycle to evolve. And the result of that is, well, nothing happened to this part. at the two expressions I've underlined. And this tells us that the quantum state of the atom as a two-level system-- ground excited state with all the phase factors-- has been now exactly matched on the quantumState of the cavity. Yes? Do you want to have an alpha e there also? PROFESSOR: Oh yes, please. Thank you. OK. So let me write that down and then we have-- so this is what I meant. This is the most fundamental aspect of spontaneous emission. the atom has been perfectly matched. Perfectly mapped onto the photon field. Phi-- we started out by phi being the phase of the laser. And if the laser is in a coherent state, in a homodyne measurement we can measure phi to any accuracy you want. This phase phi has been now perfectly imprinted into a two-level system for the atom. And now it appears mapped into aTwo-levelsystem for the photons. But if we are now doing a measurement either on the atomic system or on the photonic system, we are limited. this is what we want to discuss on Wednesday. And this is what I referred to as the fundamental limit of spontaneous emission because we have not lost any coherence here. It's just if the phase is only imprinted in one particle-- one particle quantum physics sets us a limitation. Oh well, we can read out the phase phi. OK. Any question? To be continued on Monday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full interview.