Calculus is the big application of calculus, so it's kind of interesting to see what part of calculus actually get used in differential equations. The derivative of x to the n, the derivative of sine and cosine. Above all, the derivatives of e to the x, which is e tothe x. And I'm going to show you what I see, and it's not everything by any means, but it's some basic ideas, but not all the details you learned. is e to the x. Dy dt equals y. And then the inverse function related to the exponential is the logarithm. With that special derivative of 1/x. OK. But you know those. Secondly, out of those few specific facts, you can create the derivatives of an enormous array of functions using the key rules. Derivative is a linear operation. The product rule fg prime plus gf prime. The quotient rule. Who can remember that? And above all, the chain rule. of functions that really blow open the functions or we can deal with. OK. So the fundamental theorem involves the derivative and the integral. And it says that one is the inverse operation to the other. The derivative of the integral of a function is this. Here is y and the Integral goes from 0 to x. I don't care what that dummy variable is. I can-- I'll change that dummy variables to t. Whatever. I'll use it. Maybe that's better. The fundamental theorem of calculus can be used to solve any differential equation. The product rule says take the derivative of [INAUDIBLE] that is e to the minus t is one. So the two terms from the product rule are the two term in the differential equation, which is dy dt. The derivative of that product is one term will be y and the otherterm will be q. That's a remarkable formula for the solution to a basic differential equation and it's a key example in differential equations. rather I just called the function f. A function at a point a little beyond t, is approximately the function at t plus the correction because it-- plus a delta f, right? A delta f approximately? It's approximately delta t times the derivative at t. Just draw a picture. So let me draw a graph of-- oh there's the graph of e to the t. So it starts up with slope 1. Let me give it a little slope here. OK the tangent line, and of course it comes down here Not below. tells us about bending? That is delta t squared times the second derivative. One half shows in there. So this is the term that changes the tangent line, to a tangent parabola. It notices the bending at that point. So it curves up. It doesn't follow it perfectly, but as well-- much better than the other. OK. Now finally, what if we want to do even better? Well we need to take into account the third derivative and then the fourth derivative and so on. If we get all those derivatives then, all of them that means, we will be at the real one. function because that's a nice function, e to the t. We can recreate that function from knowing its height, its slope, its bending and all the rest of the terms. So there's a whole lot more-- Infinitely many terms. That's called the Taylor series named after Taylor. It's frightening because it's got infinitely many terms, and the terms are getting a little more comp-- For most functions, you really don't want to compute the nth derivative of the function. this isn't so practical. Tangent parabola, quite practical. Higher order terms, less-- much less practical. But the formula is beautiful because you see the pattern, that's really what mathematics is about. They all fit that pattern and when you add up all the terms, if you have a nice function, then the approximation becomes perfect and you would have equality. And those are the best functions of mathematics and exponential is of course one of them. OK that's calculus. Well, part of calculus.