liyan blake: William Wordsworth is kind of out there some of his contemporaries thought he was insane you know nowadays maybe he would be heavily medicated. There is something in the madness of this man which interests me more than the sanity of Lord Byron and Walter Scott so something about this man is more interesting than these other people maybe there are some celebrities nowadays who are just so weird that they borderline genius in a way just because they're so out there and there's people that come about that are just like them. anything else that we've seen before that it's almost like a new art form does that kind of make sense. He was an individual who you know was into art and was into eventually you know religion and such became a big part of his life but his as an artist you know he was a very prolific poet but he was also big-time into painting we'll see some of his paintings later on but also a new type of art form kind of relief fetching where you kind of sketch out a negative of what you should have. fetching into a metal which would be a long long time and so he fetches out these scenes he edges in his poems into it and so it takes a lot of time a very time-consuming as it says that's why on that page it talks about how it can be the most some of the most valuable pieces of literary history that that have survived. You'll see some pictures of some of those etchings later on but in essence you know some of your money is relief itched stamped. the boundaries on and really became the form the more bear of it and a front-runner so very interesting individual and just just out there mentally just that not that we with the stuff we read today isn't gonna be like man that guy was weird it's just his personality is so different from some of those just normal people that we read about that it's like everybody else this guy would probably be a rock star nowadays you know for whatever his profession would be he probably would just be out there and everybody just thinks it's funny okay and he's a very successful person. and your parents don't know just throw out William Blake you might be right okay very very very famous individual so we'll be covering in the next couple days the lamb by William Blake. Little lamb who made thee thus thou know who made thy life and bid thee feed by the stream and o or the mead gave the clothing of delight softest clothing woolly bright gave these such a tender voice making all the vales rejoice. little lamb god bless thee little lamb God bless thee okay. this is probably the sweetest of the poems that we have to some degree okay looking at it at face value one they have a little picture and these are the the etchings that he does okay you know with the picture that they give us to to help place things you know we have a shepherd talking to his flock okay he's out there alone he's probably has conversations with them I don't know they might be very lonely the little man little manlittle lamb who made thee thus. ultimately about God made you little lamb God madeYou he gave you these things. He gave you your clothes he gaveYou that little voice that you have. He is called by thy name so he calls himself a lamb so Jesus God religion okay you are created by those things and you have been given those things he is meek in his mild he became a little child I a child and thou a lamb we are called by his name so even though I'm a man and you're a Lamb we are we are the same. little lambs and such I look at this as a little bit deeper or it could be a littlebit deeper yes we have you know the nature the common man of the shepherd and such but I like to put in a little part about the child as well. Could you see how this could be some instructor talking to little kids for every one of these lambs little lamb little child do you know who gave you your little voice who gaveYou your little clothes do youknow let me tell you let meTell you about him he is of this name you and I are the same you and blah blah blah. the field but somebody that is passionate about their religion and their faith you know the nature and the common man the shepherd person of the flock or even a child in a sense of children so it's a very short one and it's one that I believe is pretty easy to to comprehend and understand okay. "I believe it is one of the easiest to understand and understand," he says. "It's one of those things that is very, very easy to understand. It's very simple to understand"