Free disposal is when you can dispose of inputs without spending any resources fine. No free lunch is when at least 1 input is required to produce some output, or more than you know more than 1 kind of output. You cannot produce something out of thin air, you cannot consume something like in the harry potter world. If you have read Chandrakantha book in hind there, also you know people would create something in this world even the current level of technology fine so that is free disposal. The second is no free lunch. We need only milk to produce curd. If 1 kg of milk can produce can be used to produce half kg of curd, then it is feasible to produce 250 grams ofCurd from 1kg of milk. So, the key word is feasibility technology represents the feasibilities that can be achieved. We are talking about all the feasible combination of inputs and outputs, that is way I am describing it in particular fashion. We need to make sure that we use all of our resources to the maximum extent possible. out of nothing that is not possible in the real world. Third is non reversibility, what it means is that a production process cannot be reversed. So, if you obtain half kg of curd from 1 kg of milk, you cannot obtain 1kg of milk from halfkg ofCurd. That is what we are talking about no free lunch, that's what we're talking about. We're not talking about a free lunch here. That's not what we mean by 'no free lunch' in the process and labor hours spent in the process back. So, in that sense all the production and processes are irreversible. And if we have reversibility in the production process, then it would violate the laws of thermodynamics. Basically it is related to entropy, if you are not familiar with this term forget about it, but you should just remember that a production process cannot be reversed fine. Next is convexity ok, but before we talk about conveXity we are going to talk about additivity that we talked about earlier and divisibility fine what is additivity. get 1 kg of nail we need 1kg of probably this is not very good example, let me change it. Let us say to write a software code 1 software code of course, we will have to define what do we mean by 1Software code. To produce 1 kg. of rice ok, you need either let us say 100 grams of fertilizer let us. say I am writing 100 grams. of fertilizer as 1 and, 50 liters of water that I am. writing as 2. 25 liter of water is 1 fine. 1 kg of rice can be produced from 1 comma 2 plus 1 minus t 2 comma 1, and this is what additivity is if this 1 unit of input 2. So, 100 units we can produce by replicating this process 100 times. And again 50 times we will use the second process. And if we define the t dash by 100 is equal to t, then we can say 1 kg of Rice can beproduced by t 1 comma2 plus 1minus t 2 commas 1. And this will give us 1 kg using this t dash. is possible, then we say that technology exhibits additivity. Another related, but it may sound different let us say, if it is technologically feasible to produce y amount of output, then it is also technologically possible to produce  y plus y dash. This is example of convexity; let us talk about additivity first. So, let us look at it. . What it means? We have taken example where 1 unit of output can be produced using 2 units of input 1 and 2 unit of input 2, we have used different symbols there. plan, it means let us say this take one example, minus 1 minus 2 and 1 if this is a feasible production plan, then Lambda y bar is also a feasibleproduction plan. So, what we are saying is that a production process can be miniaturized ok, a productionprocess can be synched fine at this level. It sounds very you know it may not be possible sometime, but if we are talking about really large scale, then what we're saying that if we decrease all the inputs in the production process, then we can get half unit of output. same proportion, then output will also decrease in the same proportion and this is possible this is feasible fine. The easier is easier way easier although they these two are not same, but the similar 1 implies the other, but not the other way around. If this is the input combination and it is feasible to combine them, in this way and get some output, then also it is also possible to combine lambda x 1 to lambda x 2 of course, here we are not talking about the amount of output. feasible here, y is taking care of not only inputs but also output. The combination is all given here and this exhibits convexity. This is a simple example of how to make a complex shape. The shape can be any shape at any time. It can be either a shape or a shape-shift shape. It is possible to combine two shapes to create a shape that looks like a shape shape. For example, the shape could look like the shape of a circle or a circle.