[Music] because your success is my number one priority tell your neighbor our success is his number onepriority look at your neighbor and say our success are his numberOne priority that's good good job. So i'm hoping everybody gets an a in this class you can do it yes you can you don't believe me watch me. So marketing let's talk about marketing some more marketing so i told you what we're going to talk about now i'm going to tell you and then i'll tell you what I told you. marketing marketing that's capital n a you guys do it okay come on stay with me here no sleeping no facebooking who's facebooking now anybody. No text messaging all right no periscoping marketing is about creating. Marketing is about four things creating communicating delivering and exchanging value that's in chapter one so who can tell me what marketing is somebody good what's your name genius chingus go ahead tell us what is marketing i don't know but i know it's about creating right excellent good job. for something to be of a good value it doesn't need to be a low price it could be a high price but it's a very high quality and it has a lot of benefits. If you purchase a 55-inch samsung 4k high-definition led monitor that has smart capability and 3d for 2500 you might very well consider that to bea good value. Do you agree who could explain that further good tell us your name albert alvin alvin  alvin albert i'm getting bad coaching here alvin. 2500 isn't that a better value so what alvin is suggesting that it is a good value at twenty five hundred dollars because it's 4k it's high definition 4k not 1080p that's so 2008 you're so 2000 late that's the old technology 1080p we're rocking 4k now 4k so that's a good example anybody have another example of where something might be very expensive but not the lowest price yes go ahead tell us your name theresa bad um i mean would you consider that. clothing yes go ahead like so like i find people saying like buying a pair of jeans and zara is expensive because there's like 65 but they last longer than buying these at all maybe unless so teresa is saying you could buy a pair. of jeans at old navy for 20 or you could buying actually i've done this you could. buy for 300 apair of torn jeans at diesel. You could buy three hundred dollar jeans that are already torn for 300 at the diesel store. So why is 300 for a. pair of diesel jeans considered to be a good value? marketing is about creating communicating delivering and exchanging value the way that we communicate the value is through the brand. The brand is what's wrapped around the product so all products in a given category have the same generic functionality. What makes one car different from another is the brand and we're going to talk more about perceptual maps where our brand is positioned in the marketplace relative to our competitors. It's not a question of whether or not our product is expensive or whether it's a high quality the issue is the perception of the target market the people that we want to buy our product. The target market is who we want to buy our product or service. The target audience is usually a subset of the target market. The audience might be grouped by age so we're going to have a different commercial for men that are between 18 and 29 and those that are from 30 to 39. It could be for example all men that's our target market but our target audience could be all men. It's not the same as the target audience but it's who we're trying to reach with our advertising campaign. and those that are 40 to 49 does that make sense so you want to have a commercial for example that's going to resonate with your target audience usually you're not going to be able to have one that resonates with everybody. So when you're showing a commercial do you think that those men that are seeing the commercial between the ages of 18 and 29 want to see somebody in the commercial who's 60 or 65? "That's probably not something that's Going to resonate with them right unless maybe if it's coach no if it't uh bruce willis" their attention their interest create desire and ultimately action so you guys know who hulk hogan is you do what about john cena yeah. You don't know randy orton that's his thing no rko yes out of nowhere. If you were there i would have seen you it's like better than a broadway show they have fireworks on the stage and everything is amazing. So the brand is what distinguishes one product from another and that's what makes the difference between the two. Chanel: If our target market doesn't think it's high quality then we have a huge problem. Instead of going home crying what we do is what chanel said is develop a compelling advertising campaign to communicate that our product is of a high quality. We need to have pillars of support that means that we need to having proof points we get not enough just to say ourProduct is a highquality we have to support that. We have to provide proof in our commercials in our print ads on our website so think of marketing another way to think about marketing. marketing is about communicating you know creating then communicating so does that make sense so the order is important so when we say marketing marketing is about creating communicating delivering and exchanging value so from 30,000 feet if you will that's a broad overview of what marketing is another thing that we could say about marketing is that marketing includes five activities. What's the first activity the first marketing activity? It's to identify identify an unmet need so marketing we can describe marketing as being comprised of several activities the first thing is to identify anUnmet need that consumers have. being met so what would be a good example how about shampoo i know you're thinking what could this guy possibly know about shampoo. An unmet need is a shampoo that is safe for hair that's what that's dry or that that's curly oily that's perm so the way we identify the need is how guess guess guess oh you're not they're not good at guessing that's not good for exam day you got to be good guessers supply and demand right the wayWe're going to determine the need through marketing research. like what are some of the problems that they have when cooking or baking and what do you think they're going to say food sticks to the pot. We don't have anything statistically significant all we have is the input of 48 people that cost fifty thousand dollars that's a real number. If you want to do focus groups see me after class okay so and with your checkbook all right so it's 50 thousand dollars you wanna do focus group see meafter class okay and so we do two focus groups in two different cities but we still only have 48 people who participated. dollars that's tremendously valuable to do focus groups because we're going to get a tremendous amount of insight from those for example who bake those who cook those who um who use tablets or smart tvs whatever it is that we're researching it's very helpful to do that. What that's going to do is inform our quantitative research a form of quantitative research is what we're doing this semester which is a questionnaire. How many people do we need to have complete the questionnaire what do you think million now there's about 350 million people that live in the united states. complete that questionnaire now if 350 million people complete the questionnaire that's called the what census a census is when a hundred percent of the population participates in the research only the government does that they're really the only one that could afford to do that. What we're trying to do is get a representative random sample from that population so it doesn't need to be 350 million how many does it need toBe 349 million 300 million 200 million what do you think a quarter of what's the number how many is that? we have to have males and females people of different age groups peoples in their 20s 30s 40s 50s 60s. People of different ethnicities people ofdifferent religions so how many people do we need to participate so there's no definite answer. i'll tell you from my experience about a thousand people so if you have a representative random sample a thousand can be statistically significant a thousand to fifteen hundred but in most categories in the united states it doesn't need to be more than that. is that going to cost a hundred and fifty thousand dollars to do more intercept in multiple cities and get approximately 1500 respondents now when we do focus groups we also do multiple rounds of focus groups because each round is iterative so we learn from the first round of focus group and then we incorporate that in the next round before we do the quantitative research. i recommend that do the focus groups then we're going to do quantitative research before that now both of those focus groups and questionnaires qualitative and quantitative research as i describe that.