We're gonna continue the train of thought that we began last time, which has to do with the critique of The Enlightenment. Part of what I suggested to you is that you as poets move from Neoclassicism to The Enlightenment, part of what they're engaged in is a critique of a kind of impoverished view of mind or consciousness that over-relies on reason. And they therefore try to develop a higher faculty than human reasoning which they refer to alternately as fancy and imagination. All right so that's one problem with Enlightenment thought, that it is impoverished. that in fact there is something wrong with reason as a faculty, and this can take a couple of forms. One is that all of those nice ideals that come along with the enlightenment may in fact be parasitic precisely on the kinds of negative types of thinking that they are designed to get rid of. The other thing is that reason itself may not be as powerful as we think, that there might be other things going in, on within human consciousness that are either hostile to reason or are its opposite. takes over, things that go on when reason loses its purchase on the mind and the mind becomes maddened for example or goes insane. All of these things are things that Charles Brockden Brown starts to explore, right? So again I want to review some of the places that we've been. I mean we're moving towards the mid-term at the moment so we want to get our story straight here, we try to understand the larger story that we're talking about. Again the idea that enlightenment, from Kant, is an emergence from a self-incurred immaturity. The cause is not lack of understanding, but lack of resolution and courage. Edgar Huntly's story is a different kind of story altogether. Edwards and Franklin right, are two men who are, roughly speaking contemporaries. They are poised you might say in the cultural exchange between Calvinism and The Enlightenment. Edwards tries to appropriate enlightenment modes of thinking in order to bolster up US Calvinism. Franklin understands the continuing power of Calvinism as a mode of religious thinking but tries to minimize its cultural power, to use it where he must, but to promote a set of ideals that really do rely or promote the idea of reason. we called him also a kind of pre-romantic because he makes use of images that are drawn from nature. This is a very good passage for thinking about that. The soul of a true Christian appears like such a little white flower that we see. It's a literal process of enlightenment right? It opens itself up to the light of the sun, and we've talked I think over the past couple of days about the ways in which the poems and writing that have to do with The Enlightenment often use light itself as a trope. because a Calvinist would never say something like, the appearance of virtue was almost more important than the reality of it. But remember Franklin's idea of the erota and these are just a couple, some examples right? He believes that you can identify error. And you might say that part of your goal as someone living life is to try to see error for what it is and correct it. And one of the things we suggested was that in the process of writing his life, which and I suggested to you that that shares something in common with the kind of confessional mode started in the west perhaps by St. Augustine. self as author which requires him to create a self as character. And in so doing he's able as author to pick out the defective font [phonetic] of type those errors, and either talk about the ways in which he was actually able to correct them in real life in his real life, or, saying I wish now that I would correct that, I can point that out as an error. It's a sort of textural do-over as he rewrites his life. first to take many of these things for granted. The question is, how well does it go for him? Is this something that happens to him that in the end should lead him to question all of those ideas? All right so what I want to suggest to you is that Edgar Huntly is in fact exploring the dark side of The Enlightenment, the underside of it. It's turning over the rock to see what's there. And if you look at the back of your, I think it's. Passion comes from a Latin verb that means to suffer. That's why it's called The Passion of the Christ; it's what he suffers on the cross, all right? So, the passions are something you suffer. You're not entirely in control of them. But even more I wanted to point out to you the fact that the back of the book, the back. of the edition that you have, it describes this as a story of a young man who sleepwalks each night a threat to himself and each other. book tells you it's set in Philadelphia in 1787, all right? The same time as the Constitution is being framed a hop, skip, and a jump away. There's a way in which we might say this is also if not a critique, then a cautionary tale you might say about the principles of enlightenment that are enshrined in The Constitution. A kind of meditation on what the dangers to the new nation might be at the moment that the new country is being formed. Brown is an interesting character because he is one of the first US writers to try to take advantage of theFirst American copyright law which was passed in 1790.  copyright law doesn't protect US writers from being pirated abroad. It does nothing to prevent US publishers from publishing pirated editions of well-known books already circulating in the continent. So that seems like a bad thing for the aspiring US author. On the other hand remember what I said before, there is no patronage system in place in the early republic; therefore, what is emerging is a kind of marketplace for writing. Without that market, a young American author wouldn't be able to sell his writings and sustain himself as a writer. even a possibility you might say. In writing he is trying to do what in another age you might have done as a philosopher, or a professor or even a lawyer. He gives up the law because he feels that the United States doesn't need another lawyer. But he doesn't give up the idea of doing something that's morally good, all right? He thinks of himself as a teacher, and he says that the novelist should be thought of as a storytelling moralist. So I want you to see that there's a bridge to be made between the kinds of didactic neoclassical poetry that we were looking at. We didn't look at a ton of the kind of hagiographic poems that are in the vein of say the praised poem towards the Reverend Whitfield, the poem by George Washington and others. Brown wants to fulfill that didactic purpose, but he wants to reclaim a genre that already you might say is in bad repute, and that genre is the novel. So Wieland: or, The Transformation, and he says that his aim isn't merely to please the idle and the thoughtless, but actually he says to engage those who study and reflect. appears in 1798 and it's the first novel that he actually publishes, and he talked he echoes what he had said before there, and says that the novelist should be regarded as a moral painter. And he proposes, he says, to illustrate some important branches of the moral constitution of man. It's a very strange story actually, it plays on religious enthusiasm, it uses ventriloquism, it has an episode of spontaneous combustion. Brown, as a sort of man of The Enlightenment was very interested in science. And therefore he was interested in scientific oddities and brought them into some of his novels. page. An American Tale, right? He's stressing that he's doing something American. If you could read the little epigraph here it says from virtues blissful paths away, the double-tongued are sure to stray. Good is a forthright journey to still, and many paths but lead to ill. And yes, if you can actually see it, that is not an F,. that is an old fashioned way of setting an S. That's the way the S was originally printed at the beginning of a word. it mean to substitute F there. And that's one of those things where if you, he says he was aghast but he didn't correct it right away and then there was nothing to do but sit there the entire time. So don't make that mistake yourself. Okay, other thing. See he's taking advantage of the copyright law which has been passed just 8 years before in his first novel Wieland: or, The Transformation: An American Tale. So 1, 2, 3, culminating in Edgar Huntly, all of them in 1799. about it a little bit but there is a certain kind of haste that is evident in the plotting of Edgar Huntly. There are red herrings, there are loose ends that are not exactly tied up, and that might be the result of the fact that it was the third book that he wrote in that particular year. So that's one of the things to bear in mind. Brown is writing in order to transform the novel into a higher form than it's thought to be, and he's writing something that is not within the main line of novelistic writing. happy, many, many pages. Has anybody read Clarissa or an abridged Clarissa? Clarissa's a seduction narrative right, in which a middle class heroine is menaced and finally seduced and raped by an aristocrat. And you might say right away in the early English epistolary novel there's the worry about what it is we're writing and reading. And one of Laurence Sterne Tristram Shandy actually makes fun of this little thing [inaudible]. The novel starts to question its own devices early on. Susanna Rowsan's Charlotte Temple is probably the earliest example of this. Brown is not writing in this tradition. He is writing, trying to write over against this tradition and you could see that again, this is a front matter from an early novel. The Power of Sympathy which is thought to be the first American novel published. It's an endless kind of thing. And you can see that you can't get to the end. look at it. To the young ladies of United Columbia, these volumes intended to represent the specious causes and to expose the fatal consequences of seduction to inspire the female mind with a principle of self complacency. So that's what The Power of Sympathy is, but it addressed to young women. So there's something feminized about the form of the novel in this period which is part of why it is, you know regarded as a kind of lower form of writing, not really literary. fiction. And what is fiction, if not the opposite of truth? Fiction means lies, right? Why would you read this? If you do it's got to be only a guilty pleasure. So fiction, as opposed to fact, fiction somehow has falsehood. Therefore early novels try to insist on their basis in fact. Don't worry about this, it's based on a true story. As if there were something that would then could be morally improving for that. There's a certain way in which part of the problem for writers like Brown, and you might say for Romanticism, is how to take some of the prestige. that is you know linked to the to some of the prestige factuality and history and transfer it over to fiction and literature. How to create the literary as a category that is separate from the bible and sermons and biographies and history. A category that's going to be linked to this other faculty of the mind called imagination. This is part of the larger project of romanticism of gothic fiction. It's part of Brown's project as well. All right so that's the kind of regime of facts, the tyranny of fact. a young lady who has attended her dearest friend to the altar, a few months after marriage which perhaps, but for her had been a happy one, to fix her affections on a friends husband and by artful blandishments allure him to herself. Be not staggered such moral reader at the recital. Such serpents really are in existence. I have seen two poor disconsolate parents drop into premature graves miserable victims to their daughter's dishonor and the peace of several relative families wounded never to be healed again in this world. Why? Because they read novels. come on. Do we really think books are dangerous? Most of us probably don't. I mean can you imagine that a book's gonna cause like what, social unrest? Maybe it's better to live in a culture where they actually do persecute the novelists 'cause it would mean that literature matters. Well literature mattered to these people. Here it's negative, but they thought that novels were actually dangerous. You could read a novel and become depraved. That's part of what he is trying to promote Virtue comes from the Latin roots of man. guy. He's more like he's talking about these things, manliness and courage and the ability to act decisively, right? So Brown is trying to find a form of the novel that can be used to instill virtue and all of these other qualities. In part because he wants to say that you know to accept that kind of separations of fear does neither men nor women credit. So if we could get away from this idea that somehow there's something feminized about the novel, it's good for both sexes. be pronounced that no one was ever an extensive and especially a habitual reader of novels even supposing them to be well selected without suffering both intellectual and moral injury and of course incurring a diminution of happiness. Okay, this is the context in which Brown writes this book. Now, let's think about virtue again. The form that Brown decides to use is the Gothic novel. The Gothic novel isn't, is a forum that in the English context is probably pioneered by this guy, Sir Horace Walpole. it's a Gothic cathedral. They're gorgeous. But it becomes a pejorative term by this time that is, that takes on the medieval association and makes you think of you know it's so Gothic, it's medieval. Romantic writers are gonna mobilize the medieval and Gothic and dark over against The Enlightenment to show you what's wrong with The Enlightenment. Story of the Castle of Otranto, a villain named Manfred who lives in the castle and rules his realm unlawfully. His grandfather has poisoned the rightful ruler whose name was Alonso. goes on. The villain who is now ruling named Manfred wants to marry the son, marry his son off to a woman named Isabella who's the daughter of a Marquis. In one of the novel's many supernatural events, a giant helmet falls out of the sky and crushes Conrad. So Manfred then decides to marry Isabella himself, whom he, you know he's hoping that it'll kind of firm up his succession when and he's, a young peasant named Theodore that Isabella is really interested in. the rightful heir of Otranto and we have a happy ending in the end, okay? The ghosts are real. And one of the things that Walpole said about The Castle of O Tranto which he published anonymously, was that later on he said, it's not everyone that may play the fool with impunity. Right so again it goes back to that model of artistic production. He's a nobleman, he has spare time, he can write a book,. he can publish it. It's no big deal. Later on however, with the success of the novel, he takes it more seriously and he says in fact that the novel had he said,. freed up great resources of fancy. of a trifle nevertheless has a role to play because it frees up these resources of fancy. Sir Walter Scott is one of the great historical novelists in this period. He would write later on that even the name of romance now so venerable in the ears, in the ear of the antiquaries of book collectors was almost forgotten in the time of The Castle of Otranto. And he added that Walpole had a decided predilection for what may be called the Gothic style. is bad taste. Walpole starts to reclaim it. Brown wants to do something similar to reclaim the Gothic in the American context, okay. But it's interesting that the novel, the Gothic novel itself as a form doesn't take off in 1764. It has to wait about 25 years in and around the French Revolution and then it really takes off when a woman named Ann Radcliffe writes her Gothic novels. And there you can see what he says about it. Diametrical opposition to the rules of true taste. like that. There appear to be manifestations of the supernatural. She often finds herself in the various kinds of settings crumbling castles, dungeons, graveyards, darkened churches. Usually she almost escapes her persecutors, then they catch her. They are trying to get her out of greed or lust or both. In the end, all of the ghosts and supernatural manifestations that have tyrannized her are shown to be fakes. They're people in costumes or [inaudible] effigy's or there's some machinery. It's a very popular formula and it continues to this present day. it, if you go back to classic Scooby-Doo which would be the early the first season, [inaudible] on DVD 1969, the ghosts are never real. It's always Mr. [inaUDible] in the blah blah blah. So, later on there was one cartoon called Scooby.Doo and Zombie Island or something where it's much later on and Daphne's like. oh my god [inaudsible] she's now a reporter she says but you know what, the. ghosts are always fake. So they go looking around New Orleans for a real ghost and eventually they actually find one. just too much of the actual supernatural. Classic Scooby-Doo is Ann Radcliffe. The ghosts are fake. Okay, but there's another tradition of Gothic that happens at the same time. Matthew Gregory &quot;Monk; Lewis got this nickname because he wrote a very famous book called, The Monk. And The Monk you might say is really horrific Gothic. In it the ghosts are real. It is blasphemous. The story goes something like this, again it's Italian right. Ambrosio is a man who's so repressed and severe that Shakespeare calls, what does he say? He scarce confesses that his blood flows. He's soon readily corrupted by a satanic woman named Matilda who gains access to his cell by disguising herself as a young nun. They become lovers, naughty, naughty. But he soon gets tired of her and of course she's promoting this, and he dreams of possessing a 15 year old girl named Antonia, who is the daughter of a preacher. Elvira who is a noble lady who is one of his, you know in his parish. He's her confessor. With the aid of the satanic Matilda who conjures up the devil also for added backup, Ambrosia gets into Antonia's room and is about to rape her. So he kills Elvira by smothering her with a pillow, gives Antonia a sleeping potion, and throws her in the dungeon. Later on, he does manage to raped her among the rotting dead. She cries out so he kills her. a little bit of Mary Rowlandson. Anyway, let's just listen to this, I won't bother to put it up. My, this is Agnes speaking toward the end of the novel, my grief unavailing, my infant was no more nor could my sighs impart to its tender little frame the breath of movement. I vowed not to part with it while I had life. Its presence was my only comfort. It soon became a mass of putridity, and to every eye was a loathsome and disgusting object. To every eye but a mothers. In vain did human feelings bid me recoil from this emblem of mortality. I persisted in holding my infant to my bosom and lamenting it, loving it, adoring it. Hour after hour have I passed upon my sorrey couch contemplating what had once been my child. Sometimes the quick, cold lizard roused me leaving his slimy track upon my face and entangling itself to the trusses of my wild and matted hair. waking around my fingers ringed with long worms which spread in the corrupted flesh of my infant. So this conflation of this kind of carnal house, you know disgusting flesh, morbidity, is part of this stream of the Gothic in which as I suggested the supernatural as real. We should go back to the story of Ambrosio. He manages to escape their clutches by selling his soul to the devil. Except he doesn't quite specify the terms of the bargain well enough so he's immediately transported by a demon to the top of a mountain peak. There's a kind of weird conflation of supernatural demonic activity, sexuality, violent and disgusting death. This is come all the way down to current slasher movies and other, and you know the kind of torture porn that people have been watching the last couple of years. It's all part of this larger idea of this strain of Gothic. And one last thing to say about this is the, what I just read to you from The Monk really might be considered a form that we could call the anti-sublime, right? The sublime is what has the power to compel and overwhelm us. Edwards is pioneering the sublime when he thinks about the thunder and the kind of awful majesty. The sublime is kind of like the romantic emotion par excellence. It's what they are try, they are striving to recreate. Matthew Lewis's you know disgusto Gothic is actually making fun of that. But you can see that this discourse of the sublime, is part of what Brown is drawing on in Edgar Huntly as well. well as he sends Edgar out into the wilderness. But the sublime, if the wilderness is about the sublime for many romantic writers, for Edgar Huntly the wilderness becomes about something else altogether. All right, one last thing. Terror and disgust is what Agnes feels in The Monk. Ann Radcliffe makes a distinction between what she calls, let me see if I have it here, the distinction between terror and horror. And she says that horror closes down the mind, whereas terror opens you up. So Monk Lewis' Gothic is horror. is still a very interesting book although if you read the subtext of the book, it suggests it's an account of American literature says that a lot ofAmerican literature is about cross-racial friendships and more between men. [Inaudible] he has a wonderful chapter on the Gothic novel and [inaudible] writes this, the guilt which underlies the Gothic and motivates its plots is the guilt of the revolutionary haunted by the paternal past which he has been striving to destroy. And the fear that possesses the Gothic is that in destroying the old ego ideas of church and state, the west has opened a way for the eruption of darkness. think there's a cultural reason why Gothic takes off, not when Walpole writes, but when Radcliffe and Lewis do. All those democratic ideals, liberty, equality, fraternity, turn into the horror of the terror, and that's a terror that is a horror. And you could see that in the United States there's this idea that in overthrowing what [inaudible] calls the old ego ideals of church and state we're opening up a new, a new moment. Right what, remember Jefferson's quote, that not everyone is born to be booted and ridden by other people. There's grounds of hope for everybody, he says. But it also means destroying old systems of obligation. What if the total depravity of human beings is true, not because of something called the fall of human kind, but just because that's human nature? Then, we've got a big problem. All of this you might say is the context for Charles Brockden Brown's Edgar Huntly. Okay? Now, let's take a look at the first pages of this. This is the preface. to Edgar Huntly on page 1 of the text. It's in the part that's called, to the public, right? And this lays out what we might think of as the project of American Gothic. Look at the third paragraph, well no let's just look at the whole thing. So, he says America has opened new views to the naturalist and politician but it has seldom furnished scenes to the moral painter. That new springs of action and new motives to curiosity should operate that the field of investigation opened to us by our own country should differ essentially from those which exist in Europe. is the purpose of this work to profit by some of these sources to exhibit a series of adventures growing out of the condition of our country. One merit the writer may at least claim that of calling forth the passions and engaging the sympathy of the reader by means hitherto unemployed by preceding authors. Puerile superstition and exploded manners, Gothic castles and chimaeras are the materials usually employed for this end right? If you're not writing seduction obviously you're writing Gothic. And if you're doing English Gothic you'reWriting about these stupid things. But here in the United States we have an opportunity. wilderness are far more suitable and for native of America to overlook these would admit of no apology. These therefore are in part the ingredients of this tale, and these he has been ambitious of depicting in vivid and faithful colors. The success of his efforts must be estimated by the liberal and candid reader. So that's the project of American Gothic, and that whole question of what are we supposed to do. I mean you know again think of Barlow; I'm gonna use Neoclassical poetic machinery, I's gonna give it a new world subject the hasty pudding and we're gonna come out with this great poem. giant knights and you know demons and all that stuff, but there are monsters in those woods here in the United States, all right? I'm gonna write about those. Take a look at the beginning of the novel, allright? It is adopting this epistolary form. So it's a series of letters that Edgar Huntly is writing down. Page 5, I sit down my friend to comply with thy request. At length does the impetuosity of my fear as the transports of my wonder permit me to recollect my promise to perform it. language of enlightenment right? My faculties. Terminated in repose. This will, proleptically remind us of what Wordsworth would later write about the way poetry springs, from emotion recollected in tranquility. That's theoretically what we're getting here. Turn the page. The second full paragraph he says this, how short is the period that has elapsed since thou and I parted, yet how full of tumult and dismay has been my soul during that period. How [inaudible] and enormous the transition from uncertainty to knowledge, exclamation point. Light burst on my ignorance.  Edgar Huntly becomes interested in Clithero Edney right? Remember what I said about doppelgangers last time. Take a look on page 15. This is in the second chapter. He worries about the possibility of behaving rashly here he says. Find it? He found it. Found it. Is it? Is this a story about enlightenment? Let's skip a little bit further on. Let's take a look at page 15 of the book. You know the situation right? He has a good friend Waldegrave who's been killed. at the second, second to last paragraph on the page. But it suddenly occurred to me for what purpose shall I prosecute this search? What benefit am I to reap from this discovery? How shall I demean myself when the criminal, all right the one who murdered Waldegrave, is detected? I was not insensible at that moment of the impulses of vengeance. But they were transient. I detested the sanguinary resolutions that I had once formed. Right and that's a form of [inaudible] right, for talking about being bloody minded or being revengeful. Yet I was fearful of the effect of my hasty rage. be impossible to arm myself with firmness? If forbearance be the dictative wisdom can it be so deeply engraven on the mind as to defy all temptation? My late experience has been of use to me. It has shown me my weakness and my strength. Having found my ancient fortifications insufficient to withstand the enemy, what should I learn from thence but that it becomes me to strengthen and enlarge them? No caution indeed, he says, can hinder the experiment from being hazardous. Is it wise to undertake experiments by which nothing can be gained and much may be lost? Curiosity is vicious if undisciplined by reason and inconducive to benefit. insane. And he says oh curiosity if vicious if undisciplined by reason. Okay, so we can keep curiosity in check and disciplined if we use our reason. But how does that square with what he says in the next paragraph? I was not however to be diverted from my purpose. Curiosity, like virtue, is its own reward. Knowledge is a value for its own sake and pleasure is a next to the acquisition without regard to anything beyond. It is precious even when disconnected with moral inducements and heartfelt sympathies. Ask yourself is there something wrong with that pattern of reasoning. as you might say free from danger. Is knowledge a value for its own sake? And is it true that it's valuable, but it's even more valuable when you have a personal stake in it? There's something odd about Edgar's reasoning here, and the text is again one of these texts where the way which Brown has put it down seemingly through the words of Edgar should be allowing us to open up space between what Edgar is ostensibly realizing about himself and what we are realizing about Edgar. to your knowing cares, to the deep and incurable despair that haunts you to which your waking thoughts are [inaudible] from which sleep cannot secure you. I know the enormity of your crime, but I know not your inducements. Whatever you were I see the consequences with regard to yourself. That is enough. Why should the efforts of our misdeeds be inexhaustible? Why should we be debarred from comforter? An opportunity of repairing our errors may at least be demanded from the rulers of our destiny. he who killed Waldegrave inflicted the greatest possible injury on me. That was an error which reflection has cured. Be comforted, he says. And he says Clithero was still incapable of speaking here. All right, this is the confidence of enlightenment thinking. This is the kind of thing that somebody like Franklin would believe, right? He can diagnose what's wrong with this person. He can help him. Right? Take a look a little bit further down on page 32. My condition was not destitute of enjoyment. My stormy passions had subsided into a calm, portentous and awful. Edgar Allan Poe's novel, The Grapes of Wrath, is about a young man who finds himself in a state of sleepwalking. Poe's character, Clithero, is accused of killing his friend, Waldegrave, but he refuses to believe it. He believes in reason and the primacy of reason, but in his dreams he descends into madness. Poe says Clit Hero's story is a counterweight to reason and a dramatization of enlightenment principles. confessor. He will dispense the healing balm of rationality and reason, right? How does that work out? Chapter 4, page 34. The bottom of the page, Clithero abrades him. You were unacquainted with the man before you. The inference with to have drawn with regard to my designs and my conduct are a tissue of destructive errors. You like others are blind to the most momentous consequences of your own actions. They have brought my life to a miserable close. Clithero portrays Edgar here not as a redeeming confessor, but as an agent of perdition, of damnation. And the story reinforces the novel's picture of identity as confusing and inconstant right? Think about the motif's in there. There's that strange co-partnership of being that Mrs. Loramer has with her brother Arthur Wyatt as if they weren't really somehow separate people that they might share the same kind of soul. And if we look at what happens in these 4 chapters right, Chapters 4 through 8, which his Clithero's story, we see that it's clear that he has had nothing to do with the death of Waldegrave. reconcile to common maxims might prove consistent with them. It's like it doesn't look like it makes sense but he believes there's got to be some design, something he can discover that will make it all make sense. I desire to restore him to peace but a thorough knowledge of his actions is necessary both to show that he is worthy of compassion and to suggest the best means of knowledge. So what is Edgar gonna do? A little breaking and entering. Take a look on the next page, Chapter 12, The Box. the hand and by which force could be exerted. Some spring therefore secretly existed which might forever elude the senses, but on which the hand by being moved over in all the directions might accidentally light. The process was effectual. A touch, casually applied at an angle drove back a bolt and a spring at the same time was sent in action by which the lid was raised above half an inch. No event could have been supposed more fortuitous, by chance than this. And a hundred hands might have sought in vain for the spring, the spot at which a certain degree of pressure was sufficient to produce this effect. last likely to attract notice or awaken suspicion. I opened the trunk with eagerness. The space within was divided into numerous compartments, none of which contained anything of moment. Tools of different and curious constructions and remnants of minute machinery were all that offered themselves to my notice. My expectations being thus frustrated, I proceeded to restore things to their former state. I attempted to close the lid, but the spring which had raised it refused to bend. No measure that I could adopt enabled me to place the lid in the same situation in which I had found it. enabled me to discover, to discover enabled me to push forward the bolt and thus to restore the fastening. I now perceive that Clithero had provided not only against the opening of his cabinet, but likewise against a possibility of concealing that it has been opened. So this is one of these da da daDa scenes that you should be looking at as kind of an exemplary moment. What's going on here? What's the immediate ideas that this scene conjures up for us? It's a box. happens? What comes out? >> All the bad things. One thing doesn't come out. Stays in there for use later. The thing with feathers. >> Hope, yeah. Think about what that is, so that's one cultural reference right? Clearly Pandora's Box, it's a way of understanding what's happened. He says I want to know something about Clithero. He in fact has learned something. He through his, you know insinuation of himself into the circumstance, Clit Hero says you've sealed my the damnation right? You've opened Clit hero's mind up. Now what's in there is out and it can't go back in. You know the language is keeping you at a distance but you can see him starting to get a little pissed off, right? And reason is having a more tenuous hold here. And this this account of breaking into the box seems a little [inaudible] but, in a kind of neutral sentence like, in my efforts to press down the lid which were augmented in proportion to the resistance that I met with it, the spring was broken. It give us an account of Edgar's relationship with Waldegrave. It gives us our first glimpse into Edgar's personal life. by me which I had culpably neglected, to inspire my zeal, inspirit my zeal to awaken my remembrance and insight to me to the performance of this duty, did this glimmering messenger, this half indignant apparition come. So he decides to postpone his searching for Clithero for a day in order to fulfill his promise. But then it occurs to him that maybe he's misinterpreted the vision of Waldegrave. And now some dodgy things come to light. Bottom of 125 we find out that Waldeg Grave might have been thinking some things that he maybe shouldn't have. shouldn't have been thinking about. Bottom of the page, and again this is maybe a critique of The Enlightenment. Waldegrave like other men early devoted to mediation and books had adopted a different [inaudible] different systems of opinions on topics collected with religion and morals. His earliest creeds tended to efface the impressions of his education to deify necessity and universalize matter, to destroy the popular distinctions between soul and body and to dissolve the supposed connection between the moral condition of man anterior, and subsequent to death. Edgar looks for these letters, on page 128, he finds that they're missing. This is the second full paragraph. I think it's this chapter if by now we haven't already that we start to realize that there is something wrong with Edgar's thinking process. Even more so perhaps on page 129, when he can't find the letter he finds himself lost in horror and amazement. I was not conscious of having taken it away, yet no hands but mine could have done it. On the last evening I had doubtless removed it to some other corner but forgotten it. that probably don't get fully worked out in the course of the novel. They are, they involve the appearance of a stranger named Weymouth who claims that Mary's inheritance from Waldegrave belongs to be their own. I mean, it's actually his own. And WaldEGrave hasn't left a record of it, but Edgar believes Weymour's claim, and something else comes out. This is on page 149. [ Pause ] Middle of the long paragraph. Think upon the merits and misfortunes of your brother's friend, think upon his aged father whom we shall enable him to rescue from poverty. I am not insensible to the evils which have returned upon us with augmented force after having for a moment taken their flight. I know the precariousness of my condition and that of my sisters, that our subsistence hangs upon the life of an old man. And the first act of whose authority will unquestionably be to turn us forth from these doors. Marriage with thee was anticipated with joyous emotions not merely on my encounter on thine, but likewise for the sake of these beloved girls to whom that event would enable me to furnish. an asylum. But wedlock is now more distant than ever. We start to see that there's a whole property motif that is sort of hidden and starting to come up to the surface here. He's been banking his whole future on the fact that Mary is supposed to inherit from Waldegrave. What doesn't, what happens if that doesn't happen? All right? So there'sa whole way in which you might say Edgar is self interested, that he only reveals to us in the margins of the narrative. He doesn't actually address it. in my rambles with some traces of this man, but might he still not live? His words had imparted the belief that he intended to destroy himself. This catastrophe however was far from certain. Was it not in my power to avert it? Could I not restore a mind thus vigorous to tranquil and wholesome existence? Right, we get back to that. So one of the things that Brown does as you might say maps the woods onto Edgar's mind. In exploring the woods, Edgar starts exploring facets of his own mind that have remained hidden from view. and I never sleep but with a candle burning at my pillow. Right, so from the confidence of enlightenment, now it's the pathetic I need to have a nightlight on, right? That's what Edgar has sunk to. What has caused all of this? His experience in the woods. And we'll take it up again on Wednesday, the experience of the woods, the story of Edgar's pit and the panther. I want you to look for the motif of light in the Panther scene, and also track one particular word, and that word is savage.