The goal is to understand solar cell conversion efficiency, which is the ratio of output to input energy. For most solar cells, this breaks down to the following progression, from the solar spectrum to charge collection. After we get through the fundamentals, we'll be in a good position to understand the different technologies and finally the cross-cutting themes. The lecture will focus on charge separation, incorporating elements of either side but mostly focused on Charge separation. The final lecture will be on the diode under illumination. Photosynthesis is the process of converting sunlight into chemical energy. The total system efficiency in blue is somewhere, depending on the plant, somewhere around 1%, maybe as high as 7% or 8%, depending on very specialized plants. And that, in part, is largely due to optical losses. If you can see the pie chart, the efficiency of each individual part can be broken down to this little pie chart up here. And just like a solar cell, the photosynthesis conversion efficiency of the entire system is dictated by the efficiency. absorption spectrum of chlorophyll. You'll see large portions of the solar spectrum that go underutilized. So we should have sheets that describe essentially the equivalent circuit diagram, the IV characteristics, and the energy band diagram for our pn-junction in the dark. We laboriously filled this out last class. We're just going to refresh ourselves to make sure we're all all on the same page. All right. Each of you should have on your desk these sheets. Oh, we don't have them on the desks. We need to pass those out. When we reverse bias our device, notice the separation of the quasi-Fermi energies. And the diffusion current increases. And that's why we have current now a positive value. We've defined the electrons traveling to the left as being a positive current. We have now electrons traveling from the n-type to the p-type material. And so instead of electrons flowing from n- type to p- type, where we had defined as positive current, electrons are flowing from p- Type to n-Type in that, which we defined as negative. dark, this is the only case in which we have carriers traveling from right to left. And it's happening because we're using that battery in the dark to change the chemical potential on either side. This reduces this barrier height and allows carriers to diffuse from the n-type into p-type. So you can think about it as forcing carriers up the junction. And this is a very useful technique because, in effect, what it's doing in a real device, when we you have a two-dimensional device within homogeneities. let's try to imagine what will happen under illuminated conditions, and let's start out in a very simple case. We'll assume that the principle of superposition applies here, that the photo-excited carriers-- in other words, when light shines into our device-- and light's coming in and generating electron-hole pairs, essentially exciting electrons across the band gap. What will happen to those electrons now that they're in the conduction band? Where will they want to go? To the right. electrons or holes, you rightly could assume that it would be the flow of positive charges. If we shine light on our system, we have electrons flowing from left to right here. That'll put us into negative territory. So that shifts the entire thing down. And we would add illumination current, an arrow pointing to the right right here, which would mean that we would have current flowing through our device. But there's still no difference in the chemical potential on either side. There's still a difference in Fermi energy. battery there, we have a resistor, the electrons will travel from the n-type material through that external load. And so this entire curve shifts down. You have your red x somewhere in the quadrant over here. And power is flowing out of the solar cell across that External load. So in the next slide, pretty much everything is right, except that, mea culpa, I forgot to replace the battery up there with a little resistor. So you'll want to correct that in your notes. device in the dark. But under illumination, now we have all of our carriers traveling from the p-type into the n-type. What's varying is the potential that the carriers have and, of course, the total amount of current. Eventually at some point, if you keep forward biasing here, the current will be 0. There will be no net current flow because there'll be no driving force for the carriers to go from the P-type to the N-Type. The voltage is such that we can power an external load. We have charge separation. The electrons are accumulated over here. And they have higher potential than they do on the other side. There's an incentive for them to go through the external circuit, deposit the power across that external load to get back to this other side where their charge separation is. We're focused on this IV quadrant right here because this is the quadrant in which power is coming out of our solar cell device. with a superposition, which we call the illumination current, I sub L. And that's what shifts our entire curve down by this. What do we think will happen if our light intensity goes down by a factor of 2? So now if the amount of sunlight falling on our solar cell drops by 1/2, what will happen? And what do we predict will happen based on this right here? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: The curve will shift, the red curve willShift up by about 1/1. So what I'll ask folks to do now is to-- we'll begin passing around these little tools. David Berney Needleman is our lab guru. He's the one who helped build these, really was the driving force behind getting them built. These are IV testers that will allow you to measure the current voltage characteristics of solar cells. And he's going to-- well, we'll pass them out while maybe he comes to the front here and explains how they work. So modify the intensity of the light and see how this works. IV curve changes. Note the y-axis scale, which might change as well. It might rescale depending on the condition. Give that a shot. All right, folks. Why don't we circle back real quick. I am very much in favor of multitasking and browsing. So if you want to keep your experiment running over the course of the remainder of the lecture, I will certainly have nothing opposed to testing a few different illumination conditions. The I sub L, just to really recap here, we have this ideal diode equation, the illumination current coming in from our light source. don't understand still why having a load would bias the device. Professor: It's more energetically favorable for these electrons to be on the other side. It's difficult for them to get back the other way. It could be more easy for people to get to the other end of the line, but it's not impossible, he says. "It's raised the chemical potential of this side," he says of the device's illumination. "I think that's a good thing," he adds, "because it means that the device is not biased." what happens to this IV curve is it goes zoom, begins dropping. If the solar cell reverse bias. current, or the current at reverse bias voltage, is not low enough, you could have a catastrophic failure of your module by just shading one of your cells. Thankfully, this is one of the testings that are done with the solar simulator to prevent that failure mode. All right. I'll try to keep the lecture focused on the broader general topics. But if somebody is interested in learning more, I'm happy to kind of dive into there. Most often, PV researchers will report a current density, in other words, a current per unit area instead of the actual current coming out of a solar cell device. So what you've been measuring here off of the DAC has been current, total current output from that device. And it may be a really tiny number, and it might be difficult to compare against other-sized solar cells. So we're looking in the IV quadrant. Voltage is going from 0 to a positive value. We have our ideal diode equation here. Solar cell researchers often do is they say, OK, let's normalize the current by the area to get a current density. At the y-intercept, there is maximum current a lot of it, right? That's the maximum power point. This is the point at which the solar cell is producing the maximum amount of power output. It's where this blue curve reaches a maximum. That is where the solarcell is outputting the maximum Amount of Power. The maximum power is truth in advertising. Open-circuit voltage is just as you would think it is. When your solar cell is in an open circuit, when you-- say you took a pair of scissors-- please don't this-- and cut the leads. There's no energy gain of the electron traveling through the external circuit, but there's a maximum current. And no power flowing through that external circuit because there's no potential to be dropped across the external resistor. So remember, the Fermi energy is the same on either side. built up across the p and the n side of the solar cell. And it would be the maximum voltage that could be supported by that solar cell device under illumination conditions. That's the open-circuit voltage, open circuit because there's no current, again, traveling through the external circuit. And voltage because this is-- well, it's an interesting point because it's the maximum volts here represented in the IV quadrant. And somewhere in between these two extreme conditions, you have a maximum power point where there is a power being deposited across your external circuit and current is flowing through. have the right load. So the two need to be matched to each other. And that's where some of the power electronics come into play. And the rationale for that assumption is as follows. The open-circuit voltage, this point, is generally between 0.35 and 0.4 volts minus the band gap, or lower than theBand gap. So you have the band. So it's a very interesting question. Let me repeat it so that the microphone can hear it. The homework question in the last homework, there was one question that inquired. gap energy minus 0.4 volts. It essentially has to do, in part, with losses inside of the solar cell at thermodynamic limits of conversion. Then what we've done is we'vedone another additional discounting from the Voc to the maximum power point, which we've assumed is around 0.1, maybe 0.2 volts. Notice the shape of the IV curve right here. The maximum powerpoint is interesting because the voltage at the maximumpower point is almost the Voc, in a good device. And the current at themaximumpowerpoint is almost Jsc, but not quite. not the current density, the current at the maximum power point. So take this current density and multiply by area, and that's effectively-- the units work out better that way. So be very careful whether you use total power in or normalized by unit area power, right? Just keep track of your units. Don't do like the professor. OK. So as long as the units are in units of watts per meter squared, you could still use current density. Those units would still work out. power out versus power in, the power out being the maximum power point power and the power in being the illumination from the sun. OK. This is starting to get interesting because it's beginning to click. Pieces from lecture number 2 come together with what we're seeing now. So this is solar cell output power at themaximum power point and sunlight coming in. And that box looks like this blue one right here. The area of that is the area of the solar cell that is producing power. box is Jmp times Vmp. OK? And notice I have another box around here. I have this clear box that starts at the Voc point and the Jsc point. And now I have two rectilinear shapes, this blue one and the clear one right here, the bigger one. The bigger one has an area of Jsc times Voc. And I'm going to define a parameter called fill factor, which will be the ratio of these two areas. If this is 1, which is virtually impossible to do, but if this were 1, it would mean that these two boxes were the same size. the square box right over here. The ratio of the two boxes is defined as the fill factor. The fill factor indicates the quality of your diode. If your fill factor is very poor, that means that that sun right over there at its maximum power point is being dragged toward the origin. That means that the area of this blue box is growing smaller relative to the area. of this clear box. And so the Jmp Vmp product is less than the Jsc Voc product. point divided by the solar insulation, fill factor being defined as the ratio of Vmp Imp product divided by Voc Ioc product. These parameters right here are fairly easy to measure using the solar simulator that you just put together. And so from an engineering point of view, when we break the solar cell output down into these three parameters so that we can better understand what's going wrong with our solar cell, we can get a better idea of what's wrong with the device, the professor says. is why efficiency matters. It might still be cheaper to use this instead of to use. this over here. That might very well be more expensive when you do the math and figure out how much it costs to deposit those materials. The material costs might end up whopping you. And so a simple equation that calculates all these parameters in, the material costs, the module efficiency, essentially the material [? and labor ?] costs, are being calculated in dollars per meter squared. And this is just a very simple back-of-the-envelope calculation type of way of estimating the cost of a solar system. pay more for a high-efficiency cell because I'm using less area, you can use this type of calculation to get to the answer quickly. This is a really back-of-the-envelope envelope engineering approach to estimating costs of a solar system. So I think this is a great place to stop. And if anybody has an idea, a fun idea, for a class project, I'd invite you to give a pitch up here at the front of class, or you're welcome to send it on an email to the class listserv.