Jonathon Gruber: What stops people from just bingeing on everything? It's their budget constraint. He says we can use budget constraints and the utility function to describe how consumers make choices. GRUBER: We'll talk about what budget constraints are. We'll then come to talking about how consumers made constrained choices. And then we'll end with an example of food stamp use, which is very different from binge-buying in terms of the amount of food you eat. earn, OK? That is there won't be any savings or borrowing,. OK? Now that is a simplifying assumption. And, indeed, we'll spend a couple lectures at the end of the semester talking about what happens when people can save or borrow. That said, this is not a terrible description of most Americans. The median American household has $400 in the bank. So that's what we'll do. It also might not be sort of a terrible describing of your life. you as well. We write the budget constraint as saying that your resources, your income Y, can be spent on either pizza or cookies. You can essentially devote your income to some combination of pizza and cookies, but you have to consider how much they actually cost in doing that. Now this class is not alchemy. We are not literally transforming pizza into cookies. That would be kind of cool, but we're not doing that, OK? But it's effectively doing the same thing. back to the key concept we talked about in the very first lecture, opportunity cost. The opportunity cost of a slice of pizza is two cookies. And that's the sense in which you're transforming pizza into cookies or cookies into pizza, OK? Now this seems kind of abstract, but let's actually think of an organization which has taken this principle to heart to develop the best method of weight loss in America, which is Weight Watchers. Now it turns out that dieting is super hard and basically doesn't work. Dieting is incredibly hard and basically doesn't work, OK? But a much more successful approach has been established by Weight Watchers. They set up a budget constraint and ask you to follow it. So, for example, they essentially assign point values to every good you might consume. They then ask, well, what weight are you today? What's your age and gender? That stuff matters for weight loss. And what weight do you want achieve? And they say, if you want to achieve a weight loss of x over y days, then you've got to limit yourself to z points. your goal is to lose weight. So we're going to give you the budget constraint. We're not going to tell you what to eat. That's why it's better than dieting because, once again, Adam Smith was right. People like to have choices. They like to let choice drive things. So, for example, vegetables are like zero points. Snickers bars are like six points, et cetera. They have various point systems, OK? For example, suppose your budget is 30 points, which would be pretty typical. the trade-off by imposing a budget constraint, by setting relative prices across goods. The points are like utils, they're not meaningful. They're only meaningful relatively. So budget constraints can help with a lot of kind of decisions in life. OK, now what happens if we shock the budget constraint? We're going to do a lot in this class of what we call comparative statics, which is, essentially, making changes in one thing or another and seeing what it does to the system. 1/3. So the slope has fallen from negative 1/2 to negative 1-3. The y-intercept has not changed, but you can have fewer slices of pizza. So it's a pivot inward. The other thing here, you'll notice we have all these funny dots and stuff, OK? That represents what has happened to what we call your opportunity set. Your opportunity set is the set of choices available to you given your income and market prices. So your opportunitySet initially was the black dots plus the red dots. Now your opportunity Set has shrunk. We haven't-- we assume they're spending all their money, but it's just a way of representing. We care about-- we just care about the area because it represents the set. But that's a good question. Now let's ask about a second thing. What if your income goes up? What if prices are back to 12 and 6, but your parents decide to send you more money? Suppose your parents-- or send you less money. It turns out you haven't been paying enough attention in 14.01. Audience: How do you determine your marginal rate of transformation? How do determine your-- like say it wasn't just pizza and cookies? How would you determine that value? JONATHAN GRUBER: That's a great question, and we're going to actually answer that question next lecture very explicitly. Hold on to that question. We'll talk about we'regoing to compare explicitly why income changes differ from price changes and what are the underlying mechanisms. Yeah? Audience: Great, great question. point A better? Why isn't it better to have two? Maybe you like cookies a lot and don't like pizza a lot. How can we say that point D is better than point A? Yeah? JONATHAN GRUBER: It's on a higher indifference curve. So point D dominates point A because it's a higher indifferent curve. Well, fine. Same person, by that logic, why not choose point E? It's above the budget. OK, likewise, point C you wouldn't choose. the costs. It's where you're constrained. You want to set the ratio of the benefits equal to the ratios of the costs, OK? Now I find it actually easier to think of it this way. If you just rearrange terms, you can write it as MUc over pc equals MUp over p sub p. I like this way of writing it because I call this the bang for the buck equation. What this is saying, your marginal happiness per dollar should be equal. And so, basically, think of that as your bang for your buck. Jonathon Gruber asks audience to trade two pizzas for one cookie. "That's what that number means. And that is a meaningful number," he says. "You are willing to give up 2.5 slices of pizza to get one cookie" "So what should you do? Eat less pizza. Eat more cookies," he asks. "We can use that. That's not an ordinal. that's cardinal" "You're willing to trade. Yeah, say it loudly so we can hear," he adds. The poverty line is essentially a measure of what's a minimum level of resources you need to live in America. The poverty line for an individual is about $14,000. For a family of four, it's about $28,000, depending on where you're from. If you're below the poverty line in America, roughly speaking, you get help with buying food. And that comes through a program we now call SNAP, which used to be called food stamps. It's basically a program the government has that provides money for individuals to buy food. Be used to purchase food. So here's the question. Why go through this rigmarole? Why not just give people cash? This fancy thing, if we want to give poor people money, why don't you just give them money? And we're going to-- I don't want the answer yet, OK? What I want to do is show you graphically how we think about the trade-off. So hold your thoughts. Let's go to figure 3-5A. And let's start with a cash transfer. it makes it a lot easier to have two goods. Your two goods are food and shelter. And, actually, quite frankly, if you're that poor, that probably is the only two goods you have to-- you can worry about at that level of income. Now let's say we give someone $500 in cash. Obviously, this graph is not to scale, OK? It looks like you're doubling his income, but it's only $500. This just sort of makes it easier. you're poor. We're going to give you $500 in cash. Well, now all we've done is shift out your budget constraint from 5,000 to 5,500. What does that do to your choices? Well, consider two different types of people. Person y, OK, they used to be on indifference curve I0. They used to spend almost all their income on food. They were probably homeless, OK? So they spent all their money on food and were basically homeless. constrained optimization. Jonathan Gruber: People always get to the point that makes them happiest. He says if you force them to spend $500 on food, they must be less happy. GRUBER: Do people-- I don't want-- I just want to know if people understand the graphics here and the conclusions I drew. "This is not normative economics. It's positive. The positive thing is, given their utility function, they move from point y1 to y2," he says. about what I did here on this graph alone? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Like, even if like you gave them money specifically for food, couldn't they then just reallocate their other money? JONATHAN GRUBER: OK, that's a good point. We'll come back to that. OK, but do people understand what the cash transfer is, how it works? OK, now let's go to SNAP. Instead of handing them a $500 check, we give them a debit card with $500 on it that can only be used on food. How does this affect their budget constraint? this course in drawing budget constraints. The new budget constraint is this kinked line that runs from 5,000 on the y-axis to the point x2 at 5,00. Can someone explain to me why that's the new budget constraints? Yeah? AUDIENCE: You can't spend a negative amount. So you can't spending like negative amounts of your non-food-stamp money on food. JONATHAN GRUBER: Exactly, you have-- we are forcing you to spend at least $500. you die, that would be really bad. The reason to do this is because we think they don't know best. In that case, maybe we don't feel so bad about forcing the guy to buy food instead of cocaine, OK? In other words, this a program which might make sense if we are paternalistic. Now we're getting into normative economics. If we think that people won't necessarily make the right decisions, we're not going to get the best out of them. for themselves, then it may be worth actually making them worse off because they're not worse off. Their perceived benefits are worse, but they don't know what they're doing, OK? Now you can see why-- I hope you can sort of immediately see why this concept makes economists a little nervous because why do we know what we want better than they do? So it makes people a little bit nervous, economists alittle bit nervous. And a lot of people are nervous to say, gee, maybe they're just happier doing cocaine. And how do weknow that that's the wrong way for them to spend their resources? curve and all their information? JONATHAN GRUBER: That's a very good point. If you're really just sad he's poor, then you should give him money. If what you're sad about is, gee, I don't like how he's living, I'm sad he can't have better food to eat, sad at the place he lives. Then you're starting to impose your preferences, but let's be important. That's imposing your preferences. but, really, the point of SNAP isn't really with contentedness or happiness, but rather like what would be to a more sustainable life. If the taxpayer cares about, look, we want a healthy populace that's going to live a long time and be productive and pay taxes, then that would be a reason to do this. But, once again, I want to emphasize, OK, this is paternalism. If you really just care what makes people happiest, you should give them cash, OK? in practice. Are they making a difference? Well, actually, we've run an experiment on this, OK? We're going to talk in this class a lot about empirical results in economics. Here we have an uncertain prediction from theory about whether food stamps will affect food purchases or not. So let's test it. And the way we test it is we actually have run food stamps cash out experiments where we literally take guys on in the street. You always want to start with the theory, but the theory sometimes has predictions that are uncertain. food stamps and give them cash instead and watch what happens to their consumption before and after. Food stamps is forcing people to spend about 15% more on food than they would like to unconstrained by the cash. The experiment is a real randomized trial. We literally flip a coin. Heads, you keep your food stamps. Tails, we replace those food stamps with an equal amount of cash. Then we watches what happens. What happens is that people spend about 10% less on food. "The price of our paternalism is 15%, OK? We are making people, effectively, 15% worse off," he says. "We're making them spend 15% more food than they want to," he adds. "So, actually, the evidence is starting to pour in that it might not be worth it" "In developing countries, the answer seems to be just giving people cash makes them better off, that actually, especially in developing country, people use the cash in productive ways" example, they have a series of evaluation programs where they've given people cash. And they find that people spend relatively little of that on drugs and alcohol, but they actually tend to spend it productively. And, in fact, they found, in developing countries, this often provides valuable resources for individuals to start businesses. So they ran experiment Uganda where a nonprofit company randomly offered a group of women $150, which is huge relative to their income. That actually effectively doubled their earnings. From that one injection of cash, it led them to actually double their annual earnings, OK? Vox.com followed these women up nine years later, and the effect had totally gone away. They're not worse off, but it looks like, at least what in the short run made them better off, well, that effect fades over time. But the bottom line is, at this point, I think the evidence is sort of probably in favor of being less paternalistic and just giving people cash, but that runs into a lot of difficulties in terms of our concerns about how people will spend it. stop there. We will come back on Monday, and we'll talk about how we actually go from this stuff to the demand curves we started the class with. Back to the page you came from. back to CNN.com home. Follow us on Twitter @cnnireport and @CNNOpinion. Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter. For more, go to www.cnn.com/lifestyle and www.dailymail.co.uk/lpin.