Ribonucleotide reductase is the only way in all organisms that you make the building blocks de novo that are required for DNA biosynthesis and repair. From a practical point of view, it's the target of drugs they use therapeutically in the treatment of cancer. And I think in probably not so distant future in the antibacterials because I think there are sufficient differences between humans and bacteria reductases that you could make specific inhibitors. Why am I interested in it? Because the chemistry is sort of unbelievable. Nature has figured out how to harness the reactivity of radicals to do really tough chemistry with exquisite specificity. ribonucleotide reductases have been the paradigm for thinking about that. There are 50,000 reactions in metabolic systems that are going to be radical mediated transformations, yet we never talk about radicals in introductory courses. So I think that's all going to change. In the active site of these enzymes, the half-life of a tyrosyl radical in solution has a half- life of a microsecond. If you reduce it with an electron and a proton, the enzyme is completely dead. So nature has figured out a way. How do you do this oxidation? She has a little metal cluster right adjacent to where this tyrosine is. And the function of this littleMetal cluster is to put this into the oxidized state, which is essential for the way the enzyme works. Of the enzyme can be on the order four days. And this was the first example of-- it would be another example of a post-translational modification that we talked about earlier. oxidation the two atoms are sitting within a few angstroms of each other. So that's unprecedented. It involves hopping radicals which no one has ever seen before. The other reason that people in biology are interested in this is that if you believe in an RNA world where we have a ribosome where a catalysis of peptide bond formation is all with the RNA, not with the protein. How do you get from an RNA to a DNA world? The only enzyme that does that transformation making these building blocks are ribonucleotide reductases. and do the same chemistry, but they have different metal cofactors depending on where they evolved. The function in all cases is to generate a radical in the active site and then the chemistry is the same in all these things. And the function of the metalcofactors in all case is to create a radical, which is the key to the chemistry in all of these cases, says Dr. Michael Bociurkiw, a professor of chemistry at the University of California, San Diego.