[Music] okay one of the things that we're trying to figure out is which one of these is one to do right so we know that we wanted to raise our axis efficiently as possible once the minimize of deadweight loss we also [Music] [Applause] their payroll taxes these attaches our wages and these are used to fund social programs so this would be things like social security insurance so we've got our taxes so so these are taxes on corporate incomes and all the money that they're making and where wealth taxes access people. people earn more income base they are attacked a smaller amount of smaller percentage of the rounding. People pay a small person their income tax as their income goes up so only if their income go down they're going to pay a larger percentage of their income. With the 4-channel it's the same so here you see people pay the same percentage whether progressive its detect ops as progressive people pay lark there and so it's not the dollar amount it's gonna be obvious that everyone is must and a larger dollar amount in taxes. Sales taxes are a regressive tax even though rich people buy more stuff I'm going to pay more and sales tax dollar amounts as a percent of their income it's actually usually profit or loss. This marginal tax rate is the percentage change in taxes any tax paid from some changing our average tax rate beer is just going to be tax paid so there's my tax rate's tell us how much additional tax event played based upon our so they so they.taxes redress property tax can be kind of course non-progressive can depend upon how many things that is your taxi in the race and things like that. go coming back to that they have passed out here we've got these marginal tax rates here with you guys. Let's assume that we made for $90,000 you're single and we wanted to know how much you pay so that's how I come here and in essence what you've done is you've got different amounts of here and of these dollars in here. If you're at $8,000 and you go out and earn another hundred dollars you're going to pay $10 and times but if you're making eighty six thousand dollars you need to have you earn another 100 dollars. for obvious reasons why what did you do then people stopped working Sunday so we're looking at these taxes it's interesting it's also interesting that we want to know do we tax people or to be tax household so let me show you an example because the units that were taxed and can have all kinds of different applications [Music] that's hot let's look at a tax that looks like this let's soon on the first 20,000 20% from 20,00 so let'sLook at their income right Donald makes $8,000 Elena makes $20,000 bill makes $50,000 Hilary makes $ 50,000 if we tax them individually okay Donald your first 20,.000 taxes ten percent your money from 20 to 50 stops the 20 percent. Your money about 50 stops at 30% we do the warmer that we just did if we look at this on an individual tax basis McDonald's gonna hold. 17,000 Orlando will go to top Bill and Hillary will both oh eight thousand each so our total BAM attacks if we put this way 19,000 if we tax the household this goes back to this idea we discussed the horizontal language all right we want to treat people that are in similar circumstances the same those people are being treated decide why do we have this front why are we having these different taxes why is the why are these numbers larger than these numbers was because of the progressive nature of the task. want to penalize people for being married does that make sense right I mean society should not encourage people to do just shack up right exactly make sense of maybe that for at least generally we've got what we're done matter so we know we don't want this that's not the answer is is that there is no answer you cannot devise but these are just kind of illustrates some of the problems that you have in developing the taxes do you want to make you wantto penalize marriage generally all right. when we're looking at fiscal policy Keynes's and we'relooking at things wide changes and taxes or changes in government spending. When we look at government we can have for the government of course the revenue for them the taxes so we can say a budget deficit this is when they're spent is greater than government brothers. When they can also have a bunch of surplus this would be even government spending last thing or so here's government spending evil. If you look at the national debt that's just some eight of all these government debt assistants are possible just a doll and we saw for our country. was in this year spec's 383 three point eight trillion dollars when we spent almost three point nine those caught 329 Troy and we had parameters seeds we have revenue three point three trouble nice we have seven under six hundred billion dollars and we can engage in types of policies here too we're under the change and your demand as we can have spam canary fiscal policies. We can have contractionary order restrictions physical follows so if our expansionary fiscal policy here we're seeing the decrease in taxes or an increase in government spending and if you have a deficit the deficit is going to get larger. deficit or if you have a surplus and interestingly enough these surpluses and with these deficits we can go out and we can engage the fiscal policy that makes these guys change on purpose we can have it's called discretionary fiscal policy. Falls as opposed to passing just go balls where these guysChange. Falls. Falls or making them rise Falls as instead of passing just goes balls wherethese guys change. Falls and rises are called real GDP or I saw GDP doing something kind of like this and we know it's happening here between time t1 and t2. going down what's happening to tax revenue it goes to sourcing tactics if unemployment is going up and so there's more people not working. More people needing the welfare this for more people we need food stamps etc. What's happening together and spend it's so tears pair of us keeping everything else constant what should happen to the deficit between Taiwan and it goes up deficit it's gonna get larger if we had a surplus if I can spot and do that on its own you don't have to do anything. automatic stabilizers are things that change government spending automatic. These things automatically increase taxes or was change tax that automatically change taxes and/or so examples would be things like food stamps Wow because by the time you know you're in a recession and then you go out and say what should we do about this let's help people, it could be like we don't need a I just took too long that's why I call automatic stabilizers they automatically begin to kick in they automatically start increasing government spending. a beautiful fiscal policy we have this new classical view of fiscal policy and we have those called the supply side now. What we'll see on Wednesday and what these guys actually do is what we'll hear on Wednesday. We'll see what they actually do and how they do it. It's going to be very interesting to see what happens in the next few days. It will be a very interesting week. It'll be very exciting to see how they go about it. We will find out what happens.