hey everyone it's sarah with registerednessrn.com and in this video i'm going to be covering sinus tachycardia. Whenever you're done watching this youtube video you can access the free quiz that will test you on this content. Let's get started what is sinus Tachy Cardia? Well sinus tells us that we're dealing with a heart rhythm that originates in the sa node this is also known as a sinoatrial node and it is found here in the upper part of the right atrium. of the electrical conduction system is to stimulate your heart muscle cells so they will be and pump blood throughout your body. It all starts here with the sa node which again is located in the upper part of the right atrium. If it's working like it should it should cause your heart to beat at about 60 to 100 beats per minute and its goal is to really stimulate these atria to get them to contract so it leads to atrial depolarization which is going to lead to the contraction of your atria. little bit so those atria can fully empty then the signal is going to go down through the bundle of his because we're ready for ventricle depolarization so we can get contraction of the ventricles to occur. The signal goes down the bundle branches the right bundle branch the left bundle branch then the purkinje fibers and this whole process that's occurring is creating that pqrst waveform that you see on the ecg now. If this process is occurring like it should with the sa node acting as the pacemaker of the heart causing this heart to beat at about 60 to 100 beats per minute you're going to see what's called normal sinus rhythm. you want to look at those p waves make sure that they are normal. Make sure that there is only one p wave in front of every qrs complex and make sure they're upright. With sinus hack the atrial rate is going to be greater than 100 beats per minute and then whenever you're looking at the p wave take your calipers and go from p wave to p wave and make make sure there's the same distance between those because that means it's occurring at a regular interval. sinus tac because the rate is so fast remember with sauna's bradycardia the qt interval was a little bit longer and then after each qrs complex you should have a t wave present as well. Now let's analyze this rhythm together using this criteria we just went over here we have a six second ecg strip and the first thing what I want to do is i want to look at those p waves and make sure that they're normal if you look at this rhythm with me you can notice that you see these squiggly lines throughout we refer to that as artifact. the heart rate now this can be disease related or it can be non-disease related. We want to increase our heart rate whenever we exercise because that gives us a good workout so in that case sound attack isn't really that bad. If we're in a fearful stressful situation let's say you're about to be robbed your sympathetic nervous system is going to kick into gear and it's going to increase your heart rate so it can help hopefully protect you from danger and that's a good thing. can all increase the heart rate so whenever we take those things away remove the maldives and whatever the sinus tack will disappear and hopefully their heart rate will go back to normal. Then there are disease-related issues that can cause sinus tac this can be for instance let's say your patient has anemia so with anemia they have a low amount of red blood cells. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body so if we don't have a lot of those red blood cell hanging out we have low amounts of oxygen our body can increase that heart rate to try to compensate for those levels. whenever a patient develops sinus attack and they have a disease it could be that their disease is worsening and it's a warning sign that hey this needs to be investigated more so anytime you have a patient and they're going in to sinus tack you want to investigate it. You don't want to just write it off. You want to see okay what could possibly be going on with my patient why they went into this so for instance let's say that you're caring for a patient who just suffered a myocardial infarction and they go into sinus tachycardia well this could be a warning signs that they may be going into cardiogenic shock. compensate for what's going on but in the end it's going to fail and the patient'sGoing to have cardiogenic shock and you'd want to report that to the doctor. Be looking for those other signs related to that be checking out the respiratory system are they having shortness of breath whenever they breathe in. Are they having chest pain that's getting worse or are they developing a cough so you'd also want toReport that as well now to help you remember those major causes of major causes. sinus tachycardia let's remember the word tacky hearts t is for temperature elevation and this could be if your patient has infection leading to sepsis a is for aerobics this is exercise and we already talked about why that can occur c is for cardiac disease and this can be in patients who have congestive heart failure or who have suffered a myocardial infarction leading to cardiogenic shock h is for hyperthyroidism and sinus attack may be the only symptom for some of these patients. slash fear a for anemia r for respiratory conditions like pulmonary embolism chronic lung diseases where you have decreased oxygen t therapeutics like atropine albuterol dopamine epinephrine or even withdrawing from beta blockers so it's important you tell the patient just don't stop taking them you have to be tapered off and then lastly s stimulants such as nicotine alcohol cocaine caffeine and amphetamines now let's talk about the problems that can occur with sinus tachycardia for some patients. period of time and it's going really fast this puts extra stress on that heart and it increases its demands for oxygen. If a patient has coronary artery disease where there's fatty plaques in those coronary arteries that's going to limit how much fresh oxygenated blood gets to that heart muscle. So patients who have an underlying problem of that we want to make sure that we keep the heart rate slower. If heart muscle doesn't get the oxygen it needs it can die it becomes ischemic so that could lead to a myocardial infarction. Sustained sinus tachycardia can actually decrease cardiac output in your patient. As a nurse we want to assess for any potential causes for why our patient is running this rhythm. The patient can wear a halter monitor if they're at home having this and this will monitor their rhythm and then it'll go back to the cardiologist who will read can be ordered to bring down the fever and then the nurse's role is to report the rhythm change to the physician and let them know about it. it's going to limit the amount of blood that's going into the body so your patient can start presenting with a very low blood pressure that's the salt getting less than 90. With this heart is just literally failing so you'll get the backup of blood blood will start backing up into the lungs so whenever you listen to their lung sounds you'll start to hear crackles where they're developing pulmonary edema. You also want to look at their extremities how do they feel are they cool check that capillary refill is the time increase that could mean you definitely have decreased cardiac output. that and see what's possibly going on with the patient assessing blood levels like the thyroid level making sure they don't have hyperthyroidism looking for anemia or maybe infection they have a white blood cell count that is high and looking at that medication history making sure that they're not on any medicines that could be increasing their heart rate. This leads me to medications that can be ordered to help slow down that heart rate one group of medications are beta blockers and one type is called metoprol beta blockers. cool extremities and then you want to teach the patient if you're able to avoid any activities that could further increase their sinus tag like if they're smoking or drinking caffeine or using any other stimulants because we don't want their heart rate to get up any higher okay so that wraps up this review over sonos tachycardia. If you'd like to watch more videos on this topic you can access the link in the youtube description below. Click the link below to access the video.