Iceland is one of the world's most active volcanic hotspots crafer has erupted 30 times in a thousand years and last blue in the 1980s. Scientists are now preparing to drill into it the is to learn more about how volcanoes behave so that we can better predict eruptions and also tap into a super hot source of energy. Residents of grindvik have had their lives appended by a string of eruptions but researchers here hope their work will change that helping to save lives and money. 2 km down is a red hot magma chamber and scientists are preparing to drill down into it starting in 2026 they'll begin work on the first ever underground magma Observatory. The plan is to drill just short of the magma itself possibly poke it a little bit the geothermal resource which is at the heart of the project will allow scientists to predict volcanic activity with more accuracy. "This will change uh how we predict uh uh eruptions with the second well they'll harness that extreme heat developing what's called near magma geothermal" just above the magma body we believe that is around 5 to 600° C just two ball holes of this kind could match the output of this entire plant. There is an obvious uh Game Changer and there's the exciting possibility a potentially Limitless cheap clean energy. This is a big part of how we are going to take geothermal to the next level and also of course a huge part in the green energy transition. At the University of Iceland lab work is underway testing materials to withstand extreme heat and pressure this is carpon steel. New materials and more corrosion resistant Alloys they're working with temperatures of up to 500° and corrosive gases. We have been focusing on highgrade Alloys nickel Alloys and also titanium Alloys but there's still one question I need to ask from the outside all this sounds you know just a little bit risky. Is it going to be safe to do this we believe that sticking a needle into a huge magma chamber is not going to create an explosive effect this happened in 2009 and they found out that they had probably done this a few times before without even knowing it. many other locations around the world where we have active volcanoes so this crazy sanding plan may actually have huge potential e. Many other locations in the world. where we has active volcano so thiscrazy sanding plans may actually be a huge potential. e. Back to Mail Online home. Return to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the site you came From. Click here to read the original article on The Daily Mail Online. Back into the Daily Mail home.