Professor: The configuration of a particle is given by, or described by, a wave function psi of x. In 3D, the wave function would be a function of all three positions x, y and z. Professor: We're currently in our one dimensional tripped out tricycles. If we had two particles, our wave function. would be of the position of each. Each particle would have its own wave function, which would be the same in both 3D and 2D. The meaning of the wave function is that the norm squared psi of x, norm squared, it's complex, dx is the probability of finding the particle- There's an n in their.particle. x1, x2, and so on. So we'll go through lots of details and examples later on. But for the most part, we're going to be sticking with single particle in one dimension for the next few weeks. Now again, I want to emphasize this is our first pass through our definition of quantum mechanics. there are two possible configurations the system can be in, which in quantum mechanics means two different wave functions that could describe the system given psi 1 and psi 2. It's also possible to find the system in a superposition of those two psi is equal to some arbitrary linear combination alpha psi 1 plus beta psi 2 of x. OK? So some things to note-- so questions about those before we move on? No questions? Nothing? Really? You're going to make he threaten you with something. This is not trivial stuff. of x norm squared is equal to 1. This is just saying that the total probability that we find the particle somewhere had better be one. If it's less, then the particle has simply disappeared. And basic rule, things don't just disappear. So probability should be normalized. And this is our prescription. So a second thing to note is that all reasonable, or non stupid, functions of x are equally reasonable as wave functions. OK? So this is a very reasonable function. It's nice and smooth. It converges to 0 infinity. properties you might want. This is also a reasonable function. It's a little annoying, but there it is. And they're both perfectly reasonable as wave functions. This on the other hand, not so much. For two reasons. First off, it's discontinuous. And as you're going to show in your problem set, discontinuities are very bad for wave. functions. The second is over some domain it's multi valued. There are two different values of the function. That's also bad, because what's the probability? It's the norm squared. equally reasonable as wave functions. All states corresponding to reasonable wave functions are equally reasonable as physical states. There's no primacy in wave functions or in states. However, with that said, some wave function are more equal than others. And this is important, and coming up with a good definition of this is going to be an important challenge for us in the next couple of lectures. So in particular, this wave function has a nice simple interpretation. If I tell you this is psi of x, then what can you tell me about the particle whose wave function is the psi of X? What do you know? the Fourier theorem. Take any wave function which is given by some complex valued function, and it can be expressed as a superposition of plane waves. 1 over 2pi in our normalization integral dk psi tilde of k, but this is a set of coefficients. e to the ikx. We're saying pick a value of k. There's a number associated with it, which is going to be an a magnitude and a phase. And that's the magnitude and phase of a plane wave. functions. So this is a plane wave with a definite wavelength, 2pi upon k. We know what its momentum is. Its momentum is h bar k. Any function, we're saying, can be expressed as a superposition by summing over all possible values of k, all possible different wavelengths. That make sense? Fourier didn't think about it that way, but from quantum mechanics, this is the way we want to thinking about it. It's just a true statement. a definite position? AUDIENCE: Delta. PROFESSOR: A delta function, exactly. So I claim that any function psi of x can be expanded a sum over all states with a definite position. So is this true? Is it true that I can take any function and expand it in a superposition of delta functions? Absolutely. We're going to find this is a general statement that any state can be expressed as a superpositions of states for any observable quantity you want. question I want to ask you. Is that a superposition? Yeah. I mean every vector can be written as the sum of other vectors. And it can be done in an infinite number of ways, right? So there's no such thing as a state which is not a superpositions. Every vector is asuperposition of other vector. It's a sum ofother vector. So in particular we often find it useful to pick a basis and say look, I know what I mean by the vector y, y hat is a unit vector in this direction. And now I can ask, given that these are my natural guys, the guys Iwant to attend to, is this a superpose of x and y? Or is it just x or y? There's nothing hallowed about your choice of basis. There's no God given basis for the universe. But any given vector can be expressed as a superposition of some pair of basis vectors. So this somehow is about finding convenient choice of based. Whereas x hat itself is not.a superposition. So there's no natural choice. of basis, but it's sometimes convenient to pick a basis. This is the direction of the surface of the earth, and this is perpendicular to it. This would be slightly strange if you're leaning. this is an expansion of a function as a sum, as a superposition of other functions. We'll talk about that more. Quickly what's the momentum associated to the plane wave e to the ikx? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: h bar k. So now I want to just quickly run over some concept questions for you. So whip out your clickers. OK, we'll do this verbally. All right, let's try this again. How do you know whether the particle is big or small by looking at the wave function? Professor: Which particle has a larger momentum? Think about it, but don't say it out loud. If it has higher momentum, what do you just intuitively expect to know about its energy? It's probably higher. OK next one. Compared to the wave function psi of x, it's Fourier transform, psi tilde of x contains more information, or less, or the same, or something. So let's vote. A, more information. B, less information. C, same. OK, good you got it. of length l, 0 outside of that region. f has a single well defined wavelengths. Or f is made up of a wide range of wavelengths? Think it to yourself. OK, now before we get talking about it, I want everyone to close their eyes. Or close the eyes of the person next to you. That's fine. And now and I want you to vote. A is f has one well defined wavelength. B isf has a wideRange of wavelengths. It's closer to true. The sine wave is an infinite, and it cancels out past minus l over 2 and positivel over 2. You need to add a bunch of wavelengths to actually cancel it out there. If you only had the thing of a single wavelength, it would continue with a single wavelengths all the way out. If yo you take a superposition, the sine is continuous and differentiable everywhere, because it's a cosine, right? So if yo you Take a Superposition of a Sine Wave, the Sine is Differentiable Everywhere. of sines and cosines, do you ever get a discontinuity? No. Do you get something whose derivative is discontinuous? No, you don't. So it's going to take an infinite number of sine and cosine to reproduce that little kink at the edge. So how would you ever reproduce a thing with a discontinued thing? Well, you'd need some infinite sum of sines & cosines where there's some technicality about the infinite limit being singular. question. That's a very good question. The question here is look, there's two different things you can be talking about. One is arbitrarily large and arbitrarily short wavelengths, so an arbitrary range of wavelengths. And the other is an infinite number. But an Infinite number is silly, because there's a continuous variable here k. You got an infinitenumber of wavelengths between one and 1.2, right? It's continuous. So which one do you mean? So let's go back to this connection that we got a minute ago from short distance and high momentum. That thing looks like it has one particular wavelength. But I claim, in order to reproduce that as a superposition of states with definite momentum, I need arbitrarily high wavelength. To construct or detect an arbitrarily small feature you need arbitrarily large momentum modes. I want the connection between momentum and the length scale to be something that becomes intuitive to you. So when I talk about something with short. distance, I emphasize you to think and encourage you to conflate short distance and large momentum. It's really about the range, not just the number. And I want you to be able to do the same thing with something with long. distance. I hope that this will help you. features, I'm going to talk about it as something with large momentum. And that's because in a quantum mechanical system, something with short wavelength is something that carries big momentum. What should be true of the Fourier transform in order for this to reasonably function? And among other things, being able to have a Fourier. transform where you don't have arbitrarily high momentum modes is going to be an important condition. That's going to turn to be related to the question of whether a wave function can be Fourier transformed. to the derivative being continuous. That's a very good question. So that's the optional problem 8 on problem set 2. Other questions? PROFESSOR: Cool, so that's it for the clicker questions. Sorry for the technology fail. So I'm just going to turn this off in disgust. that's really irritating. So today what I want to start on is pick up on the discussion of the uncertainty principle. The certainty of the momentum seems to imply lack of knowledge about the position and vice versa. So in order to do that, we need to define uncertainty. just want to run through what should be totally remedial probability, but it's always useful to just remember how these basic things work. So consider a set of people in a room, and I want to plot the number of people with a particular age as a function of the age of possible ages. So 1, 1, 3, 2, 4, 5. OK, so what's the probability that any given person in this group of 16 has a particular Age? I'll call it a. the number that have age a over the total number. If you grabbed one of these people from the room with a giant Erector set, and pull out a person, and ask them what their age is, what's the most likely they'll have? The average age is around 19 or 20. It turns out to be around 22. It's just going to be the sum of the number with a particular age over thetotal number, which is just the sum with any given age. be 19.2 for this. But if everyone had a little sticker on their lapel that says. I'm 14, 15, 16, 20, 21 or 22, how many people have the age. 19.4. That's what I got. So in particular how did I get the average? I'm going to define some notation. This notation is going to stick with us for the rest of quantum mechanics. The average age, how do I compute it? So we all know this, but let me just be explicit about it. It's the sum over all possible ages. The average value of a squared is equal to the sum over all possible ages of a times the ratio of Na to N. The average of the square of ages is the same thing. The expected value of some function of a is equal-- and this is something you don't usually do-- to the value of f of a, times the probability that you measure that value in the first place. It's a very useful relation. And so, again, does the average have to be measurable? No, it certainly doesn't. average value of a squared is not equal to 0. And that's because the squared has everything positive. So how do we characterize-- this gives us a useful tool for characterizing the width of a distribution? So here we have a distribution where its average value is 0, but its width is non-zero. And then the expectation value of the squared, the expected value of an a squared, isNon-Zero. This is going to be like our uncertainty. Well, I'm not sure. How unsure are you? Well, that should give us a precise measure. So we always get something that's centered at 0. The average value of a minus it's average value. So deviation is not a terribly good thing on average, because on average the deviation is always 0. That's what it means to say this is the average. So the derivation is saying how far is any particular instance from the average? And if you average, if you get 0, that's not a very good thing, is it? It's just a convenient thing to note. In quantum mechanics, the uncertainty is the square root of the standard deviations squared. Different probability distributions are going to give me different delta a's. When you write delta a, there's nothing in the notation that says which distribution you were talking about. In a physical system, the expected value of x depends on what the state of the system is, what the wave function is. So there are a quantum mechanics. And this has a different flavor. It carries different implications, and we'll see what that is later. The average value of some x, given a probability distribution on x where x is a continuous variable, is going to be equal to the integral. Let's just say x is defined from minus infinity to infinity, which is pretty useful, or pretty typical. The probability distribution of x times x. I shouldn't use curvy.track. It's just this is notation that's used typically, so I didn't put the parentheses around precisely to alert you to the stupidities of this notation. couple of ways to improve this notation. One of which is to write the expected value of x in the state psi, so you write psi as a subscript. Another notation that will come back-- you'll see why this is a useful notation later in the semester. And we will give meaning to this notation later, but I just want to alert you that it's used throughout books, and it means the same thing as what we're talking about the expectedvalue of x given a particular state psi. The probability of having that momentum times momentum, right? Everyone cool with that? This is what you mean by probability. But we need to know if we have a quantum mechanical system described by state psi of x, how do we get the probability that you measure p? Do I want to do this now? Yeah, OK I do. And we need a guess. We made a guess at the end of last lecture that, in quantum mechanics, this should be dp minus infinity to infinity of the Fourier transform. This is a thing with dimensions of what? Length, right? But over on the right hand side, we have a length and a probability, which is a number, and then another length. So why are we getting something with. dimensions of length, not something with Dimensions of length squared? And the answer is this is not a probability. It is a probability density. So it's got units of probability per unit length. This has dimensions of one over length. The probability to find the particle between x and x plus dx. So that was our second postulate. In quantum mechanics, the expectation value of x.dx squared is the probability of finding it in this domain. So what we're doing is we're summing over all such domains the probability times the value. This is the difference between discrete, where we didn't have these probability densities, we just had numbers, pure numbers and pure probabilities. Now we have probabilities densities per unit whatever. Yeah? The psi is just to denote that this is in the state psi. And it can be pronounced in two. ways. You can either say the expectation value of x, or the expectation of x in the state psi. And this would be pronounced one of two ways. It's the same idea, but they have different flavors, right? So whatever your native language is, you've got some analog of this. This means something in a particular mathematical language for talking about. And so I could see he's a nice guy, I could say he's [? carinoso ?], and they mean different things in different languages. have chosen some other definition of uncertainly. So why this one? And one answer is, indeed, the uncertainty relation works out quite nicely. But then I think important to say here is that there are many ways you could construct quantities. This is a convenient one, and we will discover that it has nice properties that we like. There is no God given reason why this had to be the right thing. I can say more, but I don't want to take the time to do it, so ask in office hours. we're going to derive it twice soon and then later. The later version is better. So let me work out some examples. Or actually, I'm going to skip the examples in the interest of time. They're in the notes, and so they'll be posted on the web page. By the way, the first 18 lectures of notes are posted. I had a busy night last night. So I want to go back to this and ask a silly-- I wantto make some progress towards deriving this relation. in terms of the wave function the following way. Are we ever in a position to say intelligently that a particle-- that an electron is both hard and white? AUDIENCE: No. PROFESSOR: No, because being hard is a superposition of being black and white, right? It's not that we don't get too. It's that it doesn't make sense to do so. In general, being in a definite position means being in an extremely complex superposition. having different values for momentum. They claim that any function can be expressed as a superposition of states with definite momentum, right? Well, among other things a state with definite position, x0, can be written as asuperposition, 1 over 2pi integral dk. But in particular, it's clear that this is not-- this quantity can't be a delta function of k, because, if it were, this would be just e to the ikx. And that's definitely not a deltafunction. This is what we're after. We want some good definition of p given that we're working with a wave function which is a function of x. If I take a state, psi of x, which is equal to e to the ikx, this is a state that has definite momentum h bar k. A state with a definite momentum has the property that, when you hit it with the operation associated with momentum, you get back the same function times a constant, and that constant is exactly the momentum we ascribe to that plane wave. a wave, a plane wave e to the iks, how do I get h bar k out of it? Note the following, the derivative with respect to x. Multiply by h bar, divide by i, derivative withrespect to x e to ikx. That's suggestive. And I can write this as p e to the iks. So in particular, if I want to get hbar k, I can multiply by h bars and divide by  i. of h bar are. Delta x delta p is h bar. So if h bar has units of momentum times length, what are the units of k? 1 over length. So does this dimensionally make sense? Yeah. Momentum times length divided by length number momentum. So dimensionally we haven't lied yet. So this makes it tempting to say something like, well, hell h bar upon i derivative with respect to x is equal in some-- question mark, quotation mark-- p. But I don't know about you, but I find that deeply, deeply unsatisfying. question slightly differently. We've followed the de Broglie relations, and we've been led to the idea that there's some relationship between the momentum, the observable quantity that you measure with sticks, and meters, and stuff. But I didn't derive anything. I gave you no derivation whatsoever of the relationship between d dx and the momentum. Instead, I'm simply going to declare it. In quantum mechanics, p is represented by an operator, it's represented by the specific operator h bar upon I derivative with respect to x. discovered it, Emmy Noether. Noether, incidentally, was a mathematician. Ville went to her and was like, look, I'm trying to understand the notion of energy. And this guy down the hall, Einstein, he has a theory called general relativity about curved space times and how that has something to do with gravity. But it doesn't make a lot of sense to me, because I don't even know how to define the energy. So how do you define momentum and energy in this guy's crazy theory? algebra, looked at the problem and was like I don't even know what it means in classical mechanics. So she went back to classical mechanics and, from first principles, came up with a good definition of momentum, which turns out to underlie the modern idea of conserved quantities and symmetries. And it's had enormous far reaching impact, and say her name would praise. So Noether tells us the following statement, to every symmetry-- and I should say continuous symmetry-- to every symmetry is associated a conserved quantity. is associated to translations? Conservation of momentum, p dot. Time translations, t goes to t plus capital T. Energy, which is time independent. Rotational symmetries. x, as a vector, goes to some rotation times x. What's conserved by virtue of rotational symmetry? AUDIENCE: Angular momentum. PROFESSOR: Rock on. OK So quickly, I'm not going to prove to you Noether's theorem. It's one of the most beautiful and important theorems in physics, and you should all study it. The potential breaks that translational symmetry. The [? system ?] is not translationally invariant. The potential is not constant. It is not translational. It's not a translationally. invariant system. There is a force. And the potential is breaking the translational symmetries of the system. It breaks the translationally-inviolable system. And it is not a translational system at all, but a potential that breaks translational symbolic systems. Only potential that has full translational symmetry in one dimension is translation invariant, i.e. constant. Less trivial is conservation of energy. If the system has the same dynamics at one moment and a few moments later and, indeed, any amount of time later, then there must be a conserved quantity called energy. And that's Noether's theorem. So this is the first step, but this still doesn't tell us what momentum exactly has to do with a derivative with respect to space. So let's do this. translate by L. And what translate by L does is it takes f of x and it maps it to f of X minus L. So this is a thing that affects the translation. And why do I say that's a translation by L rather than minus L? Well, if you have some function like this, and it has a peak at 0, then after the translation, the peak is when x is equal to L. OK? So just to get the signs straight. So define this operation, which takes a function of X and translates it by L, but leaves it otherwise identical. This is a series that you should recognize, a particular Taylor series for a particular function. It's a Taylor expansion for the AUDIENCE: Exponential. e to the minus L derivative with respect to x f of x. Which is kind of awesome. So let's just check to make sure that this makes sense from dimensional grounds. So that's a derivative withrespect to x as units of 1 over 6. But I'm going to write this in the following suggestive way. This is equal to 1 times f of X minus L. Professor: We're going to do this all the time in quantum mechanics. We'll talk about it in more detail, but we're always going to define it in this fashion as a formal power series. Can you transform operators from one space to another? Professor: Oh, you totally can. But we'll come back to that when we talk about operators next time. But from this what is a derivative with respect to x mean? What does a derivative of x do? Well a derivative is a function of length, so this is dimensionless, so we can exponentiate it. to x is something that generates translations with respect to x through a Taylor expansion. If we have L be arbitrarily small, right? L is arbitrarily small. What is the translation by an arbitrarily small amount of f of x? Well, if L is arbitrary small, we can drop all the higher order terms, and the change is just Ldx. So the derivative withrespect to x is telling us about infinitesimal translations. But through Noether's theorem translations, in x are associated to conservation of momentum. So you shouldn't be so so. In quantum mechanics, the derivative with respect to x is related to the momentum in some particular way. Similarly, translations in t are going to be generated by what operation? Derivative withrespect to time from Noether's theorem is associated with conservation of energy. That seems plausible. But here's the thing. We started out with these. We're going to see these pop up over and over again. It shouldn't be totally shocking that in quantum mechanics the derivative of a function is a function of position. In quantum mechanics, momentum is represented by derivative with respect to x times h bar upon i. If you take this expression and you work with the rest of the postulates, you reproduce the physics of the real world. You reproduce it so well that no other models have even ever vaguely come close to the explanatory power of quantum mechanics. It is a fact. It's not true in some epistemic sense. But that's what physics does. Physics doesn't tell you what's true. a priori did the world have to look like. Physics tells you this is a good model. And to the degree that it doesn't fit the data, it's wrong. This isn't something we derive. This is something we declare. We call it our model, and then we use it to calculate stuff, and we see if it fits the real world. Out, please, please leave. [LAUGHTER] I love MIT. I really do. [APPLAUSE] Psi is equal to alpha, let's just do 1 over 2 e to the ikx. The probability that I measure the momentum to be h bar k is one. But I can always consider a state which is a superposition. Is that cool? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Question. Just with notation, what does the hat above the p [INAUDIBLE]? PROFESSOR: Good. So the hatabove the P is to remind you that P is on a number. the momentum. And these coefficients are going to turn out to contain all the information about the probability of the system. This is the probability when norm squared that will measure the system to have momentum k1. So I think the current wave function is something like a superposition of 1/10 psi pirates plus 1 minus is 1/100 square root. To normalize it properly psi no pirates. And I'll leave you with pondering this probability. See you guys next time. [APPLAUSE] eyes, of foot, of eye, of brow. I see the antique pens do but express the beauty that you master now. So are all their praises but prophecies of this, our time. All you prefiguring. But though they had but diving eyes-- PROFESSOR: I was wrong about the probabilities. [LAUGHTER] CHRISTOPHER SMITH: But they had not skill enough you're worth to sing. [APPLAUSE] It's not over. You wait. your memory. Gainst death and all oblivious enmity shall you pace forth. Your praise shall still find room, even in the eyes of all posterity. So no judgment arise till you yourself judgment arise. You live in this and dwell in lover's eyes. May your day be filled with love and poetry. Whatever state you're in, we will always love you. Signed, Jack Florian, James [INAUDIBLE]. [LAUGHTER] PROFESSOR: Thank you, sir.