Markus Klute: Why this is an important discussion is because it is very convenient and it simplifies life quite a bit if one does not use SI units. And it's also important to avoid carrying around large exponents. And one example is the introduction of a new unit for the cross-sections of-- units for cross-section which describes an area, and that unit is barn. We talk about cross- Sections of barns, or femtobarns. One bar is defined as 10 to the minus 28 square meters. The unit came out of the Manhattan Project. The idea of the scientist was to confuse potential spies towards what cross-sections for nuclear processes are. One barn is a cross-section where it's really, really hard to miss. In this context, also, the shed was introduced. This is not very popular today anymore. And it turns out that this idea of confusing readers of papers or of discussions turned into a new standard. So we have a new unit of a barn, and they're trying to characterize nuclear collisions. In particle physics and in nuclear physics, we use a system called natural units. This system is based on fundamental concepts of quantum mechanics and special relativity. The idea here is that we replace kilogram, meters, and seconds by h-bar, which is a unit of action in quantum mechanics, c, the speed of light, and GeV, where GeV is a typical approximate mass of a proton. That means when you talk about relativistic equations, E, you find that energies are expressed in GeV. equals m c squared and all those things, m, E, and also the momentum have the same unit. That simplifies quite a bit. You might think that you lose information by setting fundamental constants to 1, but you actually do not, because you carry with you, in your equations, the dimension of the problem. If you want to do a quick exercise here, I invite you to calculate the charge radius of the proton, which is 4.1 over GeV, or per GeV. equal to 0.197 GeV femtometers. On top of this, it's useful to use Heaviside-Lorentz units and combine them with some measurable units we discussed. In some examples, we'll use SI, in others, use natural units. So this is also very convenient, to have this kind of convention. We'll use those natural units as we go through class. So you should already know the answer from previous discussions in the lecture, but the calculation is rather straightforward. always be clear from the problem we're looking at. Always be clear about what you're trying to do. Always show us how you're going to solve a problem. Always. Show us how to get to the solution you're looking for. always. show us the way to get there.always. be clear of the problem you're aiming to solve. always be clear. of the goal you're seeking to achieve.always be. clear of your goal. of getting to the answer you're after.