Al Shalot is the CEO of GT Sports. GT Sports is an Esports organization pretty Global they call us the real Madrid of Esports. We have 13 teams in 10 games on three continents and I'm also a member of the Esports commission the international Olympic Comm. The turning point for me are the Asian Games the people from the Olympic Committee when they attended this event they're like okay now we get [Music] it hi there my name is Al shalot I'm the CEOof GT Sports uh it's anEsports organizationPretty Global they called us thereal Madrid ofEsports we have 13 Teams in 10Games on Three continents. I've been participating to the conception and Advising the I on what's not public the Olympic sports games. Olympic Games will be a dedicated event to celebrate Gamers and eorts F and why was the decision made to go down that separate route so instead of having it scheduled alongside Paris next year uh to put it in its own year. I would say that it's pretty clear that the sem Olympics bringing value to the community to the to the players to the fans and they are clearly positioned. I think there's room for new events in addition I wouldsay we are very focused on let's say Counter Strike or do 2 maybe League of Legend which are games that don't have enough stage to play on. It makes absolutely sense to pay respect and celebrate gaming by having a dedicated event. It's part of the agenda strategic agenda 2020 plus 5. I imagine there might have been some people who were quite hard to persuade I did nothing the they they came to us with the intent with the the decision with the motivation to do something special for gaming and orts uh it'spart of the agendas strategic agenda2020 plus 5 and I'm looking forward to working with them on it. I'm very excited to see what they come up with. to connect with the audience the youth audience where they are and to leverage gaming and Esports to do that so it was strategically cited and we're just part of a discussion about how to implement it. "It's not just a trend or just a something that comes and will go back we have 20 years of like see seeing like millions of Gamers actually billions now we have millions of people watching the biggest finals and you know we have also seen like the youth and it's something that's very special for them this is their Sports" have been very successful at using the gaming and the entertainment of virtual games to connect with audence with borts so there's less of like a fear and more kind of an excitement for the the potential. The Asian Games officially added League of Legend and other games on their list and suddenly you had like a lot of people watching a lotof people attending. The people from the Olympic Committee when they attended this event they like okay now we get it now we see that this brings so much potential to connecting with this generation that we need to take it seriously. moving around very much they're going to be in one location can you explain why Saudi Arabia as the host. I'm not sure that from from what I heard um this is a strategic partnership with a with with a host that has a lot of capabilities and we can talk about that in a second. They just said that it's going to come regularly to to be hosted in Saudi so my understanding is that that means that we're Going to go several times but not all the time just to to put this into context. a reason I think 70% of their constituents are passionate Gamers um and and if you're a gaming publisher or gaming team like us this is the fastest growing region of the world right now for gaming and eort so this is why finally I would just like PC always brought the idea to bring a property and events to a country to create some bridges I remember when Beijing was elected to host for some Olympics it created kind of like a a moment of like creating Bridges with like China and I I see the same way gaming entertainment in general could be a breach now for Saudi Arabia. you expecting to have those kind of conversations with some of the national Olympic committees and at the very least is that something that came up when you were advising the ioc on this. We have not been involved in the discussion with the host cities I know several City apply and and wanted to be the host uh this 12 years partnership sounds like a amazing opportunity to have a fing partner to launchable property but what I would say is that you know we we have been attending multiple events all over the world with or teams. to use this platform to to be open to anyone I think that's the way they describe it um so I look forward to it uh what I would say is like as a team as a as as players as athletes we want them to to play in the the best tournaments the best teams and therefore want everybody to participate so you mentioned the Esports World Cup there uh it feels like we've got lots of big new announcements lots of tournaments are we in danger of having too many things going on I don't think so. from their publisher to have international events will benefit and all players will have more stage to show their performance. I think there's a clear opening for mobas so hopefully League of Legend or mobile Legend like games that are a bit more strategic and away from Sports simulation also Fantasy games like rocket League. I would say that what I hear and and for the intent that they shown it's all about balance finding the balance between uh sport simulation EFC for football or basketball viral sports like Swift for cycling and traditional Sports. Singapore and we had an exhibition for Rocket league so apparently at this time this kind of game will be official titles and not just exhibition so all those games you've mentioned pretty uncontroversial. Do you think that there could ever be an Olympic branded event that has a shooting game in it though like do you thinkThat's ever so it's going to be possible to have a shooter under Olympic branding if if if you ask me I believe. Is it g to happen next year probably not I think there's kind of like a it's a common theme to talk about which sports are featured in the Olympic Games. The first edition of the Esports Olympics will be held in LA in 2028. 50% of the athletes will be women 50% will be male. The goal is to reach this target from day one. It will be a game changer not for the Olympics but for Esports. It's got its own separate event but there might be some people who might feel a bit disappointed about that potentially it's not my role to say yes or no because I'm not decision maker but I'm very positive and affirmative. view to elevate the Excellence but it's not the case for all teams. There's not a lot of competition if if you don't qualify for the Mixed environment which is very difficult. I'm very excited because I think one of the direction that these events will take is 50/50. Paris Olympics this summer will be the first time in 120 years that the Olympic Games have been held in Paris. It took them 120 years to get to that point Paris Olympics will be held in the French capital this summer. of view of someone who runs a team uh one of the most successful teams in the world. What kind of impact will this have on your players because uh you know they might be getting pulled away to compete in these big International tournaments. There might be different connections they can form with players what's the impact going to be what's going to change I I see the long term okay I don't want to talk about oh who'sGoing to pay them should we be should we receive innity because we we give our players to the teams. opening ceremony under the the Olympics logos this is amazing the pride in their eyes is the fact that the parents had to find a passport for them to travel to represent I think this is what I want for every single players of G2. I believe this will also help us to connect with the BBC and talk to a mainstream audience about something that they don't know and and be discover this amazing Community this amazing passion the the Quest for excellence and the individuals that will become the heroes to win the trophy for the national team. similar to the summer and winter games uh there'll be something you know with a flag ceremony uh probably at the beginning. I think you know to see some of the players that we selected when they were underage that we help become the best version of them themselves as athletes being selected to represent. We have been dreaming of this like France against Spain with the best player of the World in League of Legend for years um so that's exciting for me as a as a fan not as a professional just as afan. their country wherever the country we have Chinese players we have malesian players. We have French players German players Turkish players American players at G2 make will make me super proud. I'm very excited about that and that makes by definition this event very special. There has been some small minor events with amateur players representing the country but nothing that ambition to be the best player of the world in the biggest games with national teams. That makes this eventvery special for us. We've got lots of events in Esports already what makes this one different is this idea of national teams like it's in the DNA of Olympic games. special the parity in terms of like uh balance between over multiple games is also something special aside from Bas Force World Cup. The mixity in gender which I think is very important desperately needed by Esports industry. It will give us an opportunity for the best player of the world to Showcase their talent and Inspire the Next Generation to believe it's possible for me to have a ro to play in Esports at a professional level just to follow that one up obviously you talked to lots of Esports players in your team is there a real want to compete under the national flag people want to do it. "Everybody wants to see what a dennish team will do against Corin I I would love to see it too you know so um I've seen a lot of players making the the guess or what the team could look like so his aspiration to be part of is is clearly part of the discussion," he says. "You follow a bit like the conversation about but uh rocket league and OverWatch back in the days at the at the World Cup for for their game and and and League of Legend also often have this conversation about creating the Euro Cup or World Cup"