The lecture is provided under a Creative Commons License. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation, or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open CourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. The lecture was presented by Professor John L. Houghton, PhD, of MIT's Department of Computer Science and Engineering. For more information about MIT's OpenCourse Ware, visit opencourseware.org or call 1-800-847-8255. . Without using the representation in terms of. derivatives, with respect to a coordinate, without using the representations, in. terms of translations and rotations along the sphere, right? When we just used the commutation relations, and nothing else, what we found was that the states corresponding to these guys, came in a tower. And we quickly deduced that it is impossible to represent the half integer states with a wave function which represents a probability distribution on a sphere. We observed that that was impossible. to the very first lecture, and so, we'll do this in more detail, but I'm going to quickly tell you-- imagine take a magnet, a little, tiny bar magnet. In fact, well, imagine you take a little bar magnet with some little magnetization, and you send it through a region that has a gradient for magnetic field. If there's a gradient-- so you know that a magnet wants to anti-align with the nearby magnet, north-south wants to go to south-north. So, you can't put a force on the magnet, but if you have a gradient of a magnetic field, then one end a dipole-- one end of your magnet-- can feel a stronger effective torque then the other guy. And you can get a net force. that you've got some large B, here, and some smaller B,Here, then you can get a force. And that force is going to be proportional to how big your magnet is. But it's also going toBe proportional to the magnetic field. And if the force is proportional to. the strength of your magnet, then how far-- if you send this magnet through a region, it'll get deflected in. one direction or the other. How far it gets deflected is determined by how big of a magnet you sent through. sphere-- this is a better model-- imagine you have a sphere of uniform charge distribution. And you make it rotate, and that's charged, that's moving, forming a current. And that current generates a magnetic field along the axis of rotation, right? Right hand rule. And how big is the magnetic moment, it's proportional to the rotation, to the angular momentum, OK? So, you determine that, for a charged sphere here which is rotating with angular momentum,. let's say, l, has a magnetic moment which is proportional to l. can measure that angular momentum by measuring the deflection. The bigger the angular momentum, the bigger the magnetic moment. If the electron weren't rotating, it would just go straight through, right? It would have no angular momentum. And thus it would not reflect. If it's rotating, It's gonna deflect. Here's the experiment we do. And here's the experimental results. The experimental results are every electron that gets sent through bends. And it either bends up a fixed amount, or it bends down. Stern Gerlach Experiment: angular momentum can only take one of two values. The angular momentum is just some geometric constant times the angular momentum. L equals 1/2, plus some constant and, you know, plus h bar upon 2, or minus h bar on 2. But what this tells us is, which state? Which tower? Which set of states describe an electron in this apparatus? And you just do this measurement. But wait, we started off by talking about the rotation of a charged sphere. deducing that the magnetic moment must be proportional to the angular momentum. And what we've just discovered is that this angular momentum-- the only sensible angular momentum, here-- is the two state tower, which can't be represented in terms of rotations on a sphere. If it did, we'd get this nonsensical thing of the wave function identically vanishes. So, there's some other form of angular momentum -- a totally different form ofangular momentum-- at least for electrons. Which, again, has the magnetic moments proportional to this angular moment with some coefficient. call mu0. But I don't want to call it L, because L we usually use for rotational angular momentum. This is a different form of angular momentum, which is purely half integer, and we call that spin. And the spin satisfies exactly the same commutation relations-- it's a vector. Sx with Sy is equal to ih bar Sz. So, it's like an angular momentum in every possible way, except it cannot be represented. It is not related to a rotation. An electron just has it. The legacy of these little L equals 1/2 states is that they represent an internal form of angular momentum that only exists quantum mechanically, that you would have never noticed classically. And so there are plenty of particles in the real world that have L equals 3/2. They're not fundamental particles, as far as we know. There are all sorts of nuclei that carry spin 3/1, but we don't know that. And this is how we describe that experimental fact. know of a fundamental particle. If super symmetry is true, then there must be a particle called a gravitino, which would be fundamental, and would have spin 3/2, and four states, but that hasn't been observed, yet. We'll talk about that a little more when we talk about hydrogen, but it was observed and deduced from experiment before it was understood that there was such a physical quantity. However, the observation that this commutation relation led to towers of states with this pre-existed as a quantity. mathematical statement. So, that was a mathematical observation from long previously, and it has a beautiful algebraic story, and all sort of nice things, but it hadn't been connected to the physics. And so, the observation that the electron must carry some intrinsic form of angular momentum with one of two values, neither of which is 0, was actually an experimental observation-- quasi-experimental observation-- long before it was understood exactly how to connect this stuff. The intent of the experiment wasn't to solve-- that fixed the fact that I was probing Lz is that I made the magnetic field have a gradient in the Z direction. So, what I was sensitive to, since the force is actually proportionally to mu dot B-- or, really, mu dot the gradient of B, so, we'll do this in more detail later-- the direction of the gradient selects out which component of the angular momentum we're looking at. But, the universe is rotationally invariant, so it can't possibly matter whether I had done the experiment in this direction or that direction. momentum of the electron along that direction, I will discover that it takes one of two values. This is also true of the L equals 1 states. Is is every system in a state corresponding to one of those particular values? No, it could be in a superposition. But the eigenvalues, are these three eigen Values, regardless of whether it's Lx, or Ly, or Lz. OK, it's a good thing to meditate upon. Anything else? One more. we're gonna talk about real, physical systems in three dimensions. And as we'll discover, it's basically the same as in one dimension, we just have to write down more symbols. But the content is all the same. So, first off, this Laplacian, this can be written in the following form, 1 over r dr r quantity squared. OK, that's going to be very useful for us-- trust me, I'm sure it will be. And I want to note a couple of things. on this one-- this is also known as 1 over r dr squared r. And this, if you look back at your notes, this is nothing other than L squared-- except for the factor of h bar upon i-- but if it's squared, it's minus 1 upon h bar squared. OK, so this horrible angular derivative, is nothing but L squared. And you should remember the [? dd ?] thetas, and there are these funny sines and cosines. But just go back and compare your notes. 1 over r squared, times the angular momentum squared with a minus 1 over h bar squared. So, in just to check, remember that Lz is equal to h bar upon i d phi. And you can see that that's one contribution to this beast. But, actually, let me-- I'm gonna commit a capital sin and erase what I just wrote, because I don't want it to distract you. OK? So, with that useful observation, I want to think about central potentials. The energy for this is p squared upon 2m, plus a potential, which is a function only of the radial distance. So, the energy is equal to, from the first term, minus h bar squared times r dr squared r. And then from this term, plus minus hbar squared times minus 1 over h bar squares [? to L squared ?] [? over ?] r squared, plus L squared over r squared. And along the way, we'll solve a toy model for hydrogen. can be written in a nice form. This is minus h bar squared, 1 upon r dr squared r-- whoops, sorry-- upon 2m. OK, and this is the energy operator when the system is rotational invariant in spherical coordinates. Questions? Yeah? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] is that an equals sign or minus? PROFESSOR: This is just quick algebra. So, it's useful to know it. Why would you ever care about such a thing? Well, let's square it. guys cancel, right? 1 over r times dr. So, this is equal to 1 over R dr squared r. But, why is this equal to dr squared plus 2 over R times dr? And the answer is, they're operators. And so, you should ask how they act on functions. And they're equal to f prime prime-- if this is a function of r-- plus 2over r f prime. On the other hand, 1 overr dr squared R, acting on f of r, well, these derivatives can hit either the r of the f. d's hits this, one of the d's hit this, then there's the other term. So, there're two terms of that form. On d hits the r and gives me one, one d hitsthe f and give me f prime. Then there's an overall 1 over r plus 2 over r fPrime. And then there're a term were two d's. hit the r, but if two ds hit the. r, that's 0. so, these guys are equal to each other. We'll see that in just a minute. over r? PROFESSOR: Oh shoot! Yes, that's supposed to be one of our-- Thank you. Yes, thank you for that typo correction. Thanks OK. So, anytime we have a system which is rotationally. invariant, we can write the energy operator in this fashion. And now, you see something really lovely, which is that this only depends on r, this only. depends on the angular coordinates, but only insofar as it depends on L squared. phi E is equal to E phi E, it's going to simplify our lives if we also let phi be an eigenfunction of the L squared. Quick, is little l an integer or a half integer? AUDIENCE: [MURMURS] Integer. PROFESSOR: Yeah, because we're working with rotational angular momentum, right? And it only makes sense to talk about integer values of little l when we have gradients on a sphere. L squared acting on yLm gives us h bar squared lL plus 1. E, acting on phi E, takes a particularly simple form. If phi is proportional to a spherical harmonic, then this is gonna take the form minus hbar squared upon 2m 1 over r dr squared r plus 1 over 2mr squared l squared. Question? AUDIENCE: Yeah. Can we consider superpositions of yLM1 and yLlm2? PROFESSOR: Absolutely. these guys? Absolutely, we can. However, we're using separation. We're gonna look at a single term, and then after constructing solutions with a single eigenfunction of L squared. We can then write down arbitrary superposition of them, and generate a complete basis of states. General statement about separation of variables. OK. So, here's the resulting energy eigenvalue equation. This is purely a function of r. We've removed all of the angular dependence by making this proportional to yLm. eigenvalue equation. This is the result of acting on phi with the energy operator, and this is the energy eigenvalue. Cool? So, the upside here is that when we have a central. potential, when the system is rotationally. invariant, the potential energy is invariant under rotations. Then the energy commutes with the angular momentum squared. And so, we can find common eigenfunctions. When we use separation of variable, the resulting energy eigenevalue equation becomes nothing but a 1D energy eigs equation. R is equal to minus h bar squared upon 2m, 1 over r d squared r r, plus-- and now, what I'm gonna write is-- look, this is our potential, u of r. This is some silly, radial-dependent thing. So, rather than writing this out, it's convenient to write it in this form. Let's get rid of that funny set of r, and let's just quickly dispense with that. And this comes back to the sneaky trick I was referring to earlier, of writing this expression. lL 1 over 2mr squared. In text, when I write this by hand, the potential is a big U, and the wave function is a little u. So, this is my little u and so, now I'm gonna have to-- oh jeez, this was horrible, sorry-- this is the potential, capital U with a bar underneath it. And here's V, which is gonna make my life easier. OK, is everyone happy with that? Yeah?. AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: Which one? AUDIENCE: Middle. Middle.PROFESSor: Up, up. Right there! Up! There. AUDience: [CHATTER] There! PROFessor: Excellent, so the thing that isn't here, would have a bar under it. Ah! You wouldn't think it would be so hard. OK, god, oh! That's horrible! Sorry guys, that notation is not obvious. My apologies. potential capital U, let's just call this V. AUDIENCE: [LAUGHTER] No! PROFESSOR: And then we have V effective. No, no. This is good. We can be careful about this. So, this is V effective, which has V plus the angular momentum term. Oh, good Lord! This is Veffective. V phi [INAUDIBLE] U. Good, this are V. There's no U underline, it's now just V. if it's 1 over r. So, we get an effective potential-- that I'll check-- there's the effective potential. And finally, the third fact is that r must be strictly positive, so as a 1D problem, that means it can't be negative, it's gotta have an infinite potential on the left. As an example, let's go ahead and think more carefully about specifically this problem, about this Coulomb potential, and this 1D effective potential, for example. by multiplying the whole equation by r. If you see this, declare in your mind a brief moment of triumph, because you know what technique to use. You can do this sort of rescaling by a power of r. And more generally, if you have a differential equation that looks like. a derivative with respect to r plus a constant over r times phi, you know how to solve this. OK? Very useful things to have in your back pocket for moments of need. So, let's pick up with this guy. name for this. This term that comes from the angular momentum [? bit, ?] this originally came from the kinetic energy, right? It came. from the L squared over r, which was from the gradient squared energy. Why is there a kinetic energy term? Well, what this is telling you is that if you have some angular momentum-- if little l is not equal to 0--- then as you get closer and closer to the origin, the potential energy is getting very, very large. Professor: As you come to smaller and smaller radius, holding the angular momentum fixed, your velocity-- your angular velocity-- must increase. Professor: Is hydrogen stable because of conversation of angular momentum? Audience: No. Absolutely not, right? So, first off, we're calling that a potential term just because we can. Because we've worked with definite angular momentum, OK? You should have done this in classical mechanics as well. So, this is called theangular momentum barrier. in your first problems set, when you did that calculation, that particle had angular momentum. So, and if can radiate that away through electromagnetic interactions, that didn't save us. Another way to say this is that we can construct a state with which has little l equals 0. In which case the angular momentum barrier is 0 over r squared. And the reason is that the electron can radiated away energy and angular momentum, and so l will decrease and decrease, and can still fall down. let's look back at the kinetic energy. The energy is going to go like, p squared over 2md squared. But here's an important fact, d squared-- the Laplacian-- of 1 over r, well, it's easy to see what this is at a general point. As you approach the origin from any direction, the function is going like 1 overr, OK, so it's 1 over 1. But can that possibly be true at r equals 0? No, because what's the second derivative at 0? growing, but it's growing in every direction. So, what's its first derivative at the origin? It's actually ill-defined, because it depends on the direction you come in. The second derivative has to go as you go across this point, it's telling you how the first derivative changes. But it changes from plus infinity in this direction, to plus infinityin this direction. That's badly singular. And, in fact, d squared on 1 over r-- and this is a very good exercise for recitation-- is equal to delta of r. would've got the same equation. And that means that the energy eigenvalue can depend on l, but it can't depend on m, right? So, that means for each m in the allowed possible values, l, l minus 1, [? i ?] minus l-- and this is 2l plus 1 possible values-- for each of these m's, the energy is the same. And so, here we have a degeneracy. And this degeneracy isn't fixed by rotational invariance. And why is this the right thing? Rotational symmetry? of E and Lz. Can I also find a common eigenbasis of ELz and Ly? Are there common eigenevectors of ELZ and Ly?" Professors: No. Audience: No, because they don't commute, right? E commutes with each of these. So, this tells you that if you have an eigenfunctions of E, and you act with a raising operator, you act on E with Lx plus iLy and Lx minus iLy. get another eigenfunction of E. And thus, we get our 2L plus 1 degeneracy, because we can walk up and down the tower using L plus and L minus. And so, this is like the statement that L squared with L plus/minus equals 0. OK, and so this 0 because this is just Lx plus iOi. So, E with Lx is 0, and E with Ly is 0,. So, so E commutes with these guys. some examples. So, the first example is gonna be-- actually, I'm going to skip this spherical well example-- because it's just not that interesting, but it's in the notes, and you really need to look at it. OK, so, the spherical well. Here's r equals 0. And if it's a spherical infinite well, then I'm gonna say, the potential is infinite outside of some distance, l. And it's 0 inside. OK? So, what does this give us? Well, in order to solve the system, we know that the first thing we do is we separate out with yLms, and then we re-scale by 1 over r to get the function of u, and we get this equation. E on u is equal to minus h bar squared upon 2m dr squared and plus v effective-- well, plus [? lL ?] plus 1-- over r squared. And the potential is 0, inside. So, this is not a terrible differential equation. And one can do some good work to solve it, but it's a harder differential equation than I want to spend the time to study. case-- when there's zero angular momentum, little l equals 0. Eu sub 0 is equal to h bar squared upon 2m. This is saying that the energy, a constant, times u is two derivatives times this constant. So, u0 can be written as a cosine of kx-- or sorry-- kr plus b sine ofkr. And I should really call this E sub 0, because I should call this u sub l-- EuSubL. it could depend on little l, here. So, there's our momentary solution, however, we have to satisfy our boundary conditions, which is that it's gotta vanish at the origin. And so, this tells you what the energy is. It's just exactly like when the 1D system. So now, to finally close this off. What does this tell you? Well, it tells you that sine of kr, evaluated at l, must be equal to 0, and kl must be the 0 of sine, must been n pi over-- must beequal to n pi, a multiple of pi. that the eigenfunctions are? And let me do that here. So, therefore, the wave function phi sub E0 of r theta and phi-- oh god, oh jesus, this is so much easier in [INAUDIBLE] so, phi is equal to y0m. But what must m be? 0, because m goes from plus L to minus L, 0. OK, so, we get that our wave function is 1 over r times sine of n pi over Lr. So, this is a very nice more general story for larger L, which I hope you see in the recitation. OK. Questions on the spherical well? The whole point here-- Oh, yeah, go. AUDIENCE: What do [INAUDIBLE] generally [INAudIBLE]? PROFESSOR: That's true. So, let me rephrase the question, and tell me if this is the same question. So,. this is strange. There's nothing special about the origin. do I have a 0 at the origin? Is that the question? AUDIENCE: Yeah. PROFESSOR: It's true. There's nothing special about the origin, except for two things. One is that we're working in a system which has a rotational symmetry. Second, saying that little u has a 0 is not the same as saying that the wave function has a0. So, the physical thing is the probability distribution, which is the [? norm ?] squared.  physics is a process of building models that do a good job of predicting. And the better their predictions, the better the model. So, it is the solution of the Coulomb potential. And what I want to emphasize to you, I cannot say this strongly enough, is that we are not going to solve for you the problem of hydrogen. We are going to build a nice toy model. This is a bad model. It doesn't fit the data. But it's pretty good. And we'll be able to improve it later. they're all wrong. Every single model you ever get from physics is wrong. There are just some that are less stupidly wrong. Some are a better approximation to the data, OK? This is not hydrogen. This is going to be our first pass at hydrogen. OK, so let's solve it. So, if V is minus e over r squared, then the equation for the rescaled wave function, u, becomes minus h bar squared upon 2mu prime prime of r plus the effective potential. squared minus e squared over r u is equal to e sub l u. So, there's the equation we want to solve. We've already used separation of variables, and we know that the wave function is this little u times 1 over r times yLm. Also known as p squared l, momentum squared over 2m, 2 times the mass times the length. It's useful to put things in terms of mass, momentum, and lengths, because you can cancel them out. From this, we can build two nice quantities. We can build something with units of a radius. We have the mass, which has units of mass. And from this, it's easy to see that we canBuild a characteristic energy by taking e squared and dividing it by length squared. So, length squared over length, this has Units of length, so this is good. And what's the only other parameter we have? We have to build r0. And I'm going to choose the factors of 2 judiciously. The energy, which I'll call e0, is equal to 2me to the 4th over h bar squared. It doesn't have infinite negative energy. It's got some finite energy. What do you expect to be roughly the ground state energy of this system? AUDIENCE: [MURMURING] PROFESSOR: Yeah. Roughly minus e0.it by this length scale. That's the energy of the system. And so then, the energy,  is equal to e squared over r0, and we know something about 1D quantum mechanical problems. seems like a pretty good guess. It's the only dimensional sensible thing. Maybe we're off by factors of 2. But, maybe it's minus e0. So, that's a good guess, a first thing, before we do any calculation. And if you actually take mu e to the 4th over h bar squared, this is off by, unfortunately, a factor of 4. This is equal to 4 times the binding energy, which is also called the Rydberg constant. gonna be to deal with this factor of 4, right? Which, I mean, is important, but I just want to emphasize how much you get just from doing dimensional analysis. Immediately upon knowing the rules of quantum mechanics, knowing that this is the equation you should solve, without ever touching that equation, just dimensional analysis gives you this answer. OK? Which is fabulous. So, with that motivation, let's solve this problem. Oh, by the way, what do you think r0 is a good approximation to? Well, it's a length scale. because solving it is a sort of involved undertaking. Most differential equations of some, maybe if you're lucky, it's a special function that people have studied in detail. We first did, we did asymptotic analysis, at infinity and at the origin, to get a nice regular differential equation that didn't have any funny singularities. Then we did a series approximation. OK? Now, do most differential equations have a simple closed form expression? A solution? No, most. most don't have a simple solution like a Gaussian or a power large, or something. Most of them just have some complicated solution. This is one of those miraculous differential equations where we can actually exactly write down the solution by doing the series approximation. So, the first thing when doing dimensional analysis too, let's make everything dimensionless. OK, and it's easy to see what the right thing to do is. Take r and make it dimensionless by pulling out a factor of rho, or of r0. The form of this differential equation is, OK, it's not different in any deep way, but it's a little bit easier. As rho goes to infinity, which terms dominate? Well, this is not terribly important. That term is gonna dominate. If l is equal to 0, then this is the only term that survives, so we'd better make sure that that behaves gracefully. So, this tells us, having done this in analysis, we should write that rho to the l plus 1 times e to the minus root epsilon rho times some remaining remaining terms. function, which I'll call v, little v. Little v of rho, and this, asymptotically, should go to a constant near the origin and something that vanishes slower than an exponential at infinity. So then, we take this and we do our series expansion. V is equal to sum over, sum from j equals 0 to infinity, of a sub j rho to the j. So, this is the resulting differential equation for the little v guy. of the harmonic oscillator equation, and get a series expansion. And the series expansion has a solution, which is a sub j plus 1. And in order for this terminate, we must have that some aj max plus 1 is equal to 0. So, one of these guys must eventually vanish. And that tells us that for some maximum value of little j, the only thing's that's changing is little j. And this is, actually, kind of kind of a fun process. root 2 epsilon times j maximum plus l plus 1 is equal to minus 1. But that gives us a relationship between overall j max, little l, and the energy. And if you go through, what you discover is that the energy isequal to 1 over 4 n squared. And so, by solving the differential equation exactly, which in this case we kind of amazingly can, what we discover isthat the energy eigenvalues are, indeed, exactly 1/4 of e0. Rydberg relation explains why the spectrum of light of hydrogen went like 30 over 4 n squared. So, we've solved for that expansion. But there's a real puzzle here. Purely on very general grounds, we derived earlier that when you have a rotationally invariant potential-- a central potential-- every energy should be degenerate, with degeneracy 2l plus 1. It can depend on l, but it must be independent of m. But here, we have discovered-- first off, we'd fit a.