Jeremy Bentham's principle is "the greatest happiness of the greatest number" He thinks all utility is quantifiable. He allows interpersonal comparisons of utility. Diminishing marginal utility is the principle of diminishing marginal utility. If you don't have a car and somebody gives you a Porsche Turbo, you're going to get less utility from the second Porsche than you had from the first one. If it turns out Leonid Leonid has a vastly superior capacity to anybody else, then we could get a huge increase in total utility. let's just for simplicity say, say one Standard International Util costs a dollar. Then I could make you indifferent between coming to class and not coming toclass by paying you two dollars. It could get you to come to class if I paid three dollars, and I would not get you  if I Paid a dollar, right? And so that's the second point. In the first instance we say that utility is quantifiable and expressible through money, but then related to that, and as indicated in the example I just gave you, we can work with a doctrine of revealed preference. utils of pain from coming to class, one experiences three utils of pain, and one experiences two util of pleasure. There's one perverse student in the audience who actually likes coming to the class. So then we would find that if we paid a dollar, one of you would come. If we increase it to two-fifty, two ofYou would come, and so we could vary the price to get information about your utility. And we could even influence your behavior without actually changing your preferences. taking a lot from B and C and giving it to Leonid, so that we would say "allow," right? Or we could think of this change from the status quo-- we go to a more inegalitarian society and, again, the greatest happiness of the greatest number has increased. We have a world here where there are eighteen utils and a world in which there are nineteen utils. If the utility that the Aryans gain from practicing genocide and ethnic cleansing against the Jews exceeds the utilities that the Jews lose, there would be no reason under Bentham's doctrine not to do it. Econ 101: If you have no food and I give you a loaf of bread, your utility goes up a lot. Anyone know what the principle behind that idea is? Anyone want to take it? How many of you have done ECON 101, the first econ course? Yeah, so what is the principle that would tell you if you haveNo food? If you've got no food, if you're on the verge of starvation, you're going to be happier if you get some bread. If you're about to die, you'll be happier than if you don't get any food. If your utility is going to go up, it's going to make you feel better. just need more money to get the same amount of happiness. Prof: Exactly. So you got it exactly right to see that money creates some problematic examples for the principle of diminishing marginal utility. But the thing that follows from it is that, for Donald Trump to get more utility, you have to give him a huge amount of new money. So the more money you have, actually the moremoney you will want in order to get what you want. The way to think about the desire for money it's a bit like sort of a heroin addict needs more, and more. up, but you really want to protect that little bit, but when you get more maybe it encourages you to save money, to not spend more. Prof: If you had one and I said, "I'll give you my one, it's right out there," you wouldn't want it? Student: It's not that I wouldn't. want it, but maybe the utility for the second one in some cases would be more than the utility of the first one so the curve would be thrown off. so you don't lose what little you have. Prof: Okay, so it's a possibility. Any other examples of where this becomes problematic? I mean, think about beer. One beer increases your utility a lot. If you have a lot of integrity, a little bit more is still worth an equal amount. Once you start putting values like that out there it, I think, threatens the idea that it's all reducible to a single index, right? Because you can't. Spitzer's integrity is blown it's not like there's some--it's a binary good. People either think he's either a hypocrite or he's not, it' a binary thing. So there might be some goods like integrity that are not easily capture-able in this logic. We should put that out there, but yeah, over here? Student: What about health? It's not quite binary because you can be in medium health, but I think it would be pretty useful to be healthy and then super healthy. some people are sighted and some people are blind and you could do eye transplants. Arguably the blind person would gain more utility from getting one eye than the sighted person would lose from losing one eye, so shouldn't we do that? So that can also give you some ways of proceeding that would make you queasy, right, if you allow the principle of diminishing marginal utility. What about the examples I threw out there, beer and aspirins? They're a bit like the sort of left shoe examples, right? economist would have said, "Well, yes, there are some things that are not capture-able easily, or easily captured by this idea" So it's the best assumption you can make given that you've got to assume something. But now, and now I want to come back to the sophisticated point that was made in the middle at the back there a few minutes ago, when you made the point that diminishing marginal utility is true. It's going to get you closer to the truth more of the time than not. start to think about the utility that people at the bottom of the social order derive from a particular good, versus the utility of those at the top. Let's suppose a two-person society, again, and let's suppose it consists of Donald Trump and a homeless woman living out of a left luggage locker in Grand Central Station. And the question is, should we take a dollar from Trump and give it to the bag lady? What? Should we? Yes? No? How many think yes? Okay, yeah, almost everybody. of diminishing marginal utility we take the dollar from Trump up there, his loss of utility is negligible, but we give it to the woman who's starving down here, and her gain in utility is enormous from that dollar, right? So we should take thedollar from Trump. Let's assume there's no dead weight loss to the government and all of that for right now. We will just keep it simple. We should take that dollar from Donald Trump and we should give it. to the bag lady, and the greatest happiness of the greatest number will have increased. Shapiro: utilitarianism was a doctrine that was thought to be profoundly radical and frightening to rich men. He says Bentham completely saw that this was an implication of his doctrine. Shapiro: If you assume diminishing marginal utility, utilitarianism becomes a very radical doctrine. He adds: You're going to get into a very messy world of macroeconomic predictions and counter-predictions about whether and when you reach this point of practical equality, or when the gains from downward redistribution are offset by the losses from shrinking of the pie. as all that, and he wanted to temper the downward redistribution that flows from his principle, and so he makes a distinction between what he refers to as "absolute" and "practical" equality. He says, Suppose but a commencement made, by the power of a government of any kind, in the design of establishing it (absolute equality, that's redistributing to equality), the effect would be--that, instead of every one's having an equal share in the sum of the objects of general desire, no one would have any share of it at all. Bentham: In principle absolute equality would maximize the greatest happiness of the greatest number, but in fact if a government set out to do that, the rich would rebel. He's saying you have to work with individual motivations. In the transition to democracy in the South maximize utility in the society, individual motivation is vital. The rich will burn their crops before giving them to the poor. You have to see individuals as the basic generators of utility. The great enemies of public peace are the selfish and dissocial passions-- necessary as they are. Africa people said the white farmers will destroy their farms before turning them over to the majority. It turned out not to be true. So those examples put on the table, what sort of force does this claim have? It's really an empirical claim, and we don't really know how much the rich will tolerate before burning their crops. Presumably they'll allow some redistributive taxation, but we don’t knowHow much. A lot of the day-to-day argument of politics turns around how much. got his objective egoism. He can figure it all out, what will maximize social utility, and run around the world writing constitutions for people. But I'm not seeing a whole lot of room for rights in this doctrine. It seems to allow ethnic cleansing, even genocide, all justified on the grounds that this is maximizing the total utility of society. Well, even if it is, how does this respect individual rights? Am I just wrong? Is there some elementary thing I've missed here? because it's where you start to see our old friend the workmanship ideal creeping by the backdoor into utilitarianism. Bentham says, "Law does not say to man, Work and I will reward you but it says: Labour, and by stopping the hand that would take them from you, I will ensure you the fruits of your labour" So another way of thinking about this is, that Bentham's idea of the state is essentially regulatory. It stays the hand of somebody else who would steal your goods, but the government cannot itself create utility. Bentham's utilitarianism comes into utilitarianism by the backdoor. He says, "Unless you respect individual rights you're not going to be able to maximize utility for the society as a whole" So that's the way in which we see that even a classical utilitarian like Bentham is going to resist dispensing with the doctrine of individual rights. But there's a problem, though, with his mode of doing this, and the problem arises because the claim is that the state is hands-off with respect to the utility creation in the society. that the rich will burn their crops before giving them to the poor might not be true. And even if we get to less extreme circumstances like South Africa before and after the transition, when we look at actual debates in contemporary politics in the United States, this is what we see. Ronald Reagan comes in and says, "If we cut taxes, the pie will get bigger for all and they'll be actually more revenue," and so utilitarianism says do it. And the Democrats say, "No, they won't," and it's an empirical argument. responsible for what happened, versus how much many other things that happened were responsible, nobody really knows. And so a lot of the problem in debating incentives, once you get into the real world of macroeconomic policy-making, is that (a) you never have the counterfactual; you can't go and rerun history without the stimulus, right, or without the Reagan tax cuts. And (b) the sheer complexity; so many other thing happened--the price of the stimulus. oil goes up, or commodities collapse, or the dollar, or this, or that. Do or don't change the value of their currency. So that when it gets down to it, you're never going to get a definitive answer to the question what is the point of practical equality. Are we close to it? Have we gone by it? Are we nowhere near it? There have been periods in our history when we've had top marginal tax rates of 90 percent, right? Reagan thought a topmarginal tax rate of 40 percent was beyond the point. Hobbes said, "For the things we don't make, we can only guess about the causes" We don't really know and there will be--the people who want either policy will be able to find a plausible set of experts to defend their view. So you're getting to this very messy world of macroeconomic prediction, if you want to put some limits on the radical edge of classical utilitarianism. As a matter of history, how it went was to rethink the analytical structure of utilitarianism in a way that completely defanged its radical redistributive edge. classical to what we're going to all neoclassical utilitarianism is a subject with which I will begin on Wednesday. See you then for the next installment of this week's Daily Discussion, which will focus on the role of utilitarianism in the development of the modern world. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the first installment of the Daily Discussion. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @jennifer_newton.