The world woke up this morning to worldwide chaos caused by a global outage. Thousands of flights have been cancelled Banking and health care has been affected including the NHS and some TV channels have been taken off air millions of people have been affected. The firm behind the outage crowd strike has held up its hands but admitted that it'll take time for things to get back to normal. The company is deploying a fix but not before widespread Mayhem tonight we'll be looking at exactly what happened and how it's affected patients passengers and businesses. A faulty update meant millions of Microsoft users saw this screen pop up. The blue screen of death pops up when there's a critical error affecting the operation of your PC. It only affected machines running Microsoft but there are a lot of them and what's the fix well it's not straightforward. We're deeply sorry for the impact that we've caused to customers to Travelers to anyone affected by this including our uh companies. We know what the issue is uh we're resolving and have resolved the issue now it's recovering uh systems that are out there. every single machine affected needs a manual reboot in safe mode which is not as simple as turning it off and on again Microsoft says some people have had to do it 15 times so it could take a while. There will be a lot of people working this weekend in businesses all over the world to try and fix this problem and to patch it up um but at the same time you know this is the price we pay for being so reliant on digital infrastructure from travel chaos to grocery shop payment problems there'll now be tough questions about the Damage Done by one faulty update how did it slip through Microsoft safety nets. Passengers forced to wait out delays at Gatwick Airport. Many airlines unable to use their normal systems. From chaos at Amsterdam to planes stuck on the ground at Newar in the US cancellations and delays spread around the world. The airport has seen a good operation but it's a slower operation and we expect that operation to continue today from Amsterdam to Newar to Gatwick, delays and cancellations are expected to continue throughout the day. A day which is supposed to be one of the year's busiest here's our transport correspondent Katy tin. World Edinburgh stopped accepting incoming flights delayed passengers tried to figure out their options a little bit stressful hopefully it'll be okay now but the staff at the airport have been great here at hether Airport Terminal 3 for a time this morning passengers were turning up to be told they couldn't drop off their bag and they just had to go away and wait for more information on Britain's Railway most Services have been running but there's been some disruption and problems with passenger Information Systems people whose flights have been cancelled should be offered rebooking or a refund but probably not compensation as it'll count as extraordinary circumstances back at gwick. Disruption on what was set to be the busiest day for UK flights since before the pandemic will take time to sort out. GP practices in England and Northern Ireland that have been most affected with doctors struggling to access their records and online bookings Pharmacy Services have also been hit. GPS can only hope the problems are resolved quickly huim BBC News. Katy Austin BBC News and just a reminder you can get all the latest on the Travel turmoil online and that's at bbc.co.uk. At some health centers only the sickest patients were being seen with other appointments cancelled. Only written prescriptions are available with pharmacists warning patients the electronic system has failed anybody who's coming in for their prescriptions. "We have to tell them to go away uh go to back to the surgery and then get a the oldfashioned fp10 uh which is the old green prescriptions," says one pharmacist. "I can't get my sick note um updated and unfortunately I was about to be sanctioned by the um Social Security office" This just goes to show how dependent we are on it and how vulnerable we are I think it really highlights the fragility of our digital lives. There are some calls for people saying actually we shouldn't be so reliant on on a few big companies for everything. Other people are saying well actually if we have lots of smaller companies doing this stuff then are we leaving ourselves more open to vulnerabilities to weaknesses to attack so it is a real dilemma I think but nobody has seen anything of this size.