CASEY RODRIGUEZ: We proved these two theorems last time, and we used them for-- and we had a couple of applications of them. So the first theorem, simple theorem, was that a sequence converges to x if and only if the limit as n goes to infinity of the absolute value of xn minus x goes to 0. And then we also had the squeeze theorem, that if you have three sequences-- a sub n,. b sub n, and x sub n-- so that xSubN is in between a subN and bSubN. squeezed in between a sub n and b sub n. Last time we used this to prove a kind of special limit that this equals 0 if the absolute value of c is less than 1. So let's use this to do a few more special limits if you like. I'm not going to prove it, but it's a simple exercise using induction. And the binomial theorem says that [? for all ?] [? N, the ?] natural numbers, x, y in R, x plus y raised to the n is equal to the sum from k equals 0. to n of n choose k, x to the n minus k y to the k. If p is positive, then limit as n goes to infinity of p to the 1 over n equals 1. And the third is-- it's just that a certain limit exists-- limit as N goes to Infinity of n to 1 over N equals 1, OK? Let me make a small comment here. So far in our discussion of the real numbers, so far we've been talking about real numbers. We're going to move on to other topics. we've only defined what it means to take a real number to an integer power, but-- and n-th roots. So using that, we can then define how totake a real numbers to a rational power. OK? All of that is just to say that to define a positive real number, we need to use the elementary facts about the real numbers, the fact that it has the least upper bound property, and that the rationales are somehow dense in the realNumbers. positive real number to a positive real number or to a real number of power doesn't require the introduction of the exponential or logarithm. So all of that is just to say that what we've done up to now-- these things actually do make sense. But we're just going to use the basic properties of exponents throughout all this, so we don't-- we haven't even talked about continuity, or derivatives, or anything like that. So we'll just use elementary means to be able to prove these statements. epsilon positive there, we should be able to find a capital number M, such that if n is bigger than or equal to capital M, 1 over n to the p is less than epsilon. So that proves number one. So number two we'll do-- we really only need to do two cases. One is p. So p equals 1 is fine, because then I just get 1 for the whole sequence. Now let me do p bigger than 1. And if p is bigger. than 1, the absolute value of p to the 1. over n minus 1-- this is just p to. the 1 this thing times n plus 1. We have an inequality which we proved actually in the second lecture, I think, using induction, but you can actually get from binomial theorem as well. So we use this inequality now with x equals p minus 1. This is bigger than or equal to 1 plus nx raised to the n-th power. And so I want to show that this quantity here goes to 0.over n minus 1, because x is p to the 1 over nminus 1, not p minus1. the binomial theorem. And we'll use the binometric theorem to get a little bit of a different inequality. So for number 3, we want to prove limit as n goes to infinity of n over 1 over n equals 1. So let xn equal n to the 1/n minus 1, which we note is bigger than or equal to 0 for all n. And so my goal I want to show is limit as x as n went to infinity, because then that proves that this converges to 0. way we're going to do that is using an inequality we get from the binomial theorem-- and using this trick here. Now, if we look at plus x to the n raised to theN, this is just-- that's just n-- let me move it over a little bit. Plus x to n raised the n. x sub n is n to the 1/n minus 1. Add 1. I get into n. And these coefficients are just quotients of factorials, so I get n. they're always non-negative as well. This sum is always bigger than or equal to 1 term from the sum. So it's bigger than  equal to k equals 2 [INAUDIBLE] y2-- you'll see-- x sub n squared. Now, n choose 2-- this is equal to n factorial over 2 factorial n minus 2Factorial x to the n squares x of n squared, which equals n times n minus 1 over 2 x ofn squared. to 2 over n minus 1 square root. OK? And now this is just 0, so it converges to 0. This right-hand side is square root of 2 overn minus 1. Now, the limit as n goes to infinity of 2OverN minus 1 is 0. Square root of that also converged to 0, that's a fact we did from the end of last time. So this whole thing convergesto 0. And that completes the proof. All right, so now we are going to study a couple of objects related to a bounded sequence. What's the underlying question? Convergent sequences are bounded, so-- and they have convergent subsequences. Limsup and liminf are also two important objects that arise in analysis. If they exist, there are going to be certain limits, so it's not clear that they exist at all to begin with. But we'll show that they always do exist. We define limsup x sub n, and sometimes I'll write n goes to infinity underneath. And the liminf is similar, except it's now with infs. n's are bounded. Since there exist a b bigger than or equal to 0, such that all N natural numbers, x sub n in absolute value is less than orequal to b. So taken as elements of each of these sets, if you like this x of k, k bigger than  equal to n, that means minus B is always a lower bound for these sets. And this always sits below the supremum. Since all of these are bounded above by B, the. supremum has to be less than, equal to B, which I'll state. set, is just the limit as n goes to infinity of 0 equals 0, all right. So the limsup of 1/n equals 0. The liminf equals 0 as well. Now, what's the difference between these two sequences? What's the property that one holds, but the other doesn't? This is a convergent sequence and this one is not. And we'll see this is a general fact, that if we have a converge sequence, then the lim Sup and the liminf equal each. to these two numbers, which may or may not be the same. So the reason this is so powerful and so strong is that it-- to get your hands on something, it doesn't require you to show something as strong as showing there is a sequence converging to that. So quite often, you can think in terms of variational problems, where you want to show that a minimum of something always exists or a maximum ofsomething always exists. Well, what you can try and do is take a sequence of guys that you stick into your-- so this is a general nonsense that youstick into your machine or function that spits out output. And these outputs are approaching the maximum or approaching the minimum. And what you'd like to say is that there does, in fact, exist an element that you can stick intoYour machine and produce the maximum amount of output. Now, maybe it's not clear how to do that. Maybe you could show that the inputs converge to something, but that's typically really hard. But you don't have to work that hard is what this theorem says. It says that what you really need to do, and which is much more straightforward, or simpler, or impossible really, is to show that that sequence of inputs that you put into your machine to get the outputs is a bounded sequence. small bit of rambling about why this theorem is so useful is that, again, it's very difficult to show convergence to that thing you want to study. But this theorem says you don't need to work that hard or try to do the impossible. It's also useful in the study of PDEs, which is what I study. So I have a soft spot for it. Actually, one of its generalizations-- all right, so let's prove this theorem that there exists some sequences which converge to.