William Wordsworth along with the next person we talked about Samuel Samuel Taylor Coleridge probably the two of the most influential of this particular era. William Blake from earlier is very important as well. These names that I've been telling you are people that show up on Jeopardy from time to time especially if there's a Romantic era or British literature type thing. It's usually a good stab in the dark if you don't know to kind of throw out one of these names very interesting individual. to Hunts you know I will not go after her any more and she had the necklace around her neck for Caesars I am you know we understood that it was more than just an allusion to Caesar and his pets because we knew a little bit about him here is something else about another person that we have a lot of that in same information about. William Wordsworth just reading about some of this past you know upbringing and how that influences writing and the piece that we'll read today it's heavily influenced by his past. such you know it's about that emotional feelings and that powerful feelings and he was one that really was pushing pushing and pushing for those to be in his writings and that why he stands out that's why you've such a visionary of the time and the building background on the next page gives a little bit more insight into that same premise so that's something to remember about this era and about Wordsworth to help out growing up his past to talk having two tragedies the loss of his parents which would be a tragedy for anybody but also the division of his family. sister I've never lost a parent um I don't know if anyone has but I would imagine that's a big gap in your life and you may be bond a little bit more with your siblings maybe she being the only female he has a sense of protection for and so being separated you can imagine the struggle that one might have in dealing with it with the loss and so he you know he longed to be with her and such and it wasn't until it said the mid-20 so for you know half of his life up till he's like 12 13 14 when the dad died. You know his passion he developed for poetry for simple country living and for the natural world was to influence him for the rest of his life. So throughout his upbringing even though he was away from his sister at the school he developed this passion for poetry and this observation of nature and such and we will see that played out in the piece today. It's kind of interesting just a little paragraph it has about rebellion in France remember the very first pages of our introduction to this unit was dealing with revolutions it had Industrial Revolution but also the American Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars. degree not like spiritually but worships these ideas he goes and and helps um you know he falls in love with a woman but he becomes broken so he has to take off and go back home and so for years it talks about there that he's feeling a sense of abandonment and loss for leaving the woman that he loved back in France that I can't stay and you keep the cause going any longer because I have to run back home because I'm broke. So he has some of that guilt and some ofThat that pressure and you can see how he teetered that last line there he cheated on you know a nervous breakdown and a collapse. The Rime of the Ancient Mariner for Coleridge was as we'll read here and for the intro for that you know Wordsworth worked with him on that it was going to be a dual credit both of them were going to get credit for it um but Wordsworth had to drop out of that. Some of the most famous elements of the piece still are in there and they're still a focal point so we still see his kind of finger prints on that masterpiece áwillá will take care of in the next episode. couple days but just a very famous individual very uh you know emotional a pioneer a visionary at that time and so you know understanding all this stuff about him will help us in our in our you know undertaking via tintern abbey here in a little bit okay you see the literary term enjambment for Wordsworth is key that's a term you probably haven't heard of before this class it's very easy it's more about identifying by looking and you'll see it throughout his piece today. different than the typical every line it's kind of its own little thing and so when it's read in a different way it's it might see a little Jill at times button jamming is something very easy to visually identify a once you understand oh that's in JAMA it's a piece of cake okay but something you haven't done before something you never heard of before it might give you a little bit of reservation here and there but it shouldn't okay what I want to talk about first is a 786 lines composed a few miles above Tintern Abbey on Abbey. the Canterbury Tales where you could go and visit the Canterbury Cathedral like you seriously could go there now tintern abbey still stands okay it is not a practicing monastery any longer it was closed down during the time of Henry the eighth if you recall he had that big religion issue with his you know with Anne Boleyn and so he shut down monasteries. You can see more information about it on the PowerPoint slide but then there are several pictures that you can look at that are really kind of neat um sprinkled throughout now in England. a little bit you know there's one look at you know a grass I think there's no roof on it but imagine what it'd have been like to you know to walk through this when it was a practicing monastery and such what was the like with that big roof on there with the stained glass windows all still in there I mean we don't have much of this here in Fort Wayne you knowthere might be a couple bigger churches sprinkled throughout that are kind of still Gothic influence but you know things like this it's pretty pretty amazing. within the Abbey but it's still some place that you can go in and view and see and I don't know maybe people can still get married there maybe they can have ceremonies I have absolutely no idea but someplace that's so historically relevant and famous Wordsworth's Tintern Abbey very famous and you can going in and to the area that was the motivation for this particular piece it's kind of neat so I like if you canGo to one of the globes and watch a Shakespeare play I mean that's that's time travel guys I really like this picture here. You know this might be some sort of view notice the river winding through he referenced his cottage and the smoke coming out of their chimneys. There's that there's that moment of wow this you could technically time travel to some degree here so just some pictures and stuff that I think it's kind of neat to to to. You know something like that where we are in the vicinity. He's not saying I'm sitting there staring at Tintern Abbey right now but you know this could be probably. look at from time to time so let's go ahead and read it on a 786 follow along with it if the rhythm gets choppy and you start to get lost refocus this is only about eight minutes so it's not a long one but focus on what he is saying about nature. This is probably one of the most difficult readings that we have throughout the semester I don't think it's impossible but you're going to have to you're gonna have to work a little bit ok. can we guess who that might be and why this moment is interesting ok lines composed a few miles above tintern abbey hopefully you found that I know is probably a little bit of a struggle to get through you found some of those those elements of nature and we're going to go through those but who is the individual that surprisingly is he speaking with his sister okay and it's not just oh it's a brother-sister thing fine but we know about his feelings for his sister based on their absence for a decade a decade plus. Five years have passed since he's been there okay five years have been there and it's really interesting because he's still there. You know some places if I die think back to this time. Think back to the love that I have for you but think back of the love I have to nature and all of these these feelings and these memories you know and we will be able to you know be together again kind of what you know in thought and such so the beginning if you look back on the first two pages I'm just going to point out a couple key things. he talks a lot I mean just describing you know leaning against the tree and looking out amongst the field on looking at the orchard with the you know it talks about the all of the which at this season with the unripe fruits are clad in one green hue. "I'm just enjoying this situation this scenery I know if any of you have ever gone on a vacation at some place where it's just visually beautiful you know" he says. "Some people would some Hermits and some cave" just maybe mountains maybe a lake you know just something that's just very calming okay very calming and he almost has kind of a teleportation back to some degree of when he was a child okay he goes into great details about when I found through around the river like a like a row like a deer and I would play and when I was little I was having a great time but when you're a kid playing outside you really appreciate how beautiful it is everything are you just like play play play run run run okay. He says that the memory of the woods and colleges offered tranquil restoration to his mind and even affected him when he was not aware of the memory. While he was away thinking back to this it helped calm him and help restore him. If he mentioned that when I was off in a city whether I was alone or far away or with some people you know I would think back to these place. It brought me a lot of peace it brought meA lot of comfort ok do you remember a certain trip that you took at some point in your life maybe five to ten years ago and. you distinctly remember a visual image have you ever gone back to that same place and like oh yeah this is the place one of my earliest memories was I was like two or three and I went to Disneyland on California I remembered nothing throughout my life except I remember look you know right and the entrance usually there's a big train that goes across and you have to walk underneath it you know well not like under a train but like a tunnel. I just remember that I don't remember sights and sounds and smells but I remember visually what it looked like. in California and watch the train go across and was like this is the same spot I stood when I was three you know and so it's kind of a nice little Wow think about how I've changed in my life think aboutHow I've grown up things that I've experienced you know stresses and things and you can think back to this this for me I didn't look back to Disneyland and think hey that was awesome but you look back at certain things in life and that brings you some calm those are you looking forward to spring break or summer. calm and then when you go there it's enjoyable I like line 61 right around in there it says that the pictures of the mind revives again while here I stand not only with the sense of present pleasure but with pleasing thoughts that in the moment in this moment there is life and food for future years. So you go back to experience that memory and you're there and maybe it's identical to what you thought. Maybe it's a little different but it's almost like you're now you're hitting the record button. steeped in nature and such okay he mentions the river you know meandering through the the trees and through the fourth that's why looking at that picture before we started you know that river is the same river that he was looking upon and quoting and talking about here. To go to that place and visually see that nature that appreciation maybe you could hunt down I don't know if that orchard is still there I want to be kind of cool if through the little you know the little hints here an orchard there's some cottages of smoke the near the river. introduction the child and the common man the innocence of children and such this isn't a story about or poem about children but yet through his childhood memories we are able to make that connection to those passion emotion feelings about nature and and his sister and such. We get to see little elements sprinkle in four motivations you know just lines sprinkled throughout you know therefore am I still a lover of the meadows and the woods and the mounts so he just he keeps going on and I think that if you were to read this through a second time these would pop out a little bit more. a little maybe some of the footnotes you know that's why a second exposure as always is always beneficial yeah we don't know that there's anybody with him okay anybody with them until he says my dear dear sister they're at the bottom of 790 and such let me see here. Even if he did not feel this way about the nature or understand all of the things he would still be in good spirits for this day I wouldStill be happy for what's going on today even if I didn't have those previous four pages. hitting it wasn't now we know it's not just because he wants to record all the beautiful panoramic surround it's recording my time with my sister as well okay and so to see that they can appreciate that you know a few lines in your nature never did betray the heart that loved her nature's power over the mind that seeks her out is such that it renders that mind impaired impervious to evil tongues rash judgments and the sneers of selfish men and instilling instead a cheerful faith that the world is full of blessings. like I said we first started this particular piece talking about it you know that memory if I am dead if I'm gone think back to this time sister if you can't hear my any longer just remember what my feelings are for you. "This is one I probably say the top three or four most difficult pieces not that it's crazy hard but it's just it's a lot more difficult than reading those pulp" "My voice and my spirit will continue because you'll be experiencing all of these things and thinking in the same mind frame that I was thinking"