This is cereth registered nurse re and calm and in this video i'm going to be going over blood transfusions which will include the nurses role and as always I've been to this YouTube video you can access the free quiz that will test you on this procedure so let's get started what is a blood transfusion it is where as a nurse we will transfuse a patient who is low on red blood cells with new blood cells via a venous access of some type. This is most commonly done through donated red blood cell so a patient needs them. they're low on red blood cells and what can cause a person to be low on Red Blood Cells. Red blood cells are very vital for our survival and how our body works so in other words our body can't function very well without them so what a red blood cell do with the help of the body. What can happen in conditions like renal failure cancers just to name a few because the body is not producing enough substances to produce or maintain those red Blood cells now what's the importance of red Blood Cells? Whenever your patient is low on red blood cells they're going to have some side symptoms that can present especially if they're really low they'll be very pail. They can feel very fatigued they can be short of breath any activity they're just like really wore out and they can have an increased heart rate. If they have received a lot of blood transfusions in the past they're at risk for febrile nan hemolytic transfusion reaction where their body has just built up these antibodies from all those previous transfusions. be tachycardic because that heart is trying to pump that blood because consents of the oxygen is low so it's like I got to get more blood everywhere else so it can overwork itself so when is a patient transfuse well this really depends depends on what's going on with the patient their vital signs how are they tolerating that low blood level and recent guidelines by the American Association of blood banks recommends transfusing blood when hemoglobin levels fall to 7 to 8 grams per deciliter. Nursing lecture exams but you need to know it for the job. Most hospitals require that you're a registered nurse in order to transfuse the blood. Follow your Hospital protocol with that so let's say you got an order for patient to be transfused with two units of packed red blood cells. What's the very first thing that's going to be done the patient is going to being type and cross-match either you'll or you'll be given a blood transfusion. The first thing before a patient is even transfused is a lot of prep work that is super important. be drawing the blood or your phlebotomist will be drawing it and this is the part where you've got to pay special attention to everything from what you write down to how you identify the patient. Everything must be done perfectly because we don't want do too like some type of clerical error to cause a transfusion reaction because someone messed up. Always take care whenever this has to be done next send the blood labs going to type in blood bank will match the blood with a donor and we'll prepare the amount of blood that you're going to need now. A lot of times physicians like to pre medicate them and you'll want to let the physician know if they do have a history of that and sometimes they're pre-medicated with benadryl or Tylenol acetaminophen before hand orally or when about 30 minutes before you start the transfusion. Look at the health status of your patient are you giving a patient who is in fluid overload or congestive heart failure has renal failure and but they really need blood you need to be looking at that. You typically want an 18-gauge or larger IV site. It takes anywhere between two to four hours for a unit of blood to transfuse. You use special tubing which is called Y tubing with an inline filter which helps filter some of those substances out of the blood before it actually goes to the patient and keep in mind again it depends on hospital protocol a lot of protocols say only one set of Y tubing per unit that you transfuse so you'll have to use multiple sets. next you'll want to grab a bag of normal saline 0.9 percent ofnormal saline this is the only only solution you ever use whenever transfusing blood you never use any met other medications or any other fluids only saline. Because dextrose and red blood cells don't get along it can cause them to clump up together. We will be using that saline to prime that why tubing whip and then to flush that tubing with afterwards once the blood is done transfusing and in addition just whenever everything's wrapped up you're ready to take that tubing down you'll need to get a red biohazard bag to dispose of it properly. Trash now let's talk about transfusing okay done all your prep work the blood bank calls you and says hey your blood is ready let us know whenever you're ready for us to send it to you because they're keeping it refrigerated for you. Some key things you want to remember you will be giving one unit at a time patient needs two units you're gonna give one unit now and then whenever that's done call blood bank and say send me the other unit and then they'll send it. notify the blood bank whenever you're ready to start that transfusion now blood wormers blood warmers can be used if the patient needs large amounts of blood quickly and they're at risk for experiencing hypothermic response so you're not gonna warm the blood up by using a microwave or anything like that you want to use a special device if need be next before you even start the transfusion you're gonna be doing this verification process so as the nurse you're going to be getting another nurse it's usually to our ends cuz ourian's are usually the ones who can transfuse. matches up perfectly you're gonna look look at the patient's blood type versus the donors tie and the Rh factor. If there's a discrepancy you'll need to notify the blood bank immediately and just from personal experience this has happened with one of my patients I was doing the whole verification process with another nurse and we were looking at the blood bag. There was one letter that they had did a clerical error on so I had to send the blood and we had to go to the hospital. through the whole process again so this does happen so always make sure you verify everything also before transfusing you're going to be getting baseline vital signs which is going to include the temperature the blood pressure respirations and heart rate. If you have a temperature greater than a hundred degrees Fahrenheit you'll want to notify the physician and make sure they just want to still proceed with the blood transfusion then again before you actually transfuse you want to explain to your patient if they're alert and oriented they can talk to you what you're about to do and for them to notify and report to you if they feel any of the signs and symptoms I'm fixing to describe. breath headache backache or nausea and vomiting and if this happens you'll immediately want to stop the transfusion okay now it's actually time to start the transfusions so you're gonna have your blood ready hung and it's going to be controlled by an infusion pump which will deliver it to the patient. You want to start  slowly about two milliliters per minute for those first 15 minutes in addition you want to stay with that patient at their bedside looking at them monitoring them. A 418 is your patient saying I have a backache all of a sudden or I'm having chest pain or my head is hurting that's a red flag c-4 chills t4 tachycardia especially if it's really increased from baseline I for increased respirations same thing with that increase from baseline oh for all glory so you really want to be looking at your patients urinary output during this blood transfusion and you want to remember those major signs and symptoms of a transfusion reaction. you start having this rash from head the this fever diarrhea all this stuff for several weeks after you've had this blood transfusion you want to report that to your doctor. Other complications that can arise that really aren't immune related it's like septicemia where the blood is contaminated so as a nurse again it's really important that you start that transfusion promptly after receiving it from the blood bank. There can be a risk for hepatitis B C or HIV etc also that circuit or e overload we are talking about or developing high iron levels and this happens with people who've had frequent blood transfusions. it in the back of your mind so the first thing what you want to do is stop the transfusion. Note mentally what time this occurred what time you stopped it because you'll be documenting this later on. disconnect the blood tubing at the access side and replace it with new tubing and have some point nine percent normal saline running to keep the vein open then you're going to notify the doctor and the blood bank of what's going on. During all this you'reGoing to be staying with the patient at their bedside you need be watching them you need your eyes on them so this is a great time to call in other people on the floor. signs every five minutes looking at them watching them looking at that respiratory status it's not compromised or they have an allergic response what's going on now whenever you contact the physician depending on what type of reaction they suspect the patient's having or how severe it is they may order some medication so it varies some things they can orders like corticosteroids which is going to suppress that immune response along with fluids helping flush out that free hemoglobin that's in the body getting it out we want out of the body. diuretics also some labs are going to be ordered they want to look at those claudine levels because remember if this is hemolytic type because a lot of times they don't know what type of reaction this patient is having. Look at the renal function how's our kidneys and other blood levels in addition you'll be collecting urine urine urine on them looking for the free hemoglobin that's came from those red blood cells I have lysis and whenever you are disconnecting your tubing over here do not throw it away don't throw any of it away. bank who's going to test it look out and see what went wrong. Of course you're going to document you want to document the time it happened. What actions you took what the patient was given if you gave them anything. What labs you drew all that and how the patient is currently doing okay so that wraps up this review over blood transfusion. thank you so much for watching don't forget to take the free quiz and to subscribe to our channel for more videos. Back to the page you came from.