In this class, we'll talk about spin. Last week, we discussed the decay of a pion into an electron and a positron. The pion has spin zero, and the electron and the positron have spin 1/2. It is not easily possible to align the electrons and positron such that the spins of the particles are aligned such that their velocity can be calculated. We'll talk more about spin in the next week's 8.701 class. Back to the page you came from. In quantum mechanics, the spin of a particle with a vector is quantized, and in terms of its length and its components. The components, and along any axis, have eigenvalues, and they are listed here. And we find that there is 2s plus 1 possible values. So I'll pick here, just arbitrarily, the z axis. But the question-- it's an obvious question-- which axis is a sensible choice for this problem? So I want you to actually stop here and think about this. What are sensible options? physical state of particles, which axis are the right ones to choose-- or, sensible? There's no right and wrong in this discussion. Let me motivate this. If you look at the orbital momentum of a particle, that's given by r cross p, where p is the momentum vector of the particle. So now, if you're looking at the total momentum, we have to look add the angular momentum and the spin of the particles together. So this is a nice choice of coordinate system or of axis. of the particle perpendicular, and the transverse component is its angular momentum. This, then, immediately gets us to a new definition, then of helicity. You can define the helicity of a particle as the spin of the particle dotted with the momentum. So basically, for a fermion, which has a spin 1/2, you get plus 1.2 if the spin points in the momentum direction and minus 1.1 if it points in opposite direction. So now, if you go back to our particle here, off by here, decaying into an electron and a positron, spin is at 1-1. the same connection. The pion here is spin 0, and if you discuss this in the rest frame of the pion, the electron and the positron fly off in opposite directions, which means that the spin doesn't in align to 0. So that's why this is highly suppressed. It's not 0, because you can find-- you can put [INAUDIBLE] into a rest frame, where you're just basically looking at both particles from one side that was coming to you, and in that case, it's allowed.