In the year 2000, four-year college grads actually earned more with their entry jobs than they're earning today. In the year 1970, only 1 out of 100 taxi drivers had a college degree. In today's world, the momentum is moving toward people who are trained, says Tyler Cowen. The labor market is more about skills than ever before, Cowen says, and college degrees are no longer enough to get a job in the U.S. Today's labor markets are ruled by supply and demand, and supplies and demands are changing all the time. the best jobs. So there's good and bad news from the labor market. How do we think about what's been driving it? Well, we should go back to the core economic concepts. That is, the supply and demand for labor. To think about how those supplies and demands have changed, let's start with the factor of technology. Technologies have changed. And this will affect both the supply of labor and the demand of different types of jobs. It's not just manufacturing, it's also information technology. Kinds of labor. Well, skilled labor -- working with computers -- is much more powerful. The computer enhances the productivity of the skilled laborer. And information technology makes it possible for skilled labor to sell their products around the entire world. At the same time, with information technology, that can be pretty hard to learn. So changing technology has made wages rise more at the top, but has held wages down for a lot of other jobs. And new college graduates are experiencing that when they go into the labor market. -- you can sell to, and this means the value of your labor, and thus your wages, will be higher. If you don't have a special skill, you might find your job prospects aren't doing so well. A third set of factors has to do with slower economic growth, slower productivity growth and slower dynamism in the American economy. For instance, the number of start-ups in the U.S. has been declining each decade since the 1980s. That means there are fewer new jobs. When productivity growth is low, dynamism is lower, there is less turnover in jobs. Over a quarter of the jobs in the U.S. require this kind of legal permission, often coming from a state or local government. It may make sense for some jobs, but should it really be the case that you need a legal license to be a new labor worker? The answer is probably not, but it's a good idea to be aware of what you're doing and how to do it. The Great Recession hit the U.S. economy hard in 2008. People who start working during bad economic times are slower to climb the ladder of success. The cost of getting a license to be a.barber, or to be an interior decorator? That increases the cost of entering those sectors, it means a lot of time and some money, to get the license. It's good for the incumbents, who face less competition, but it's bad for people starting off in the labor market. in information technology, who work well with computers and who can exploit growing global markets. When supply and demand are ruling labor markets, the people who do well are those who have an economic understanding of where is demand high, and where is supply scarce. Check out our practice questions to test your money skills. Next up, we'll show you where to find data to help you decide which career to choose. We'll also show you how to get the most out of your college degree, including how to apply your knowledge to the real world.