MIT OpenCourseWare offers high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourse Ware at ocw.mit.edu. The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT Open courseWare continue to offer high quality education resources forFree. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. a Geiger counter right here. That's our GM tube. And we have a point source that's emitting things in all directions. Let's say it's a cobalt 60 source. It's now 0.52 microcurie. The question is, how many counts do you expect in this detector when a certain distance away? So I've actually laser-cut out a little Geiger counters jig from a previous class. And you guys can all do this too. Who here has been to the IDC before? A couple. dose and distance or measured activity and distance? Yeah, Luke. AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] r cubed. MICHAEL SHORT: Close. It's, let's say, the measured activity would be proportional to 1 over r squared. Who knows where this comes from? I'll move the source a bit away to lessen the beeping. Yeah. The flux of particles coming out is just [INA UDIBLE] over the surface area of [INAudIBLE] and the [INAudsible] is 4 pi r squared, Michael says. here-- in other words, at a certain distance r away, how much does the area of this sphere-- does this detector take up? And a simple formula for the solid angle is just the surface area of whatever you've got over r squared. This approximate formula-- the blue curve-- is a pretty good approximation of the red curve until you get really, really close to 5 centimeters away, or about this distance right here. But this is actually not that good of an approximation when you put a source very, very up close to a detector. If you were to take this detector and bring the radius down to 0, if that solid angle went to, well, infinity , then the count the sphere or how much tin foil you had to use. some sort of a detector that is 2.5 by 10 meters in size. That's an enormous detector. So instead of looking all the way out to 15 meters away, let's look one meter away, maybe less. And we'll take a look there. And what we notice is that except for extremely short distances, this approximate formula for the solid angle-- or in other words, if I were to draw a sphere around the source that's the radius of the distance between the source and the detector. Solid angle is kind of the analog to regular old angle, except in 3D. Instead of looking at things in radians, this has the unit of what's called steradians. A full sphere takes up 4pi steradian, which is also the surface area of a unit sphere with radius of 1. So that's where this comes from.should go to infinity, and it does not compute. Does anyone know how many-- first of all, who here has heard of solid angle before? At 0, the correct formula does give you 2pi steradians. Which is to say that half the gamma rays leaving the source would enter the detector. That's where the detector efficiency comes in. And that's something we're going to be measuring today, which is why I have my big bag of burnt bananas. These are the ashes of roughly 50 pounds of bananas charred to a crisp at about 250 Fahrenheit for 12 hours in most of the dorms and a couple of the frat houses. a lot. So there's a reason I've been using potassium 40 as a lot of examples in this class, because you're full of it. If you eat bananas-- which, I think most of you guys do-- you're intaking a fair bit of radioactive potassium. So today, what we're going to be doing is calculating the activity of one banana. But that's kind of a very difficult thing to do. So anyone know how radioactive one banana actually is in any units at all? Whatever it is. One banana contains a minuscule but measurable amount of radioactivity. One of the ways to boost confidence on any sort of radiation measurement is to boost your signal strength. So we've concentrated the ashes of 50 pounds of bananas in here. This will boost your count rate, which is the intro I want to give to statistics certainty and counting. That should motivate the rest of the day. So I'll pull up that problem set, number 4-- which, by the way, is due Thursday. Tuesday, because we have no class on Tuesday. That was a surprise to me, but whatever. I'll still be here. We don't get holidays-- just you guys. So bonus question-- go do this. So we all know that smoking is a major source of radioactivity. And so I was thinking it'd be neat for us to find out, how radioactive is it to work in a smoke shop? Because there's all these radon decay-- oh, yeah? You actually work there. know. Most of the Boston area is 21. But once you leave Boston-- MICHAEL SHORT: It varies. I don't think it is where I'm-- from Swampscott. But that's kind of up on the commuter rails. You don't want to go to Swampsc Scott. At any rate, I would think that, OK, it's 21. You can buy them. It's still late-stage. it's like town-to-town. But you have to be 18 to smoke. How long would you actually have to bring a detector in and count in order to be sure that there's any sort of measurable difference? That's about as simple as it gets. From Poisson statistics, you can say that the standard deviation of that count rate is actually just the square root of the count rate divided by time. And that's kind of the simple thing right here. But usually, usually, the answer is "not very long" or "not at all long" and that's in the reading for today. If you want to know how much more radioactive is one place than another, you have to take a background count. As you can imagine, the slower the count rate, the less certain you can be that the number that you're measuring is actually accurate. So the two things that you could do to decrease this standard deviation-- you could reduce the background radiation in the room, or you could increase the amount of radiation that is visible to the human eye. The idea here is that thisstandard deviation is a measure of confidence that your value is actually right. Michael Shorter: Counting for longer can decrease your standard deviation. He asks, how long do you have to count in the smoke shop to be 95% percent sure? Shorter says the more error you allow, the shorter time you've got to count for. He says sometimes, do you necessarily have to be95% confident of your result? Depends on what you're doing, he says. But if you can't get within 5% error, there's always some trade-offs you can make. The radiation emission from anything is a truly random process. There is no correlation between when one particle leaves and the next particles. It's just the gross count rate minus the background-- let's keep the symbols the same-- count rate. Does anyone know how to quantify the uncertainty of this net count rate? Do you just add the two? Well, in this case, we have to account for the fact that radiation emissions from anything are a trulyrandom process. So it's actually random. And that's what we're going for. In a truly random process, errors in the background rate and the gross rate could add together or could subtract from each other. If you just add together the two standard deviations, you actually always get an overestimate of the true error. So in this case, that would be your worst case scenario, which is not your most likely scenario. What you actually want is to do what's called uncertainty in quadrature, where you actually add up the sum of the square roots of those errors. How do you know that we're 95% confident of our count rate plus or minus 5% error? That's the main question for today. Does anyone know how we'd start? Anyone get to the reading today? I see some smiles. OK. We'll start from scratch, then. All right, So who here has heard of a normal distribution before? A lot of you guys. Great. The idea here is that with enough counting statistics, this very rare event binomial distribution approaches anormal distribution, where you can say if you measure a certain count rate-- let's say this would be your mean count rate. If you go plus or minus 1 sigma away from your true average right here, you've filled in 68% of the area under this normal distribution. Similarly, if you went plus 2 sigma or minus 2 s Sigma, it's around 95% confident. 3 sigma is getting towards 99 point-- what was the number, again-- I think it's 6.5%. And then so on, and so on. There's actually societies called 6 sigma societies. And the way that they get their name is we're so confident of things we can predict them to 6 s Sigma. you have to give an answer that will relate two times this standard deviation. And now we know the formula for standard deviation of this net counting experiment. So then we can substitute in our expression for sigma-- our uncertainty in quadrature-- and find out things like, well, it depends on what the information we're given is. And so let's actually look at that on the graph. If we keep on scrolling up just by adding stuff to the y-axis, eventually we see that it gets all straight. let's start substituting this out. That's not mine, so we can get rid of that. So 0.05 C n equals 2 sigma. And there's our sigma expression, which I'll rewrite right here. So we have see C b over t b squared plus C g over t g squared. What's next? How do we relate t g and C g? Well, let's start with the easy stuff, right? What can we cancel, or square, or whatever? Just somebody yell it out. radiation detector. How long do you have to be here, looking all weird? You want to have an answer. So why don't we just start, divide by 2, right? Divide by 2. We can square both sides. And there's a C n there. Square both sides, and we end up with 0.000625. C n squared equals C b over t b squared plus C g over t g squared. There's lots of ways to go about it. I want to make sure I do the efficient one. The standard deviation is the square root of the count rate over the time. So the standard deviation squared is just count rate overtime time. We've got too many variables, but it's easy to get rid of one of them, either C n or C g. Do you a question? MICHAEL SHORT: No, I was just going to say [INAUDIBLE].. MICHAELSHORT: Great. Now that everything is corrected here, what's next? We've Got Too Many variables. So we'll take out our C n, and we'll stick in a C g minus C b. And we're trying to isolate t g as a function of C g or vice versa. So we'll have 0.000625 C gminus C b squared. Then I'm going to subtract C b over t b from both sides. Minus C bover t b equals C g over t g. And do I have to go through the rest of the math with you guys? out the expression, which I want to show you guys here. Back to smoke shop counting time. That number right there is just a more exact part-- a bit of 2 Sigma. Instead of 0.05, we had something much, much closer. So what I want us to look at is this graph right here. We've got a nice relation now between the count rate and counts per minute-- and it was the gross count rates and the required counting time to get to that 5% uncertainty. some level. So if we have that expression right there-- so let me just actually get it all the way out so we can see. Because I want to show you some of the math-related implications for this. So like Sean said, for the condition where 0.025 C g minus C b-- let's just call it C net squared minus equals C b over t b, this equation is actually undefined. Which means that if your C b and t b -- let's say if the uncertainty from your background counting rate experiment is such that you can never get to that point. activity in the smoke shop to within some confidence and some error. It depends on your elevation to say how much of the atmosphere is protecting you from cosmic rays. In New Hampshire, the background count's quite a bit higher, because there's a lot of granite deposits, and granite can be upwards of 52 parts per million radium. We will get into background counts and sources of background radiation in about a month, but to give you a quick flash-forward, it depends on location. You can use background counts as a radiation altimeter. One of my graduate students actually built a Geiger counter interface to an Arduino, where you could actually tell what the height you were flying at is by the amount of background radiation increase. So certainly it's going to depend where you are, right? But you want to make sure that you're in an area, to answer Sean's question, representative of where the smoke shop is. So yeah, you'd want to be, I don't know, same block. That would be a pretty good. Use this formula right here to estimate how much time you'd have to wait. So for example, let's say you go in there and you get a count rate of 100 counts per minute. That would do that would surprise me. You'd only have to count for an extra 28 minutes to nail that net count rate with 95% confidence to 5% error. If you're willing to accept 10% error, that would be acceptable. We just take that number and double it. Then, all of a sudden, you don't have tocount for nearly as long. it goes down to seven minutes and 18 seconds. So do you guys see the general interplay between confidence, percent error, counting time, and counting rate? Who here is built an NSE Geiger counter before? Awesome. So this is definitely a try-it-at-home kids kind of thing. If you want to find out is something radioactive, this is what you can actually use to answer the question, is it discernibly radioactive to within some limit of error or limit of confidence? radiation quanta or whatever that enter the detector, how many interact, and how many leave out the other side? That's we're going to be spending most of the next month on when we do ion, photon, electron, and neutron interactions with matter. We'll find out-- what's the probability per unit length that each one undergoes an interaction, what kind of interactions do they undergo, and then we'll complete this actual picture. So you can take a source of, let's say, unknown activity, put it a known distance away from a known detector with a known efficiency, and back out what the activity of that source is with accuracy. That's what you'regoing to start doing on this homework as well for the banana lab. efficiency of the detector and the geometry of the detectors. You're going to be able to measure the number of potassium 40 counts that the detector picks up. So by taking-- let's see where we have some space left. We had a little bit here. We've been using cobalt 60 as an example. So remember, we had two gamma rays emitted per cobalt 50 disintegration. Or was that cobalt 70? Or was it cobalt 80? I don't know. on average. Then you can get to the actual activity of the source. Once you know the activity of this bag of bananas, you can then divide by either the mass of one banana, or the number of bananas,. or whatever to get the final answer. That's what we're going to spend the rest of today doing. So since it's getting on five out of five of, do you guys have any questions about what we covered today or what we are about to go do? thetas are actually subtended by your detector. And the value of that actual surface integral gives you the real solid angle. That's the super simple one if you just know the area of something and you know that you're kind of far away. But again, whenever possible, use the exact formula. So any other questions? Yeah, Sean. Sean, if you have any, please send them to us at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. becquerel of cobalt 60 would give off two gamma rays per second. activity is measured in disintegrations, not in number of gamma rays emitted. Dose-- you'd actually care about how many gamma rays you absorb. But activity is how many atoms are disintegrating per second, and that's the difference here. It's just twoGamma rays per atom. So in this case, it's like twoGammas per atom, or better yet, twoGamas per disintegration. per disintegration. So you've got to know what material you're looking at in order to know how many gamma or how many betas or more that you're going to get. Who here has heard of this uncertainty in quadrature before? There's a couple folks. OK. The idea here is that, again, if you just add the errors up, you're probably overestimating the error and selling yourself short. In that case, if there's no questions, let's go do this. a couple thousand volts across it. When a gamma ray goes into it, it makes some electron hole pairs. So you collect the current from that, and you get a little pulse of current. The height of the pulse tells you how many hole pairs you had, and then back it up to what the energy or your gamma was. That works fine if you collect all of the gamma energy. You don't always quite do that. Anyway, so that's how-- You all can scooch up. There's not a whole lot to see in there. there. The black part is just a carbon fiber window, because you don't want to cut off the low energy gamma. The reason there's copper is if you get a high energy gamma ray into some lead, it will emit a high-energy gamma ray. It shields the detectors from the activity out here, from you guys, from the activities coming out of here-- because sometimes I'm counting very low activity samples. And it also, if I'm count something that has a lot of activity, it shields us from that activity. it makes x-rays. And it makes a very nice 75 keV-- do you guys know keV? Good. So anyway, so this is I've got two germanium detectors. That ones also germania, but it's a well detector. So it's got a little one-centimeter hole in. They're hooked up through a little electronic box and go into the computer over there that does all the peak height analysis. Oh, yeah, liquid nitrogen [INAUDIBLE].. Thanks for pointing. out the thermal noise. Because you're looking for really tiny little signals here, so you cool everything down. And that way, it's not too noisy. These guys are OK warming up. It doesn't destroy the detector. The old detectors you had to keep cold all the time. And if they warmed up, then they were just paperweights. So this is just the counting lab. I've got an actual sample counting in here right now. We'll take a look at the spectrum in a minute. bag. MICHAEL AMES: We're going to let this count until Tuesday. Because, why not? And I don't feel like coming in over the weekend and turning it off. So this is just picking up all the gammas coming out of the bananas, and everything else that happens to get through the [INAUDIBLE],, and all the contamination on the inside of that. And we just let it count. And then you guys can calculate how much potassium 40 is in your ashes. You'll need to do the background subtraction. so ahead of me. OK, I think that's all-- Is this going to fit now? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL AMES: OK. I've got a whole bunch of little spacers if I'm counting something that's hot. And by hot, I mean radioactive hot. I'll space it out a little further. MICHAEL SHORT: We did just go for a solid angle too, today. MIC Michael AMes: Is there anything else I want to say in here? how long has that been going? Half a day-- less than that. Anyway, so this is a sample of quartz that was irradiated next to the reactor. You guys are going to do shorts in like a month-- did you bring your samples? MICHAEL SHORT: We're getting them. I think this ran six hours. And it's just a little tiny piece. And the reason we're running it is the people who are looking at this quartz want to run it for 80 hours, and we'd like to know if there are any impurities in it. Tungsten 186 activates into tungsten 187. So if you've looked at the chart of the nuclides, you can tell that there's all the sort of parameters you would need to calculate how much activation you'd get based on neutron flux. So you can see, there's a whole mess of peaks in here. This one-- you see that? You see that lovely, little peak right there? Can you all see that?" "Yeah, OK. So that's the full spectrum. That's the peak." The 28.43, that's the abundance of that isotope. The sigma gamma 38 is the cross section for thermal neutrons. So you could, knowing how big that peak is, what the efficiency of the detector is for collecting that peak in that geometry, the half-life, the cross set-- that whole mess of parameters-- back-calculate how much tungsten is in the sample. So that's kind of how NAA works, which I assume you've explained. is these guys are going to calculate what's in their samples. But that's not how I do NAA. The other way that everybody who does NAA is you run a standard material. So I run a bunch of different material, which means a material that how much tungsten is in it or how much a whole mess of other things are. That's the way I do it. It's a simplified version of what they do. But it's not the same thing. standards. So along with this piece of quartz, I ran a standard, irradiated it at the same time. And by comparing the peak heights and doing all the decay corrections and the weight corrections, then I calculate how much tungsten is in my sample. So I don't actually use the cross sections, or the flux, or any of that other stuff-- all of those parameters disappear. Notably, the detector efficiency disappears out of the equation, because that's the parameter that you usually have the funniest idea about. samples. But we'll figure out how many samples we'll run. MICHAEL SHORT: It's one per person. [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL AMES: That's a lot of shorts. In pairs, right? MICHAEL ShORT: Yeah. So I'll show you how the shorts get run. So when we run your shorts, we'll running your samples and we'llrun standards, and then you can do the comparative method. Or, if you feel like it, you can doing the other method. comparative one on an envelope. Anyway-- well, we'll run standards or not, depending on how you guys are feeling. Oh, right. Let's count your bananas. So this is detector 2. We did an energy calibration earlier today. So actually, I've got a couple of little button sources. Have you seen the button sources? Yeah. So that's just aouple of cobalt 60 lines and a cesium 137 line down in here. And I know where those energies are, so that just gets used to calibrate the detectors. month or so. So I'll give you a background spectra. I will provide the efficiency for this geometry, which is pretty poorly defined. And I can't give you the program, and it's a pain in the neck to run anyway. If we've got a really well-defined geometry that's not a big bag, usually I try to count sort of point sources-- so I've got an efficiency standard that I can use that I know what the disintegrations in that are at a lot of energies. When you're running NAA, you really want to avoid having all these fast reactions. There's usually an energy threshold for the fast reactions, like 1 meV or so. If you're near the reactor, you're also getting some fast neutrons, which can give you an n p reaction. And that's a pain in the neck, because if you've got iron, you've always got a little cobalt floating around-- you maybe need to do a correction.any questions for Mike on what you've just heard? Well-timed, because we were just talking about this stuff all week. that's how I measure nickel, using n p reaction. And I need to put the rabbits into where I've got a fast flux in the reactor. I try not to have to measure nickel,. because it's pain in the neck. But sometimes people want to know nickel. And we talked a little about what we've run in here for types of samples. MICHAEL SHORT: Well, why don't you tell us? MICHAEL AMES: OK, OK. So back 15, 20, 25 years ago, we did a ton of environmental samples in this lab. We had a whole three grad students, myself included, who did atmospheric particulate matter. lake sediments. Other analytical methods have gotten a lot better, and so they've kind of caught up to NAA, and you don't need a reactor to run those. So the environmental side of this has kind of quieted down a lot. But it's still useful for a bunch of things. And so I do some work here now. I also work in the NCORE group. So that's a lot of my time, rather than just this lab. Practical things-- let's go take a look at a couple other labs. Fish samples that we actually did the fresh fish samples. And you want to kind of homogenize those. And we had this kind of titanium blender-- you remember the Bass-O-Matic? We had this titanium blender that we dropped the fish in, and you completely homogenized the fish. Then you took a little sample of it, and freeze dried it and then analyzed it for mercury. MICHAEL SHORT: [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL AMES: Yeah, right. Because, I mean guys saw, the rabbits are only this big. that looks at zinc deficiencies, and fingernails and toenails will give you a good record of how much zinc you've had over the last week, or month, or whatever-- depend where you cut the nails. And so I was going to get a couple of hundred African children's toenail. That didn't happen. But I did analyze my own toen nails. Well, if you went to somebody who was a little suspicious of you, asking for toenailed is a lot easier than asking for a blood sample. Because people would give up toenailing-- it's not a big deal. the things we did in this lab was we collected baby hair samples from people's scrapbooks. We analyzed the hair samples for arsenic and chromium, and then we plotted out where they were, when the sample was taken, and how close they were to some contaminated wells. And we found that it didn't correlate with the well water or the time when the contamination was the worst. That was in the mid-90s or so. Anyway, that was one of my samples. And the hair is a pain in the neck to analyze. work with. So I hope none of you give me hair samples. I won't run them. So let's go down the hall, this way. You all got to follow. And so this is just a fine powder. And it's fly ash from a coal-fired power plant. Fly ash means the ash that goes up the smokestack, as opposed to bottom ash which is what falls down. They collect a whole hundreds of kilograms of fly ash, just homogenize it, sieve it, send it out to a lot of labs to analyze. This is some soil from Montana next to a mine, so it's nicely contaminated with some metals. This is my IAEA mercury and hair standard. And this is kind of what everybody uses for standards. And you just kind of have a whole collection of them. And depending on what elements you're looking for, you try to mix and match them so you cover what you want without having to run five or six of them, which is what I do. And so I got this. And they all look the same. For longer radiations there's a spot in the basement in the reactor where they can get these, and they send them into the irradiation location. For short irradiations, like what you guys are going to be doing in a month, I send them in from here. So this is one end of the pneumatic system. And so I can put a couple of samples in here. I stick it in that little tube there, call the control room and say, OK, turn a bunch of knobs, and switches, and whatnot. And it goes schwoonk, and in about 15 seconds it's next to you. the reactor to the core of the reactor in the graphite. I usually run shorts. I'll usually irradiate for about 10 minutes. We usually let the sample sit in the reactor for a little while. So the very short half-life stuff decays away, and then it comes back out here. And the thing just kind of shoots out there and bounces into here. Then pop open the rabbit, and in that hood, pull the samples out. Iusually try to repackage the samples. count it, I'll also have whatever elements are in the vial on the thing. For when I'm running standards-- and this is when if we're not running standards you don't have to worry about this-- that powdered standard stuff, I never get that out of a bag. Because you'd never get all of it out, and I'd have contamination everywhere if I started cutting open those bags. So when I do when an irradiation, I always irradiate a few empty bags, and then you do a correction for those. it on a detector, and we count it. When we're doing shorts, I'll irradiate two samples at a time, because I have two detectors. I usually do a 10-minute irradiation for shorts. I'll do a fairly quick count-- five minutes-- right after I get the sample down there. The shortest half-life I look for is for aluminum. It's 2 and 1/4 minutes. But things usually have a lot of aluminum in them, so I see aluminum pretty well. 15 hour half-life. Longer stuff, I'll do a longer irradiation to count. There's a little overlap on my shorts and longs. That helps me do QA on things. There is a lot of archeology that NAA got used for that a lot. I don't think we ever did it here. Fred Frey, who's a professor, retired now, from EAPs-- Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary-- he did a lot for NAA. of geological samples. NAA is really good for rare earth elements, which are hard to measure by other methods. By picking out various rare earths and the ratios, it can help identify where things are from in the world. MICHAEL AMES: The thing I really like-- excuse me, where's my vials? I used to have some smaller ones up here. But that should definitely fit in one of those. It's the rabbit. So it's definitely got to fit in there. Like, see that guy. My usual description of what size sample I like is if it's a piece that you would pick up with a pair of tweezers. So not too small to pick up-- to be able to find. And you could maybe get it with your fingers. But 20 milligrams, 50 milligraphic, 100 milligram is just in the right ballpark. MICHAEL AMES: We'll look at what comes in, and-- yeah, I might veto some things or not. working on and myself. The full size bricks-- like, that size, 2 inches by 4 inches, by 8 inches, weighs about 25 pounds. This lab has been doing NAA since the '70s, I think. Anybody else? AUDIENCE: Is there a single brick that I could just hold to see how heavy it is? MICHAEL AMES: Yeah, these are just painted lead bricks. And you know, these have been here longer than I have. And sometimes things just are somewhere, and you never move them. There's usually a bunch of them floating around. So I've got steel toast. If I miss the toe, I'd probably break my-- I don't want to think about it. And they move much bigger things in the reactor. And that's the other dangerous thing in there, dropping really big things. We've never dropped anything that big. I think somebody dropped a steel plate on their. They're heavy. Anybody else want to toss it? No, OK. [LAUGHTER] foot once. That was about the worst of it. You know, like, four-foot, half-inch steel-- boom. That's what happened to my foot. And people trip and fall off ladders. And it's the usual industrial accidents. It's in two parts. The first is raising reactor power using a low worth absorber called a regulating rod. And then the second part will be lowering reactor power. And I'll see you guys in a month or something and have fun running the reactor. power using a high worth absorber. To actually do this experiment, we need two licensed people in here, one at least has a senior reactor operator. Both Tim and I are both senior licenses, so we have that covered. The only way you can actually do these manipulations are if you're in my training program-- I'm the training supervisor for the facility. And the program you guys are in fits that definition. So I just want to show you the controls. And we don't want to run into a chance if you accidentally going too high. The experiment we're doing is basically change reactor power by half a megawatt. And we're currently at 500 kilowatts. We're going to bring the reactor up to 1 megawatts and then bring it back down. So before we can do this, you have to log into our log book as a trainee on console. We'll show you the proper way to make the entries. As you make those entries, you'll go ahead and then do the actual movement itself. using a regular rod to move the reactor power up. You want to be careful when you raise reactor power. When you get to about 80% of the power level you're going to-- since we're going up to 1 megawatt, that's about 800 kilowatts. You'll drive the regulating rod inwards. It'll slow until it actually starts to go down again. Once it reaches that value and you see it going down, you now know that you could control the reactor and keep it from going away. Once it reaches the power level you want to stop at, the 1 megawatt, keep driving the regulating rod in to hold it at that power level. You haven't stopped the power at this time, you've just decreased how fast it's going up. The power level will sill go up, but a much slower rate than it was before. So once again, you make an entry in a log book that says I'm going to lower ranked power to 500 kilowatts, and then this time we'll use a shim blade. and they've actually done a lot of these manipulations already. If, at any time, you don't feel comfortable doing something, let us know. We'll ask you just to take your hands off the console, and we'll take care of doing whatever is necessary to keep the reactor safe. But be aware, we're a factor of 10 lower than where we would automatically scram at so it would be very difficult for you to get to someplace where it would cause a problem without us being able to stop it. The reactor is on autocontrol. When we do these manipulations, the reactor operator is going to take manual control. That'll cause an alarm to come in. And this will only happen for the first time. And that should be the only time you hear this alarm, because we'll leave it on. The last person will make an announcement that we're done with power manipulations. We'll do that at the end-- is she'll take Manual control of the reactor, and she'll answer it. manual control until the final participant has done their manipulations. Two of the displays are just for evaluation only. They're based on a system that hasn't been approved yet. But we're testing them to see how well they work. So you can see that the power level on the far left is going up. The middle one is getting closer to 100 second. And channel 7 and channel 9 are increasing in value. The period is getting shorter. It's no longer at infinity. is showing what the actual power level-- we started at 500 kilowatts. And the period that was at infinity is now around 160 seconds. One of the things the note is that when she started, the [INAUDIBLE] was around 0300, 0310, and she's almost right back to there. She's closing in on the 1 megawatt. When you raise reactor power, you basically open up the power plant. It's a very dangerous thing to do. up a valve and let more neutrons in. And when you get to the place where you want to be, you basically close that valve again. So you basically add reactivity and then stop that reactivity addition by bringing the absorbers back to about where they started from. AUDIENCE: We're at 17.1 FRANK WARMSLEY: we're at 1 megawatt? AUDIENCE? Yeah. FRANK: Go ahead and make your log book entry. When the rest of you sit down, we'll guide you through those-- the log book entries that she's making. neutrons not leading to fission. One is direct from fission and the other is decay. That's the way it's produced. The way it goes away is basically absorbing a neutron and decaying to another isotope. The fact that we don't have the reactor at a very high power means that the amount of xenon in the core isn't being removed. So we actually start-- the power would actually want to go down on it's own. So you would have to do a lot. of re-shims. And for a while, that's a very large amount of reactivity that has to be compensated for. For this experiment, though, we actually shut down the reactor yesterday and we started up early this morning. So it's not a big factor as it normally would be after doing one of these lowering reactor power. She's driving the absorber out again to slow down how quickly the power level is going down. And when she's done, the shim blade will end up about at the same point. where it started, the 13.42 inches out of the bottom of the core. It might not make it all the way back up to [INAUDIBLE]. FRANK WARMSLEY: It'll be close. Compensate with the reg rod if you need to. 30.8. OK. And that's the end of the exercise. We'll be back in a few minutes with the results of the test. We hope to see you on "Larry King Live" next week.