Alberto Riva is an instructor at CHB. He will talk to you about the most important resources for finding and using biomedical information, especially information connected with the study of the human genome. Most of them will be websites, where you can find information, and to talk about how this information is stored and represented, how it's accessible, and what it can be used for. You're going to see a long list of references to sites, websites, with URLs. Don't worry if you can't remember all of them because, of course, I'm going to distribute the slides. so-called central dogma of molecular biology, as you know, almost all our cells contain DNA in their nucleus. DNA is the molecule that encodes information-- for at least from the purposes of this presentation, this is what we're interested in. And this information is transcribed into our name molecules, that then exit the nucleus under the form of mRNA. MRNA is then translated into proteins. And proteins are ultimately what is responsible for essentially all the external manifestations, all the observable properties of our biology. As you move from one end of the spectrum to the other, you're going to encounter very different forms of information, of data. And each one has its own specific nature and function, and needs to be treated with different tools. So essentially these are the questions that I'm going to answer. How is all this information represented? What are the different ways that we can store and describe this information? Where does it come from, where is it stored, how do we find retrieve and use it? The genotype is digital, because each base pair in our DNA can be exactly represented using one of four symbols, A, P, G, C. On the other hand, the phenotype is, say, analog. Most phenotypes are qualitative in nature. They cannot be measured exactly or precise, they cannot even be defined precisely in most cases. You always have to take into account the effect of environmental factors that, again, are very hard to describe in a quantitative way. But essentially, using a small number of symbols, you can provide an exact representation of our genome. of protein is the fact that the proteins are not uniquely determined by their sequence. For DNA, you just look at the sequence and you know essentially all that there is to know about DNA. For proteins, you cannot look at. the subsequence of a protein and understand just by looking at it what the protein. is going to do. Not even how it's going to be-- not even what it's three-dimensional structure is going. to be. That's difficult enough. Then understanding what theprotein does, just byLooking at the sequences, is still very far from being feasible. was discovered, more or less, the same years. But at the time, nobody had any idea that there was any connection between these two things, between the DNA and inherited traits. It took over 80 years for this concept to be proven. So the definite proof that genes are made of DNA dates back to 1952. After that, progress was faster because the elucidation of the structure of DNA, and the DNA replication mechanism, came one year later. Then the geniculate code was deciphered between 1961 and 1966. Something that we now take for granted, like the discovery of introns, only happened in 1977. There are differences between the DNA of two any human beings. These differences are due to polymorphisms, like single nucleotide polymorphisms. Microsatellites, repeats, insertions, deletions, translocations, these are all things that can happen to your DNA sequence that can modify in ways that, of course, are not enough to turn you into another animal. You're going to find approximately one difference every 1,000 bases. And understanding what these differences do and mean is one of the most interesting problems in current genome research. bioinformatics and molecular biology, because now we finally have the tools of looking at our genome with this level of detail. We can look at individual base pairs and we can see, well, there should be an A here, and instead, we have a C. Does that cause a problem? So again, we're going to go back to this soon. And the same thing happens for phenotypes, although in a slightly different ways. Phenotypes are generalizations, too. The typical operations we might be interested in doing are, for example, sequence matching. So to understand if certain stretch of a sequence matches anything else that you've seen before. Homology searches refer to looking for similarities between DNA sequences in different organisms. So if you find a high degree of similarity between the two genes, you can hypothesize that they are also going to have the same function. We will see as we go forward that we're going to encounter very different forms of data, according to what the purpose of our work is. another pretty common cooperation is performing DNA sequences, is SNP detection. They are locations where different individuals don't have the exact same nucleotide. And we'll talk later about why genotyping is important, what kind of information you can get from that, and how this relates to diseases. At a level of RNA, it might be interesting to look at alternative splicing transcription rearrangements-- these are all things that could be used in the future. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. that happen to the original DNA sequence when it's transcribed into RNA. It undergoes a series of transformations that can, of course, affect, in a very deep way, the final product. And this process, the process of transcribing the DNA sequences into RNA, is, ofcourse, at the basis of expression analysis. So I'm not going to go into too much details on this, but differentiable analysis, clustering, and so on, these are all the usual things that can be done using microarrays. Predicting the three dimensional structure of a protein is another very important and very complex task. Starting homology and conservation of proteins across different organisms can give you a very good idea of the importance of some proteins. And finally, something that is very challenging, and it's receiving a lot of attention lately, is the automatic construction and analysis of metabolic pathways and regulatory pathways. If you are able to understand how proteins interact with each other, and interact with the rest of the cell, how they then regulate other genes, and in turn other proteins, then you can use this information to make better decisions. try to build, in a computational way, the kind of pathway maps that biologists have been drawing by hand for decades. It works in some limited case, and we're going to see later some examples of some of these things. But these are all very challenging problems that, of course, are still very much open. And finally, we get to the phenotype then, we could put a very long list of things here, but could talk about population genetics, about association studies. Association studies are studies that try to correlate the presence of a certain genotype with an observed phenotype. between one or two alleles and the disease, and that might mean that the SNP is indeed responsible for the disease in some way. And clinical trials, of course, to validate all this. OK, so two more slides about philosophy and then we'll start with the more practical stuff. I've already mentioned the word gene a lot of times, and I'm going to mention it again very often. So it might be interesting to ask ourselves, what is a gene? And this is something that it's a question to which the answer is probably obvious, but it turns out that there are actually many possible answers. This is the definition that goes back to Mendel, essentially. If you ask someone who is doing medical research, you will get the answer that the gene is a disease-causing trait. So hear about the [INAUDIBLE] gene, or the gene for cystic fibrosis, and so on. So in this case, the word gene has a very clear clinical connotation. It's an active element in one of those big networks of interacting genes that regulate each other, and that overall realize the metabolic process. LocusLink is a repository of information about genes, and it collects everything that is known about the genes. No LocusLink assigns a name to each gene, and if you stick to that name, then you're sure that everybody knows what you're talking about. Other resources that we'll mention later use a different way of naming genes. This makes things very difficult when you're trying to build programs to integrate information from different places. It's very, very hard to know exactly how to reconcile different ways of naming gene. GenBank is the largest repository of DNA sequence data. It accepts direct submissions from researchers. GenBank is at the basis of the NCBI cluster. The National Center for Biotechnology Information, is a branch of the NIH, that has the task of assembling the largest possible number of databases of biomedical information. The most recent data that I could find from one year ago contained more than 22 million sequences and 100,000 distinct organisms. With a total of almost 30 billion nucleotides. And this is the URL for GenBank. for a lot of other resources that we're going to see now, that are all part of this cluster of NCBI resources. They're all interconnected, so you can easily jump from one to the other. So this is a graph that shows you the growth of GenBank in recent years. You can see the very steep growth of the number of base pairs. And you can probably tell that the number-- we're sequencing longer and longer sequences, because the blue graph grows more rapidly than the red one. If you have enough sequences from the same organism, you can try assembling them, putting them together, and trying to reconstruct the entire genome. This is what was done to assemble the human genome, for example, and all the other genomes that are being sequenced. You start with-- you look at the sequences you have, and if you can find overlaps, then you know that these two sequences are related in some way, and you proceed from there. And in the end you're going to build a map that tells you where all these fragments should be positioned. The human genome is considered finished by now. It's hard to go above this level of accuracy. But now we have several other organisms, including a chimp, that was recently released. And it's going to be very interesting because it's essentially identical to the human genome. So there is 1%-- the differences are about 1% between the genomes. So and the details of how this process has been implemented and CVI are here. And in addition to thehuman genome, of course, we have a lot of other genomes that are completed, or near completion. of the human and the chimp. And it will be very interesting to see exactly where these differences are. The best resource, in my opinion, for looking at the human genome in literally is Golden Path. Golden Path is a genome browser for several different organisms. Initially it was only for human-- now it has mouse, rat, chimp, Drosophila, yeast, and a few others. And a new genomes, the small ones-- the viruses and bacteria, there arenew genomes, essentially, every week. it gives a graphical view, so you can see it in the next slide, it's very clear. All the information it provides is available in easy to download and to parse formats. It provides arbitrary DNA sequences-- you can ask for any region of any human chromosome, you'll get back the exact DNA sequence for that region. Inside the genetic map, for example, you find information about disease genes, what bands break points. It's extremely detailed, because of course, it can rely on the whole set of NCBI databases. So genes, markers, mutations, other features, they tell you exactly they are at this location, in terms of the absolute base pair. This is the URL for Golden Path. And this is how it looks like-- this is an example, we're looking at the region that contains the TLR1 gene. And you can see all these different tracks that provide different information on different objects. For example, up here we have the genes, we have different sets of known genes. We have predicted genes, according to different prediction algorithms. functional part. So it undergoes selective pressure. There are tracks that tell you the location of SNPs, and so on. You can select the tracks you want to see, and you get your own view of a certain genetic region. You have the coordinates up here, chromosome 4, the band. And this is just to show that you can query it for any-- this is the same DNA region we were looking at before. But in this case, we asked for the DNA sequence, and we get it. SNPs are the most common form of variation in our genome. They're much more frequent than microsatellites or insertions, deletions, and other things. SNPs are at a fixed location in the genome. And if you know where the SNP is, you can find it. You can use them as causal candidates for diseases, because a certain percentage of the SNPs introduce changes that then have some consequence on the genotype, on the disease.here. They essentially serve the same purpose with different levels of detail in different areas. phenotype. What I mean is that, for example, if you have a SNP in the coding subsequence of a protein, you're going to get a protein that has an abnormal sequence. There are many diseases that are due to the fact that you have SNPs that truncate proteins. They can be used as evolutionary markers, because SNPs arise randomly during the replication, and then they are transmitted from one generation to the next. And it's very interesting to study how SNPs are transmitted. SNPs get-- how the frequency of the SNP changes in a population. Most SNPs are deleterious. But in some cases, the SNP can also provide an advantage, if it generates something that was not present before, and that works better than the original. If a SNP is neutral, then there is no selective pressure, and it will either go away by chance, or will stay at a certain basic level of frequency. So if you have a SNP that introduces a change is beneficial, then you will-- given enough time-- you will see that thefrequency of the SNPs increases in the population. A SNP is a polymorphism that substitutes the nucleotide you should have at one location with a different one. There are ways of calculating the age of the SNP, so when that mutation arose in the history of our genome. Now the largest database of SNPs that we have again, is at NCBI, it's called the dbSNP. It currently contains over 4 million human SNPs-- actually, I think that by now this number is closer to 5 million SNPs. Almost 50% of the SNPs are validated, which is something very important, means that the SNP has been observed independently multiple times. for example, in 80% of individuals. And the alternative allele appears in 20% of the population. Now, knowing this frequency is very important, because it allows you, then, to do association studies. For example, to look for a correlation between a disease and this polymorphism. But in order to be able to do this, you have to know what is the baseline frequency. What is the original frequency in normal, so to speak, human beings. Yes? AUDIENCE: I guess the question then becomes, what's the base population is across base population? SNPs are used for population genetics. If a SNP arises in a population, then it tends to be limited to that population. Alfred at Yale is another very small database, but it has a very high quality, and it focuses on frequency data. SNPper is a resource that tries to integrate information from all the places that I sited so far. So it takes a lot of information about known associations between SNPs and diseases. says next.say next. "It's very important to specify what population you're looking at, because we're going to have an example in two slides" HapMap is a project that is aiming at building a complete haplotype map of the human genome. HGbase, another database of SNPs, it's manually curated, so you find-- it's very limited, but you find information that has very high quality. It's all manually verified, and it focuses on SNPs. The HapMap project allows you to understand exactly what this can tell you about the evolution of our genome. But this will become clearer in the lecture about haplotypes. information mainly from dbSNP, from Golden Path, from TSC, from Alfred, from HGbase. It tries to put everything together in a unified view that allows you to look at the gene. And it provides a way of exporting this data in different formats to make it easier to process later. And I just want to show you one slide from SNPper, but this is a window that describes-- that tells you information about the particular SNP. This is a [? SNP ?] identifier. the gene it belongs to, notch 4. And here, it tells you that this gene is in the coding sequence of the gene, and it actually causes an amino acid change at position 319. It affects protein domains-- this is the list of protein domains that are affected by the SNP. And finally under here, I wanted to show you, this data comes from TSC, andIt's a frequency information data. So they sampled 41 individuals from a population of African-Americans. And then they looked at a different population-- these are Caucasian, I think-- and they found very different alleles frequencies. Protein sequences are known to have some function, they are important because they do something. If you have a SNP that affects one of them, that SNP, in turn, might cause a protein to work-- it can change the function of a SNP-- of a protein. This is not meant to be an accurate prediction of what the SNP does. And we get so many because all all the information is known about it. It's just telling you that proteins have-- the sequence of aprotein is-- well, it contains portions that are active domains. these domains are overlapping. And this information comes from Swiss [INAUDIBLE] database of protein information. And so you see for example, this first domain covers almost all of the protein. AUDIENCE: So six would be the maximum number? ALBERTO RIVA: No, no, it's just that these domains can be overlapping, just because the Swiss people, they annotate the protein sequence saying OK, from here to here, we know that this happens. But-- well, well, there are some domains that cover the entire protein. can be overlapping. It doesn't necessarily mean that the SNP affects all of them in some meaningful way. This one is probably the only one that could be affected by the presence of a SNP. Because it's a binding domain, so it might be that it doesn't work anymore. So don't get confused by this place. Just a list of Swiss [INAUDIBLE] domains that include that location. Now, the next step I'm going to talk about genes again. LocusLink is a curated directory of genes from 13 organisms. a slightly different approach. It's an attempt at collecting all the GenBank sequences that refer to a region of the genome where a gene is known to be. So essentially, if we know that a certain region of our chromosome contains a gene, then we can go into GenBank and look at all the sequences that fall into that region. And UniGene puts them all together in one cluster. And then tries to provide a description of why all these sequences-- of description of the features of allThese sequences. LocusLink is a curated directory, means that there are people who spend their days going through gene records and adding information. UniGene is an automated system, so it's actually an automated procedure that looks at all the GenBank sequences and tries to build these clusters based on the location of the sequences. HomoloGene is a database of all orthologs. So what it does, they take all the sequences in GenBank, they compare each sequence with all the other sequences inGenBank, at different properties. least in a set of organisms. And if they find a good match between the two sequences, then this pair is added to the HomoloGene database. So right now it encompasses 25 organisms. In these 25 organisms, they have 470,000 ortholog pairs-- so pairs of genes from different organisms that are highly similar to each other. All these are put into the database. And then if you find there are three organisms that share a similarity relationship, this, in turn, is marked. It means that you're finding a match that has an even higher quality. is conserved across all these organisms. This one is partly curated, partly calculated. So they have an automated procedure that looks at sequence similarity using all the many algorithms to do that. And then they have a subset-- this is not mentioned here. But then, most of these entries in [INAUDIBLE] are also manually curated to make sure that they are really-- that they're really similar genes. It's something that is pretty similar to LocusLink in scope. Again, it's a software system for the automated annotation of genomes. So it's basically means it's a system that discovers genes and tries to find as much information as possible about these genes. It's limited to 10 organisms, but it provides a lot of information about the genes in this-- about this organism. It provides information about genes, about proteins, diseases, SNPs, cross-species analysis, microarray data. It has a very powerful data access interface. So you can do queries on this huge database in a relatively simple way. Not everybody uses the LocusLink way of naming genes. And going from one to the other is sometimes tricky. There are links between the two databases. But of course it's not-- they don't necessarily match very well. OK, and finally, a few words about gene regulation. So gene regulation is almost needless to say, it's an extremely complex mechanism. Our understanding of how gene regulation works is still very limited. It's the most visible consequence of everything that is in this complex mechanisms. is a consequence of the fact that there is a very complex machinery behind it that determines which genes are active or not, and how much, in different conditions. This is actually a system that integrates a lot of different factors that might include the following, in no particular order-- The tissue, we know very well that the set of genes that are expressed in one tissue is very different from theSet of genes expressed in another tissue. The time-- the time can mean either a time of day, for the case like the circadian rhythm. Or time at a larger scale, there are processes that take place. years to complete, like puberty, for example. External signals, of course, all response to external stimuli. And it also depends on the expression state of any number of other genes, because genes regulate each other through feedback loops and so on. So again, it's a very complex system. We're slowly working to try to understand how it works. So what we have for now is some understanding of what transcription factors-- the transcription factors are proteins that bind to the upstream regions of the genes, and are able to control their expression. In the end, you get the gene is expressed, because it was latent in the protein is produced. And the transcription factors, as I was saying, don't act alone. They have to interact with the target gene, but they also interact with each other in a combinatorial fashion. So what we need to look at is the pattern of transcription factors that binds to a certain gene. And that, in turn, will determine the spatial, temporal, dependent expression of thetarget gene. We need to be able to reliably identify which transcription factors bind to a given gene, and where, exactly, in the promoter region of the gene they bind. The ways that people have been using to do this are usually based on pattern matching. The binding site, as I said, is a small stretch of DNA, usually goes from five to about 20 or 25 base pairs. So they're really short. And they're characterized by [? concentric ?] sequences-- in general, they are not very precise. a computational meter to detect binding sites that works well, then you can think about doing this on a large scale. This is one of the things we are working on in our lab. And it's going to take a lot of work but the rewards are potentially very interesting because this is something that will then allow you, if it works, to automatically build the networks that describe how genes regulate each other. And that's something that, of course, has a lot, of potential interest. GEO is a database of gene expression and hybridization array data. The Stanford microarray database, again, is a repository of all the-- of a large number of micro experiments performed at Stanford. Other resources for gene expression are found in different PGA projects, PGA are programs for genomic applications, they are are large projects managed by the NIH. The [? tracks ?] PGA, for example, offers 565 microarrays from mouse and rat models of sleep, infection, hypertension, pulmonary disease. disease. The Hopkins PGA, again more than 500 microarrays from several human diseases. Cardio genomics provide microarray data on mouse models of cardiac development and signal transduction. Human gene expression index-- these are just some of the most important most useful public resources of micro array data. And if you'd rather stop me with questions, or if there's anything you would like to discuss about what I said so far, we could stop here, or I could just run through this last portion quickly. DNA and RNA world for the reasons that I've explained at the beginning. Some of the reasons are that proteins interact with each other in very complex ways. They combine in three dimensions, they catalyze chemical reactions. They have a behavioral that is much harder to describe in [INAUDIBLE] terms than everything else we've seen so far. So as a consequence, protein databases, first of all, tend to be older, because they were started earlier than genomic databases. They are less. integrated, they are less complete. Nomenclature is much less standardized. So it's harder to work on protein databases than with all the other resources we've seen so far. The biggest database is SwissProt, 120,000 sequenced centuries, 9,000 human proteins in SwissProt. It's composed of a core set of data elements, this sequence, the references, taxonomic data for this protein. And then our [INAUDIBLE] about the functions of this protein, domains and sites. SwissProt is a database of protein domains and protein families. It's hard to link this database with LocusLink or UniGene, but is its own identifiers for proteins. PFM at the Sanger Institute looks for domains in the proteins, and then they look for similarities between proteins on the basis of the domains that were identified. They use similarity measures, they use hidden Markov models. And as you can see it's growing but at a much smaller rate than GenBank or other resources like that. notation there is a high quality. And then there's a second portion of PFM that has smaller families of lower quality. This is an example of a display, a PFM display, of a protein with all the different domains that were found in the protein with the tails here. So give it this nice graphical display. I'm going to skip protein interaction databases. And I want to get to the end. We're getting to the phenotype and to the spectrum, finally. And there's just a couple of resources that have to be cited because they're extremely important. you can find a description, mechanical feature, the function mapping, and then you can find all known correlations between that gene and diseases. And finally, PubMed, you probably all know what PubMed is, a database of citations from the biomedical literature. It contains 12 million entries starting from the mid-'60s, and it provides references, abstracts, linked to online resources. It's one of the most used resources in the world, and has been growing at least at this speed or faster since '98. Gene ontology is to build a dynamic controlled vocabulary that can be used to describe biological concepts. It's organized in three taxonomies, and each taxonomy contains concepts and sub-concepts and so on. Each taxonomy tries to describe everything that is known in at least three domains-- molecular function, biological process, cellular component. This article was originally published on CNN.com. We are happy to clarify that gene ontology does not mean that all biological concepts are defined in this way. Gene ontology is a standardized nomenclature. It's a work in progress-- still very far from being complete. It has all the usual problems that occur when you're trying to build taxonomies. It could find exact definition of all the terms that people use, especially in this field is very hard. But this is where they are now, and it's aWork in progress, so it will keep growing in the future. And this is what they're working on. a view of taxonomy, for example, for biological process. If you are talking about site communication, then response to external stimulus is a subclass of communication. And if you want to talk about the immune response, you can cite this biology term. OK, I think we're out of time. Well, just a conclusion slide that I'll just let you read, because I think it's just repeating what we're saying so far that we are drowning in data and converting this data into knowledge is not easy. is a challenging task, because as we saw, biomedical data covers the whole spectrum of knowledge representation and management techniques that we know about. We are trying to make the most of the data we have, and we hope that it will help us understand more about the human condition. We hope that this article will be of interest to people around the world who are interested in biomedical data and data management techniques. For more information, go to: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-and-biomedical-data/bio-data-measurement-mechanical-data.