In this video I'm going to be going over lung oscilation specifically the sites of where you osculate. We're going to go over normal breath sounds versus abnormal breath sounds. You can access the quiz and the notes over here or in the description below. In the next video I'll be performing an assessment on a patient and show you how to listen with your stethoscope to these sides. I'll also be going through the anatomy of the anterior part of the chest. chest in this illustration you have your right lung and your left lung and how I set up this illustration is that I wanted you to be able to see what is over the lungs. Whenever you're listening with your stethoscope you need to know where your clavicle is and certain intercoastal spaces because they correlate to which lobe of the lung you are listening to. We're going to start from top to bottom and compare sides and work our way down and we'll start right above the scapula right where the Apex is. patient's back if you were to look inside look at the lungs you'll have the clavicle on the front then it comes around and it forms into your scapula and you have your left lung and your right lung they're on they're flip then compared to the anterior View. It's really important you find C7 to T10 whenever you're assessing which we'll go over in the oscilation sites because this will help you know what you're looking at. You can't really assess the middle lobe like as you can with anterior View and then over over here you haveyour left upper lobe and your left lower lobe. you will listen here compare your side and then just go a little bit lower maybe into the third intercal space and just keep listening to those upper loes. We're still in the left lobe in the upper lobe. Now we're going to go over here and compare sides now we're in the right middle lobe and this again is mid perly and we're listening in here. We will inch down to the sixth intercostal space but we'll just inch a littlebit down maybe in the fifth. remember to get the best sound quality so you can hear so you're not listening over the shoulder blades because that will muffle your sound and you won't be able to hear. Have your patient put their arms in their lap or just separate those shoulder blades from each other so they can get in between that spine and shoulder blade area. From C7 to T3 your cervical and thoracic spine that is where your upper loes are and as you can see here's your Fishers right here. and discontinuous now first let's go over continuous what does continuous mean this is a extra sound that you're hearing that is lasting more than 2 seconds with a full respiration. The first type is called a high pitch polyphonic whe let the name help you okay so what is it it is mainly heard in expiration so when the patient's breathing out but it can be in Inspiration as well. The third type of continuous adventitious breath sound is called stri spider and this is heard on inspiration because what's happening is that the airway is being obstructed. sound and this is what Strider sounds like now let's go over the second type of breath sounds abnormal breast sounds called discontinuous This is an extra sound that you're hearing that is La lasting less than2 seconds okay first type um is coarse crackles crackles for nor Al has been known as rails so if you hear that that's what it means crackles rails they're interchanged just like ronai and Weis so course crackles they are mainly heard in Inspiration when the patient's breathing in. noise this fine crackles is high pitch it sounds completely different than coarse crackles and it has like a crackling a fire sound to it. The last sound is called a plur friction rub this is heard both on inspiration and expiration and it is a low pitch harsh grading sound. What's causing this is that your plora on your lungs those two layers are rubbing against them each other and they normally have this little thin layer of Cirus fluid around the lung but it doesn't right now due to all that inflammation. patient's breathing in and breathing out so that's why you're hearing it on inspiration and expiration now it can sound similar to a parac cardial friction rub how do you tell the difference um if you are wanting to know is this the lungs or is this this the heart just listen have the patient hold their breath. If you can still hear that harsh grading sound it's the heart because they're holding their breath their lungs aren't moving so you've rolled out the lungs. That is lung occultation and normal breast sounds versus abnormal breast sounds.