These are the last authors that we'll focus on in this time period some of their philosophy some of the writing styles and things that motivated them. We're really kind of bridging the gap between the victorian and the modern we're really transitioning. The more we know about it the more we can understand and hopefully appreciate their work a little bit uh in finer detail. We'll be focusing on the works of William Blake, Emily Dickinson and Emily Dickinson in the next few episodes of the series. self-taught um even after he you know it said his nervous breakdown and he went back the next year and finished his schooling but not with honors. He continued on his own time to go and study these classics and in studying these classics he got better and better and more refined and more educated and eventually that's where his job took him. Most of his poetry especially towards the end if you look on the right there the grief and poetry era you know especially the last of his poems. if you've noticed you know some of the you know most famous musicians you know a lot of their work comes from some of their pain and torment and struggle that they've had throughout their lives. You almost wonder would they be able to have obtained that enlightenment without suffering that pain so can truly anybody be rock star do you really have to be a troubled you know childhood or something i mean it's just something that people debate uh here and there but with houseman he can tap into that pain and that darkness. It's a short one to an athlete dying young by a e houseman the time you won your town the race we cheered you through the marketplace man and boy stood cheering by and home we brought you shoulder high today the road all runners come shoulder high we bring you home and set you at your threshold down townsmen of a stiller town smart lad to slip be times away from fields. It might even be active already some of you may have read it already. It's a bit of a departure from the usual stories we hear about young students dying young and things of that nature. where glory does not stay and early though the laurel grows it withers quicker than the rose eyes the shady knight has shut cannot see the record cut and silence sounds no worse than cheers after earth has stopped the ears now you will not swell the route of lads that wore their honors out runners whom renown outran and the name died before the man so set before its echoes fade the fleet foot on the sill of shade and hold to the low lintel up the still defended challenge cup and round that early laureled head will flock to gaze the strengthless dead and find unwithered on its curls. um you know a nice little song to some degree um there was a good flow a good meter and all of that um you know from the first stanza the time you won they're reminiscing of remember that time that we you know carried you chaired you lifted you up in celebration of whatever uh a compliment accomplishment you had. Then the second stance is well we're doing this now today the road all runners come we're not talking about a race okay we're carrying you now shoulder high. and and it's sad we're carrying you like everybody else um all of the other uh you know descriptions in the in the following stanzas about you know dying before the man. The last line at 24 they're the the still defended challenge cup and we're going to remember you and and that your hair and the stuff in your hair what do they call it the uh and around that early laurel head will flock to gaze the strengthless dead and find unwithered on its curls. medals and such um and so they would come and remember you we would come to think about this we will come and look at those as if they were curly as so much stuff on it as if it were a girls. So it's a piece that's uh you know to an athlete young you already know what it's kind of about um but really in essence the main thing is the reflection of the past and and kind of sad but written in a lyrical kind of way it's still kind of melodious and semi-enjoyable. okay the next one is much shorter if that's possible when i was 1 and 20. so when i'm 21 when I was 1 in 20 by a.e housman when I'm 21 i heard a wise man say give crowns and pounds and guineas but not your heart away give pearls away and rubies but keep your fancy free but i was one in twenty no use to talk to me. When i was 1 and 20 i heard him say again the heart out of the bosom was never given in vain just paid with size aplenty and sold for endless rue and i am two and twenty and oh tis truth is true okay the first few lines when i was 2 and 20 and i heard a wise man say give crowns and pounds and guineas but don't give your way. Don't fall in love you can spend money on them you can give them all this stuff but what ultimately don't you want to give them at this age? to talk to me i'm not hearing it i'm 21 i know what's best right you guys have all experienced that your folks you know at this age until you do something you're like no way I'm not going to do that. So within that year from 21 to 22 what did he give away his heart he didn't listen to the wise man that he was two and twenty and oh tis truth is true. He didn't listening to thewise man or wise woman in that case okay um and that's he even noticed this. he had heard mention that okay so now he is crushed okay he's been defeated to some degree because when i was 1 and 20 i heard him say again all the heart out of the bosom was never given in vain to paid with size of plenty and sold for endless rue sorrow remorse in the footnote there. So giving it out okay it's you're going to be getting some pain and you're opening yourself up uh for a lot of sorrow and remorse and he gets struggled so you can see this kind of as the lover's lament. here in when i was 1 and 20 the kid kind of learns his learns his uh his issues and still 22. that's still pretty young to learn um to learn a life lesson. That's when i learned a lot about myself. That was when I was 1 to 20. I'm 22 now. I've still got a long way to go, but that's a good thing. I still have a lot to learn. I don't think i've learned all of my lessons yet, but I'm getting there.