Professor Shelly Kagan: Would you want to live a life on the experience machine? Would you be happy or would you be unhappy, to discover that you actually have been living a life? Shelly: The experience machine gives you all the experiential side of those things, but you're not really doing those things. You're actually just floating in the scientist's lab. She asks ourselves, would we want to be in a lab where we were having identical experiences to the ones we would have if we were really doing what we were doing? on the experience machine? Most of us, when we think about this, find ourselves wanting to say, no, we wouldn't want to have a life on the experienceMachine. But that means, if we think something's missing, we then have to ask yourselves, what's missing? What's wrong with the experience Machine? The one thing we can conclude immediately is, if you think life on. the experiencemachine is missing something, that the hedonist--and views like hedonism--must be wrong, insofar as they say. that all that matters for the best possible life is--for well-being--is getting the right kinds of experiences. So, if something's missing from that life, there's more to the best kind of life than just having the right mental states, than just getting the insides right. Well, we ask ourselves then, well, what's missing? I think different people will answer that in different ways. And if we had more time we could spell out rival theories of well- being, which could be interestingly distinguished. "If you're just spending your life floating in the scientist's lab, you're not actually accomplishing anything," he says. "You wanted to be climbing the mountain, but you's not actually climbing a mountain" "You're not writing the great American novel. You're just floating there," he adds. "Nobody other than the scientist even knows that you exist" "There's no point in trying to pursue those alternative theories in a systematic fashion," he writes. "They're just not going to work" a variety of things you wanted. You wanted to know your place in the universe, but you don't even have that kind of knowledge either, because you think you're writing novels, finding the cure for cancer, climbing Mount Everest. You're completely deceived about all those things. You don't have the kind of self-knowledge that many of us value. Well, as I say, different theories would try to systematize these examples in different ways. Different theories might have different explanations as to whether these things are valuable because we want them, or because we recognize they're valuable. all think accomplishment's important, but it's not as though any old accomplishment is important. We can say that there are certain things that are good above and beyond experiences. After all, not every bit of knowledge is equally valuable. It's one thing to know your place in the universe, or to know the fundamental laws of physics. But again, just put those details aside. The right kinds of accomplishments, the right kind of knowledge, can be very valuable. We might have to distinguish between any old accomplishments and genuinely valuable accomplishments. thing to know what was the average rainfall in Bangkok in 1984. I'm not clear that that kind of knowledge gives a whole lot of value to your life. The crucial point is that it takes more to have the best kind of life than just getting the insides right. It also requires getting the outsides right--whatever that comes to--having in your life not just experiences but the right kinds of goods or accomplishments or whatever term we use for it. But imagine you've worked that out. We could still evaluate in principle--whatever the practical difficulties might be. about adding up all the positive experiences along with all the--ask yourself how many goods, how many accomplishments of the right sort were in that life? And that's on the positive side of the ledger. And against that we would then have to subtract the sum total of the negative experiences, all the failures and deceptions or what have you. Those would count against the overall value of your life. We could still say it's--how good your life is, is a matter of adding up the goods and subtracting the bads. of chosen to become a doctor. Or my life would've gone better for this period of ten years, but then it would've become worse. Or when we ask ourselves, how will things go for me over the next couple of weeks if I go on vacation versus staying back here? We add up the goods, subtract the bads--whatever our favorite list is--and we come to our best educated guess about the rival evaluations of not just lives as a whole, but chunks of lives. "Life's always worth living; it's always better than non-existence," says optimist. "No, no. Although life perhaps has some good things, the overall grand balance is negative for everybody in every circumstance," says pessimist. moderates say, "It varies. And for some people the balance is positive, for some others perhaps it is negative," he says. "Perhaps more accurately still, all be better off never having been born in the first place," moderates say. of their lives." We then have to get down to facts about cases, try to describe the instance. We've expanded our list of goods so that--Nobody's going to deny that among the goods of life are pleasure and other positive experiences. And among the bads of life is pain. That's what the moderates would say. It varies from case to case. But there's still one other assumption that all these positions still have in common. It's that the future holds out for them is negative. How good it is to be alive is a matter of adding up all of the--call it the contents of life. It's as though we've been assuming, and I have been assuming up to this moment, that being alive per se has no value. Life may have value in and of itself, but it's not mere life. What we want is the life of a human. We want a life in which we're accomplishing things, there's agency. The life of somebody who can have an emotional side. there I am and my brain has been so thoroughly destroyed that I'm not longer able to know anything. You can imagine somebody who has that view. I've got to say I find that a pretty implausible view. So I'm going to restrict myself, at least when I think about it, to versions that say, it's the life of a person per se that's valuable. That's the way to look at it, I think. It's not about how well off I am, or somebody else is, but how valuable my life is. always worse than nothing." And in between these two extremes are the moderates, who say, "For some of us, death does not come too soon." There's a quote I want to read. It's actually out of place now. I should have read it a lecture or two ago when I started talking about immortality, but I misplaced it. So, I found it this morning. Isn't that nice? All of this is about immortality. All of it is about death and dying. The central bad thing about the fact that I'm going to die is that because I'll be dead I will be deprived of the good things in life. But although I've been at pains to say this is the fundamental bad thing, I think it's arguable that this isn't the only bad thing. There are other features of death, as we experience it, that at least add to the way that death occurs for us. Or conceivably for some of these things, perhaps it mitigates it; it minimizes it. It's inevitable that you're going to die. There's no avoiding the fact that you'll die. So we might ask, what about this inevitability of death? Does that make things worse? And here I want to distinguish between the individual question about the inevitable of death, and the universal question. It's not just merely the case that in fact we are allGoing to die; it's a necessary truth that we're all going to death. So just start by thinking about the fact. that it's unavoidable that you’ll die. of death make it better or worse? And the interesting thing is, I think you can see--you can get a feel for both possible answers here. On the one hand, you can imagine somebody who says, "Look, it's bad enough that I'm going to die, but the fact that there's nothing I could do about it just makes it worse" On the other hand, there are those people who'd want to say, "No. Actually, the inevitability of my death reduces the badness" the fact that you can't change it, it loses some of its grip to upset you. If we then realize that there's nothing I can do about the fact that I'm going to die, then perhaps some of the sting is eliminated. When we see that something is just necessary, we--it reduces the sting of it. The philosopher Spinoza thought that if we could only recognize the fact, what he at least took to be the fact,. that everything that happens is necessary. in life is necessary, then we'd get a kind of emotional distance from it; it would no longer upset us. We could no longer be disappointed, because to be disappointed in something presupposes that it could've been some other way. Spinoza thought if you see that it couldn't go any other way, then you can't be sad about it. Well, maybe that's right, but going back to the firsthand, I don't know how many of you have read Dostoyevsky's short novel The Underground Man. can't change the fact that two plus two equals four. And so Dostoyevsky takes that thought and runs with it and says, "Yeah. It doesn't help to say that it's inevitable. It makes it worse." Well, there's both sides. And as I say, I myself, in different moods, get pulled in both ways. What about the fact of our powerlessness that we're stuck with the necessities. God isn't stuck with them. Does the universality of death make things better? or worse? And again, you can sort of feel the pull both ways. On the one hand you say, it's bad that I'm going to die, but I'm not a monster. And there's at least some comfort to be had, isn't there, in the realization that this thing isn't just true for me? It's not like the universe has singled me out for the deprivation of dying too soon. It's something that it does to everybody. So perhaps there's some comfort in the inevitability of death. different aspect of death worth thinking about. What about the variability of death? After all, it's not just the case that we all die. Some of us make it to the ripe old age of 80,90 a 100 or more. Others of us die at 20, or 15, or 10, or younger. We could imagine a world in which everybody dies--everybody dies at the age of a hundred. Does it make things worse or better that there's this kind of variability? fact that there's variability and so some people get less than average--that extra bad, I suspect, outweighs the extra benefit of some people having more than average. We've had inevitability; we had variability. What about unpredictability? Not only is it inevitable that you're going to die; not only do some people live longer than others, you don't know how much more time you've got. We could imagine a world like this where it's inevitable; everybody's got some date on it. 20s--you know 20--roughly another 60 years are going. And as you're busy calculating all this, you're walking across Chapel Street and you get hit by a truck and you die. Right? Because of unpredictability, you can't really know. And in particular, it's hard to know how to pace yourself. It's a long-term plan, which can go wrong if you get sick and die in your early 20s. Well, that's a rather dramatic example, but the same sort of thing in principle can happen to you. all of us. You make a life plan, what you want to accomplish in your life, and well, obviously enough, some of us will die too soon. If only you'd known you were only going to have 20 more years instead of 50 more years, you would've picked a different kind of life for yourself. And indeed, less obviously, it can work the other way as well. You continue to stick around, and then your life has this feeling of--at least we can imagine this happening--being sort of anticlimactic. another 50 years, that you weren't going to die young--or James Dean, going to burn out fast and die young. If only you'd realized you were going to live to the ripe old age of 97, you would have picked a different life for yourself. What we could also call "the narrative arc of your life" matters. Let me illustrate the point with some very, very simple graphs. These are not meant to be realistic, but they'll give you the idea. Somebody starts out poor and makes his way through hard work and dedication and effort to riches and success. That's the Horatio Alger life--H.A. Great life. Instead of the rags to riches life, imagine the riches to rags life. Starts off with everything, ends up with nothing. It's the reverse. Now, I doubt if there's anybody here who is indifferent between the choices, indifferent with regard to the choice between these two lives. I imagine that everybody here prefers this life. But notice that in terms of the contents of the life, at The story "bad to good" is the kind of story we want for ourselves, while the story "good to bad" is not. Why is that? And this of course should remind us of the puzzle about Lucretius. Why do we care more about future non-existence than pastNon-existence? When the bad is behind us, that seems less bothersome than when the good is in front of us. We're not indifferent. We want the bad behind us. So, whatever the explanation, we care about the overall shape of our life. A lot of us might feel that a life like this, where we peak but then we stick around--you know, isn't--can at least fail to be as desirable in which we end with a bang. If you start thinking about narrative arcs--imagine a novel, right? It's one thing to have--it's not to say that the best--if you want your life to be like the plot of a great story, it's not as though you think, "All right, the dénouement must occur at the very last page" Without predictability you don't know where to put the peak. If you try to aim for peaking later, you might not make it to that. All of this suggests then that the unpredictability of our death adds an extra negative element. It makes it harder to plan what the best way to live my life would be. And from that perspective it would be better to know how much time you've got left. But then we have to. Care about the overall shape of our lives, we might worry about wanting it to have the right shape overall. ask--so I'll throw the question out and we'll call it a day, start with this next time--then we have to ask, would it really be better to know? would you want the birthmark? Would you want to know exactly how much time you've got left? All Right. See you next time. Back to the page you came from. Click here for more from CNN iReport. Back To the pageyou came from, back to thepage you were from.