it doesn't work so let's kind of look at them in the atas model right we have this Keynesian view. We have our kind of a classical view and we have our what would be called supply-side view. There's more views than that obviously but we're just gonna look at these these three stir them the three main ones. We're at some full employment level of output YF and here we are initially we're in some recession right we're at output level say y1 and some price level just call it P l1. change the demand for loanable funds so you have this market right if you're gonna have the government go out and borrow money they're going to borrow the money. There's a market out there for people borrowing and lending the money and that can be for us savings bonds. When you guys put money into your savings account your parents put money aside for college. They're the suppliers you guys are borrowing money to go to school and you're now demanders you're the ones taking money out. F and basically this guy says look we know eventually the short-run aggregate supply curve will increase and we go to the full employment level of output if you guys engage in this type of policy over here. The deficit today means that at some point in time in the future you're going to have to increase taxes so you can kind of think of it as the budget deficit over two different time periods. In fact thanks to interest it won't be 20 that you have to borrow or in raise taxes for it'll actually be like say 30 all right. revenue will we collect how many guys are going to work later today okay what's what's your name again Paige okay what do you do again okay. So here the supply-side view this is called the Laffer curve. It's not what you spend it's what you tax and it's not even necessarily the amount that you tax it's the marginal tax rates that are important. If tax rates are 20% if the government takes 20% of my pay they are in essence taking all of my. their real income they went down right because here it was they had nine thousand nine hundred ninety nine dollars in wages they had a thousand dollars and say food stamps could be anything right so here they have actually ten thousand nine nine nine they go out and they earn two more bucks to go above ten thousand this guy falls to zero. They're actually facing marginal tax rates that are above a hundred percent to see what I'm saying they take not only the dollar that you were earned in welfare not only do you lose that but you also now have to pay taxes. doesn't make any sense I'm not gonna do that I'm gonna goof off. I don't want it because they're facing a marginal tax rate that's really really high so which view is Keynesian new classical supply? I'll write the paper and win the Nobel Prize and I can go to Sweden and get the nice little bitty gold medallion that I couldn't wear around my neck for the rest of life at such a such recession. alright this is the end of test three material I will. CNN's John Defterios takes a look at three different views of fiscal policy. Keynes says we can change aggregate demand in such a way that we can make. Defterius: Once you actually start spending money it becomes difficult to take money away. He says once you start giving people something taking out money now becomes very very difficult. The crowding out problem and the crowded out problem says well when you go out and you borrow all of this money you're gonna bond to your kid all right.