equally reasonable as wave functions. All states corresponding to reasonable wave functions are equally reasonable as physical states. There's no primacy in wave functions or in states. However, with that said, some wave function are more equal than others. And this is important, and coming up with a good definition of this is going to be an important challenge for us in the next couple of lectures. So in particular, this wave function has a nice simple interpretation. If I tell you this is psi of x, then what can you tell me about the particle whose wave function is the psi of X? What do you know? a definite position? AUDIENCE: Delta. PROFESSOR: A delta function, exactly. So I claim that any function psi of x can be expanded a sum over all states with a definite position. So is this true? Is it true that I can take any function and expand it in a superposition of delta functions? Absolutely. We're going to find this is a general statement that any state can be expressed as a superpositions of states for any observable quantity you want. Professor: Which particle has a larger momentum? Think about it, but don't say it out loud. If it has higher momentum, what do you just intuitively expect to know about its energy? It's probably higher. OK next one. Compared to the wave function psi of x, it's Fourier transform, psi tilde of x contains more information, or less, or the same, or something. So let's vote. A, more information. B, less information. C, same. OK, good you got it. of length l, 0 outside of that region. f has a single well defined wavelengths. Or f is made up of a wide range of wavelengths? Think it to yourself. OK, now before we get talking about it, I want everyone to close their eyes. Or close the eyes of the person next to you. That's fine. And now and I want you to vote. A is f has one well defined wavelength. B isf has a wideRange of wavelengths. It's closer to true. The average value of a squared is equal to the sum over all possible ages of a times the ratio of Na to N. The average of the square of ages is the same thing. The expected value of some function of a is equal-- and this is something you don't usually do-- to the value of f of a, times the probability that you measure that value in the first place. It's a very useful relation. And so, again, does the average have to be measurable? No, it certainly doesn't. average value of a squared is not equal to 0. And that's because the squared has everything positive. So how do we characterize-- this gives us a useful tool for characterizing the width of a distribution? So here we have a distribution where its average value is 0, but its width is non-zero. And then the expectation value of the squared, the expected value of an a squared, isNon-Zero. This is going to be like our uncertainty. Well, I'm not sure. How unsure are you? Well, that should give us a precise measure. In quantum mechanics, the uncertainty is the square root of the standard deviations squared. Different probability distributions are going to give me different delta a's. When you write delta a, there's nothing in the notation that says which distribution you were talking about. In a physical system, the expected value of x depends on what the state of the system is, what the wave function is. So there are a quantum mechanics. And this has a different flavor. It carries different implications, and we'll see what that is later. The probability of having that momentum times momentum, right? Everyone cool with that? This is what you mean by probability. But we need to know if we have a quantum mechanical system described by state psi of x, how do we get the probability that you measure p? Do I want to do this now? Yeah, OK I do. And we need a guess. We made a guess at the end of last lecture that, in quantum mechanics, this should be dp minus infinity to infinity of the Fourier transform. having different values for momentum. They claim that any function can be expressed as a superposition of states with definite momentum, right? Well, among other things a state with definite position, x0, can be written as asuperposition, 1 over 2pi integral dk. But in particular, it's clear that this is not-- this quantity can't be a delta function of k, because, if it were, this would be just e to the ikx. And that's definitely not a deltafunction. This is what we're after. We want some good definition of p given that we're working with a wave function which is a function of x. If I take a state, psi of x, which is equal to e to the ikx, this is a state that has definite momentum h bar k. A state with a definite momentum has the property that, when you hit it with the operation associated with momentum, you get back the same function times a constant, and that constant is exactly the momentum we ascribe to that plane wave. question slightly differently. We've followed the de Broglie relations, and we've been led to the idea that there's some relationship between the momentum, the observable quantity that you measure with sticks, and meters, and stuff. But I didn't derive anything. I gave you no derivation whatsoever of the relationship between d dx and the momentum. Instead, I'm simply going to declare it. In quantum mechanics, p is represented by an operator, it's represented by the specific operator h bar upon I derivative with respect to x. This is a series that you should recognize, a particular Taylor series for a particular function. It's a Taylor expansion for the AUDIENCE: Exponential. e to the minus L derivative with respect to x f of x. Which is kind of awesome. So let's just check to make sure that this makes sense from dimensional grounds. So that's a derivative withrespect to x as units of 1 over 6. But I'm going to write this in the following suggestive way. This is equal to 1 times f of X minus L. your memory. Gainst death and all oblivious enmity shall you pace forth. Your praise shall still find room, even in the eyes of all posterity. So no judgment arise till you yourself judgment arise. You live in this and dwell in lover's eyes. May your day be filled with love and poetry. Whatever state you're in, we will always love you. Signed, Jack Florian, James [INAUDIBLE]. [LAUGHTER] PROFESSOR: Thank you, sir. The configuration of a particle is given by, or described by, a wave function psi of x. In 3D, the wave function would be a function of all three positions x, y and z. If there are two possible configurations the system can be in, it's possible to find the system in a superposition of those two psi. The probability that we find the particle somewhere had better be one. If it's less, then the particle has simply disappeared. All reasonable, or non stupid, functions psi of X are equally reasonable as wave functions.