we get the product hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA or HMG-CoA, as you notice the initials H, M, and G are part of this name. We are also given an additional hint and that is the acetyl CoA substrate provides the CH2CO2 CO2 minus moiety in the HMG -CoA product. So the hint is telling us that these two carbons, which I'm going to label in blue from acetoacetyl- CoA, are, in fact, these twocarbons, CH2 COO minus in hydroxyl-glut Daryl CoA. Now, let's take a look at the crystal structure and see what information we can gather there. The reaction will start by forming this thioester between the acetoacetyl-CoA carbons and the cysteine in the active site of the enzyme. The reaction first involves activation of the cy Steine, is deprotonated, and then cysteines can attack the thioesters and form a tetrahedral intermediate. Angstrom: The reaction may also be involved in the catalyzing of the reaction with the enzyme serine 307, which is a type of protease. experimental work and evidence. The study of the effects of drugs on the human body was conducted in the 1970s and 1980s. The results of the study were published in a book called "The Effects of Drugs on the Human Body" The book was published by Oxford University Press in 1989. It was the first of its kind to be published in the U.S. and is published by Simon & Schuster, a division of Simon and Schuster Inc. in New York. The book is available in hardback and paperback. Bogdan Fedeles: Today we're going to be talking about Problem 2 of Problem Set 4. HMG-CoA synthase is a key enzyme in central metabolism responsible for making the five carbon building blocks from which all sterols, such as cholesterol and steroid hormones are made. Bogdan: The three general mechanisms by which enzymes accelerate reactions are binding energy, general acid/general base catalysis and covalent catalysis. The binding energy also manifests when we're stabilizing, for example, the transition state of the reaction relative to the binding of the substrates.