methods. So all those methods basically look the same. You just get equations that have more unknowns in them. And so fundamentally, there's no problem, but in practice, there is a big problem if the number of unknowns gets to be so large. So think about it. How many points do you think you need to discretize? Now, these are all different ways to write down the equations. All of them are correct in the limit that delta z goes to zero. But they lead to really different numerical properties when delta z is large. trying to flow by, sort of, every path. And there's some insulation that's resisting its flow. And it has been in the connectivity of flow a certain way. Those kinds of equations are called elliptic. And the methods that we use for the relaxation mesh that we showed are really good for those kinds of problems. And then another kind of problem that we get into a lot is like this one. This is called parabolic. And typically, in the cases we see that are parabolic, we have time as part of the problem. a terrible approximation to do this. You can see that what we're doing is, when we have this problem where the local Peclet number is getting too large, is we're actually choosing delta z bigger than the, sort of, the thickness of the solution. And approximation to the differential. This is a asymmetrical finite difference formula. It's not a very good value estimate of the derivative, if delta z is big. But you can write it out carefully and write this out and say, oh, this actually is sort of like this plus an effective diffusivity chosen very carefully. before. There's a similar thing and it might be relevant to the COMSOL problem that Kristyn showed you on Monday, is you can-- In that case, there was a region of the boundary here that had some concentration c naught, and then there was, over here, the concentration was zero. Here, it's some number, 17, whatever number it was. And if you think of how to model what's going on, one way to look at it is, I have a diffusive flux coming in from the drug patch, diffusing the drug into the flow. sure we all our time steps are exactly right. We're just going to throw away all those time points anyway. We'll just keep the final one as our initial guess for a Newton-Raphson solve to find the steady state. So this is time accurate. There's another method. I don't know if I should call it time inaccurate. If you don't care, if the solution is really, what the solution yft is, all you care about is where you get to, then you can do other methods. set up is right, so you can use it. But if you can, it can be pretty good. All right. See you on Friday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here for the latest from CNN.com. Back To the pageYou came from the page You came from: Back to the Page You Came From: Back To The Page You Were Originally From: The page you were originally from: The Page you were initially from: the Page you started from. Professor: Today we're going to talk about partial differential equations. Professor Swan is going to do a review on Friday. Next time I'll be lecturing to you will be a week from Friday. The homework following the quiz will be posted and so you guys can get started on that. For example, if you wanted to solve the Schrodinger equation for h2 plus, it turns out there's a special coordinate system called the elliptic coordinate system. And in that coordinate system, the partial differential equation is separable.