There are differences between the DNA of two any human beings. These differences are due to polymorphisms, like single nucleotide polymorphisms. Microsatellites, repeats, insertions, deletions, translocations, these are all things that can happen to your DNA sequence that can modify in ways that, of course, are not enough to turn you into another animal. You're going to find approximately one difference every 1,000 bases. And understanding what these differences do and mean is one of the most interesting problems in current genome research. The typical operations we might be interested in doing are, for example, sequence matching. So to understand if certain stretch of a sequence matches anything else that you've seen before. Homology searches refer to looking for similarities between DNA sequences in different organisms. So if you find a high degree of similarity between the two genes, you can hypothesize that they are also going to have the same function. We will see as we go forward that we're going to encounter very different forms of data, according to what the purpose of our work is. LocusLink is a repository of information about genes, and it collects everything that is known about the genes. No LocusLink assigns a name to each gene, and if you stick to that name, then you're sure that everybody knows what you're talking about. Other resources that we'll mention later use a different way of naming genes. This makes things very difficult when you're trying to build programs to integrate information from different places. It's very, very hard to know exactly how to reconcile different ways of naming gene. If you have enough sequences from the same organism, you can try assembling them, putting them together, and trying to reconstruct the entire genome. This is what was done to assemble the human genome, for example, and all the other genomes that are being sequenced. You start with-- you look at the sequences you have, and if you can find overlaps, then you know that these two sequences are related in some way, and you proceed from there. And in the end you're going to build a map that tells you where all these fragments should be positioned. it gives a graphical view, so you can see it in the next slide, it's very clear. All the information it provides is available in easy to download and to parse formats. It provides arbitrary DNA sequences-- you can ask for any region of any human chromosome, you'll get back the exact DNA sequence for that region. Inside the genetic map, for example, you find information about disease genes, what bands break points. It's extremely detailed, because of course, it can rely on the whole set of NCBI databases. A SNP is a polymorphism that substitutes the nucleotide you should have at one location with a different one. There are ways of calculating the age of the SNP, so when that mutation arose in the history of our genome. Now the largest database of SNPs that we have again, is at NCBI, it's called the dbSNP. It currently contains over 4 million human SNPs-- actually, I think that by now this number is closer to 5 million SNPs. Almost 50% of the SNPs are validated, which is something very important, means that the SNP has been observed independently multiple times. for example, in 80% of individuals. And the alternative allele appears in 20% of the population. Now, knowing this frequency is very important, because it allows you, then, to do association studies. For example, to look for a correlation between a disease and this polymorphism. But in order to be able to do this, you have to know what is the baseline frequency. What is the original frequency in normal, so to speak, human beings. Yes? AUDIENCE: I guess the question then becomes, what's the base population is across base population? SNPs are used for population genetics. If a SNP arises in a population, then it tends to be limited to that population. Alfred at Yale is another very small database, but it has a very high quality, and it focuses on frequency data. SNPper is a resource that tries to integrate information from all the places that I sited so far. So it takes a lot of information about known associations between SNPs and diseases. says next.say next. "It's very important to specify what population you're looking at, because we're going to have an example in two slides" We need to be able to reliably identify which transcription factors bind to a given gene, and where, exactly, in the promoter region of the gene they bind. The ways that people have been using to do this are usually based on pattern matching. The binding site, as I said, is a small stretch of DNA, usually goes from five to about 20 or 25 base pairs. So they're really short. And they're characterized by [? concentric ?] sequences-- in general, they are not very precise. GEO is a database of gene expression and hybridization array data. The Stanford microarray database, again, is a repository of all the-- of a large number of micro experiments performed at Stanford. Other resources for gene expression are found in different PGA projects, PGA are programs for genomic applications, they are are large projects managed by the NIH. The [? tracks ?] PGA, for example, offers 565 microarrays from mouse and rat models of sleep, infection, hypertension, pulmonary disease. is a challenging task, because as we saw, biomedical data covers the whole spectrum of knowledge representation and management techniques that we know about. We are trying to make the most of the data we have, and we hope that it will help us understand more about the human condition. We hope that this article will be of interest to people around the world who are interested in biomedical data and data management techniques. For more information, go to: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-and-biomedical-data/bio-data-measurement-mechanical-data. Alberto Riva: How is all this information represented? What are the different ways that we can store and describe this information? Where does it come from, where is it stored, how do we find retrieve and use it? He says there are some very deep differences between the kind of information you find when you're talking about the genotype, and when we'retalking about phenotypes. He says each one has its own specific nature and function, and needs to be treated with different tools.