"untie" means "take something and do things to it such that it is no longer in the state it is standardly in after you have tied it" There's an "un-" that applies to verbs, and has a reversitive meaning. "Un-" number two combines with adjectives and makes adjectives that mean more or less "not (adjective)." So "unkind," or "unfamiliar," "Unfortunate" These all mean not the adjective, whatever it is. "Unlockable" is ambiguous because there are two "un-"s. "Un-" can combine with either a verb or an adjective. " unlockable" consists of three morphemes, a prefix, a stem, and a suffix. It's not a complete description of what's happened either, but it is also those trees, or those trees represent something, namely the order in which you did things. "John walked up the stairs," "Mary looked up the stairwell," "John" and "Mary" are sentences. Theory of syntax would divide sentences into three kinds. There are sentences that you've heard a zillion times before, like "We're going to class" And on the other hand, sentences you have possibly never heard anyone say, but that are fine. So if I say, "My anteater is hula dancing," you may never in your life have heardAnyone say that. Maybe you have. Some of you may have had more exciting lives than I have. But it's an OK sentence. There's a fairly stupid hypothesis, which says, all you're doing is remembering things people have said, and that's what distinguishes grammatical sentences from interpretable sentences. That's false. You can take a sentence you've never heard before and accept it. We're going to have to be explicit about which subparts count and what exactly we mean when we say that. But you're right, there could be a better version of that hypothesis. Good point. Other questions? Did I successfully answer your question? Yeah. "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously" is meaningless if you don't mess with the meanings of the sentences. If the words meant something else, the sentence would be fine. "furiously" is an adverb and it's trying to modify "sleep" When I say it's meaningless, what I mean is you can't sleep furiously, he says. "I wonder if it just has to do with the idea [INAUDIBLE].. NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. In many languages, including Latin, you have to say, "About what are you talking?" In English, you always bring it along with the question word to the beginning of the sentence. "Who" is supposed to be the direct object of "you are talking to" this person, so it's like, "to whom are youtalking"? "To whom areyou talking?" sounds fancy and snobbish, but still right, according to the linguist, who says it's not his go-to way to say this. many recordings of English speakers you go through, you will never find an infinitely long sentence. Nobody actually says these things. But the reason nobody says an endlessly long sentence, the idea is going to be, it's a fact about life. And we don't care about life in this class. We're not going to try to find out what's the longest sentence anybody ever uttered and try to get that fact to be a fact that we want our grammar of English, our theory of the possible sentences of English to be. will find the red book" for example, we'll see that syntax treats that string, "The red book," as a unit. It's OK to take a substring like that and put it together with another similar substring conjoined with the word "and" so you can say things like, "I will find thered book and the blue pencils" But "find the red I will book, leave the blue I will pencils." No. Can't do this with just any random three-word string. the fact that it contains a noun. So when we put together "red" and "book," what we get has properties that are determined by the fact that they contain a noun, if there were no noun, it wouldn't have those properties. Similarly, with "the red book," the things that can go in that slot, there are various kinds ofThings that can be larger or smaller. What they all contain is a noun; we're going to name that thing after those kinds of units. We'll give it the label "noun" Kind of like when we added "un-" to "lock" and got "unlock" is that it contains a noun. "Find the red book" we're going to give that the label verb, because having a verb is the important part for that. "In the garage" is a unit, it's a constituent. It's the kind of thing syntax gets to care about. And again, if I say, "I will find the book in the garage," and you're amazed, you can say "in the garage?" It's a prepositional phrase. kind of example that I was exploiting in the first slides I was showing you about syntax. Notice, for example, that if I say I will wake up the cats and you're astonished as you might well be, you can't say "Up the cats?" You cannot say, "I will walk the stairs up," I think. So "up the cats" is not a prepositional phrase. We need different structures for these verb phrases, and we will develop them. I was a way, waking the cats up, it's a little bit like painting the cats red. You can't say, "I will walk up the student to her room," can you? NORVIN RICHARDS: No. That implies you're walking on the student, which is not the case. For "walk up them" we want "up" and "them" to combine to be a propositional phrase. For these other two, we want something else. We're going to want to circle around and try to find out what that other thing is. Do you have a suggestion? Share it with us at CNN iReport. construct syntactic trees for strings of words. It's often the case that we get ambiguities like the "unlockable" ambiguity. There is more than one way to combine things. And what we'll do is develop tests that allow us to see which way we've combined words in different ways. And we'll find cases where, depending on in what order you combine things, you get different meanings, and our tests will combine with that. All right. We will do this again on Tuesday. Linguist: "Unlockable" can mean either it's possible to unlock it, or it is not possible to lock it. "Un-" combines with verbs to make adjectives like "singable" or "understandable" "This door is broken, It is un-unlockable," would mean it cannot be unlocked. "Go harass your roommates whose minds have not been contaminated by linguistics," he says. "If you are going to try to learn from me how to make yourself popular, then you are in the wrong class"