In this problem, we're given a collection of 10 variables, x1 through x10, where each i, xi, is a uniform random variable between 0 and 1. And we'd like to develop a bound on the probability that some of the 10 variables being greater than 7 using different methods. In part A, we'll be using the Markov's inequality, which says the probability x is greater than a is bounded above by the expected value of x divided by a. For part B, let's see if we can improve the bound we got in part A using the Chebyshev inequality. know how the distribution of a standard normal looks like, we can go to table and look up certain properties of the resulting distribution. So right now, we have about 10 variables. If we believe 10 is a large enough number, then this will be roughly equal to 1 minus the CDF of astandard normal evaluated at 2.19. And we could look up the number in the table, and this gives us number roughly, 0.014. Now let's do a quick summary of what this problem is about. We're asked to compute the probability of x greater or equal to 7. that even with 10 variables, the truth is more like this, which says that the distribution of x concentrates very heavily around 5, and hence, the probability of x being greater or equal to 7 could be much smaller than one might expect. That is, x is more likely to be greater than 7 than it is to be less than 7, and so the probability is much lower than one would expect. It is also more likely that x is greater than or less than 5, rather than equal to 6 or 7. a better bound. To remind you what a central limit theorem is, let's say we have a summation of i equal to 1 to some number n of independent and identically distributed random variables xi. We take the sum right here, and subtract out its means, which is E of the same summation, and further, we'll divide out, what we call normalize, by the standard deviation of the summation. So as the number of terms in the sums going to infinity, we will actually see that this random variable will converge in distribution.