able to evaluate these matrix elements is the permutation requirement. And it turns out that there is a really simple way of dealing with the requirements for electron permutation, and that is to write the wave function as a determinant of one-electron orbitals. Now this, because of the properties of the determinant, is anti-symmetric with respect to permutation of any two electrons or any two orbital. But we don't really care about the permutations of the orbitals, because it's really the same thing is permuting the electrons. Well, when we do this, the diagonal matrix elements of the 1 over rij Hamiltonian can be expressed. And we use this notation, J tilde minus K tilde. So for every two-electron thing, we're going to get this kind of-- now these are simple integrals, and some of them are 0. Because this doesn't operate on spins. So this tilde notation is a convenient thing, because you can use any Slater determinant, and you can express it in terms of J's and K's. In order to make an eigenstate of s squared or sz, you sometimes need two or more Slaters. When you have mismatched alpha and beta, the K's are 0. But when you have K, the 1 over rij matrix element between two Slaters, you can fix that. Now if you looked at 100 textbooks, I think 95% of them will have Hund's rules wrong. You're never going to get it right. But some things in life are worth suffering for. shielding arguments are capable of explaining that. OK, so this is the end of atoms. And I've asked you to observe some complicated algebra which you're never going to do. Everything you need to know about atoms, you can tell a computer, and it can do it. Now molecules are much more complicated. And that's we're going to start on next time. We'll start with molecular orbital theory. I'm not going to be presenting the normal textbook approach. I'll present an interpretive approach, where you understand why things happen. The goal of this course is to give you the tools to interpret complicated phenomena. We have electronic structure and the hydrogen atom as a way of understanding what electronic structure is. When we go to molecular orbital theory, we take what we know about atoms, and build a minimally-complex interpretive picture, which is sort of a framework for understanding complicated molecular interactions. The relationship between the effective quantum number and the ionization energy of a state then provides a hydrogen-atom-based structural model for everything you can observe.