In this video I'm going to be going over lung oscilation specifically the sites of where you osculate. We're going to go over normal breath sounds versus abnormal breath sounds. You can access the quiz and the notes over here or in the description below. In the next video I'll be performing an assessment on a patient and show you how to listen with your stethoscope to these sides. I'll also be going through the anatomy of the anterior part of the chest. chest in this illustration you have your right lung and your left lung and how I set up this illustration is that I wanted you to be able to see what is over the lungs. Whenever you're listening with your stethoscope you need to know where your clavicle is and certain intercoastal spaces because they correlate to which lobe of the lung you are listening to. We're going to start from top to bottom and compare sides and work our way down and we'll start right above the scapula right where the Apex is. and discontinuous now first let's go over continuous what does continuous mean this is a extra sound that you're hearing that is lasting more than 2 seconds with a full respiration. The first type is called a high pitch polyphonic whe let the name help you okay so what is it it is mainly heard in expiration so when the patient's breathing out but it can be in Inspiration as well. The third type of continuous adventitious breath sound is called stri spider and this is heard on inspiration because what's happening is that the airway is being obstructed. patient's breathing in and breathing out so that's why you're hearing it on inspiration and expiration now it can sound similar to a parac cardial friction rub how do you tell the difference um if you are wanting to know is this the lungs or is this this the heart just listen have the patient hold their breath. If you can still hear that harsh grading sound it's the heart because they're holding their breath their lungs aren't moving so you've rolled out the lungs. That is lung occultation and normal breast sounds versus abnormal breast sounds. patient's back if you were to look inside look at the lungs you'll have the clavicle on the front then it comes around and it forms into your scapula. From C7 to T3 your cervical and thoracic spine that is where your upper loes are. What you want to do is just go in between where the shoulder blades and the spine are and just work your way down so we're going to listen to our upper Li. We'll go here and then sound and this is what Strider sounds like.