Free disposal is when you can dispose of inputs without spending any resources fine. No free lunch is when at least 1 input is required to produce some output, or more than you know more than 1 kind of output. You cannot produce something out of thin air, you cannot consume something like in the harry potter world. If you have read Chandrakantha book in hind there, also you know people would create something in this world even the current level of technology fine so that is free disposal. The second is no free lunch. 1 kg of rice can be produced from 1 comma 2 plus 1 minus t 2 comma 1, and this is what additivity is if this 1 unit of input 2. So, 100 units we can produce by replicating this process 100 times. And again 50 times we will use the second process. And if we define the t dash by 100 is equal to t, then we can say 1 kg of Rice can beproduced by t 1 comma2 plus 1minus t 2 commas 1. And this will give us 1 kg using this t dash. is possible, then we say that technology exhibits additivity. Another related, but it may sound different let us say, if it is technologically feasible to produce y amount of output, then it is also technologically possible to produce  y plus y dash. This is example of convexity; let us talk about additivity first. So, let us look at it. . What it means? We have taken example where 1 unit of output can be produced using 2 units of input 1 and 2 unit of input 2, we have used different symbols there. feasible here, y is taking care of not only inputs but also output. The combination is all given here and this exhibits convexity. This is a simple example of how to make a complex shape. The shape can be any shape at any time. It can be either a shape or a shape-shift shape. It is possible to combine two shapes to create a shape that looks like a shape shape. For example, the shape could look like the shape of a circle or a circle. The key word is feasibility technology. Feasibility technology represents the feasibilities that out of nothing that is not possible in the real world. For example let us say that we need only milk to produce curd. So, if it is feasible to produce half kg of curd from 1 kg of milk, then it is possible to produce 250 grams of curD from 1kg of milk. Third is non reversibility, what it means is that a production process cannot be reversed. And fourth is convexity, we are going to talk about additivity that we talked about earlier and divisibility fine.