The course is really less about programming and more about dipping your toe into the exotic world of data science. The lectures will be-- and maybe I'm speaking euphemistically-- a bit faster paced. There'll be a few additional bits of Python. Today, for example, we'll talk about lambda abstraction. Inevitably, some comments about software engineering, how to structure software engineering. And the final exam will be a final exam based upon all of the above. All right, prerequisites-- experience writing object-oriented programs in Python, preferably Python 3.5. The 0/1 knapsack problem means you either take the object or you don't. You can solve it with what's called a greedy algorithm, and we'll talk much more about this as we go forward. These might be the most valuable items here. So here is in words, written words what I just said orally. There's more stuff than you can carry, and you have to choose which stuff to take and which to leave behind. I should point out that there are two variants of it. that once I take something that's 1,485 calories, I can't take anything else, or maybe 1,200 calories and everything else is more than 300. Once I take one thing, it constrains possible solutions. A greedy algorithm, as we'll see, is not guaranteed to give me the best answer. On Wednesday, we'll talk about how do you actually guarantee finding an optimal solution in a better way than brute force. See you then. you about greedy algorithms. and I'm going to allow myself 1,000 calories. Well, here what we see is the winner will be greedy by value, happens to find a better answer, 424 instead of 413. So there is no way to know in advance. Sometimes this definition of best might work. Sometimes no definition ofbest will work. You can't get to an optimal solution with a greedy algorithm. On Wednesday, we'll talk about how do you actually guarantee finding an optimal Solution in a better way than brute force. John Guttag: The main topic of the course is what I think of as computational models. How do we use computation to understand the world in which we live? What is a model? We'll talk about three kinds of models-- optimization models, statistical models, and simulation models. The first time I talked about the knapsack problem was 10 minutes into the class before I realized it was a class. It's what we old people used to call a backpack, and they used to look more like they do today.