There are only two activities on this island. The first activity is catching fish, and second activity is gather coconut. So, they have several options there; devote part of the time to catch fish or devote all the time that they have to catchFish depending on their need. The next is how to produce. So of course, how this allocation involves making this decision what you produce. The third activity, that they can take up is that, they can fabricate net that would help them catch fish. In command economy essential authority typically, government some sort of government determines, how to produce. In market economy, as opposed to command economy, decisions are made by individuals. Third is mixed economy, here it is somewhat a mixture of command and market-based economy. Now think of it how would you categorize Indian economic system? Do we have command economy? Or we have market-Based Economy? Or do we have mixed economy? Also, it is good idea to think about what we had before 1991, and what we have after 1991. the government. So, this is a concept, an extreme concept that we typically do not find, but you would see in newspapers talk about moving towards laissez faire or moving away from laissezes faire. The government. is not a government, it is a body that has the power to decide what happens to people's lives. The. government is not the government. It is a group of people who have the power. to make decisions about people’s lives. It has the ability to make changes to the law. Allocation is nothing but assignment, allotment, share, but in economics we are more technical about this particular term allocation. Allocation here means solving these three fundamental or basic questions of economics, and the first question is what to produce? The second is how to produce and third is for whom to produce. So, let us talk about this question, first what to produced? Let us look at to answer these three questions one by one. Let us imagine a very simple economy. After 1991 after economic liberalization we are slowly moving towards market based economy, but we are not yet there.