Borat: I want to talk about my favorite part of the Second Discourse, a book that never grows old. Borat: Inequality is for Rousseau far more what we might call "the moral and psychological injuries of inequality" than the material aspects of the phenomenon. He says Rousseau very much takes the side of the poor and the dispossessed but it isn't property, or poverty rather, that rouses Rousseau's anger as it is the attitudes and beliefs shaped by inequalities. Rousseau: Amour-propre only arises in society and is the true cause, he believes, for our discontents. He distinguishes it from another disposition that he calls amour de soi-meme, a sort of self-love. "Amour- Propre is merely a sentiment that is relative," he says, "artificial and born in society which moves each individual to value himself more than anyone else" The desire for recognition is at the root of our sense of justice, he says. For Hobbes, and this idea of pride, vanity, what Hobbes called vainglory, was a very important part of Hobbes' political and moral psychology in Leviathan. For Rousseau by contrast amour-propre is something that could only come about after the state of nature, a state that Hobbes had called solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short. But how could pride have arisen in such a state? Rousseau speculates about this and, again, this is part of his hypothetical or conjectural history. Rousseau has to say about it, about this kind of issue. To tolerate simply means not to persecute, to leave alone, while respect for something requires that we esteem it. This is a vast topic. I think that amour-propre, the desire to be esteemed, recognized, and to have your values and points of view esteemed by those around you is very different from what Locke talked about. It doesn't require us to censor, self-censor, our own views on the ground that they may be disrespectful or hurtful to others. Only a very few people, Rousseau writes, are capable of finding their way back to nature. He is one of those rare aristocrats of nature, you might say. His claim to superiority is not based on a higher understanding but a superior sensitivity, less on wisdom than on compassion. But it requires you, in some way, to distance yourself severely and psychologically from all of the possibilities of society, to return inward, and it was that inward journey that Rousseau took and that he writes about so powerfully. general will and how Rousseau sees it as a sort of collective answer to the problem of the securing of individual liberty. So meditate on that if you like for the next day. If you like, you can read the rest of the book tomorrow. It's a great read and a great way to start a new day. I hope you'll join me for a cup of tea and a glass of wine in the next few hours. I'm looking forward to seeing you in the morning. Rousseau's Second Discourse is about the origins of inequality. He says the passion of amour-propre is the first and most durable cause. Government is a game that legitimizes the rich and dispossesses the poor, he says. The social contract, as he presents it, is a kind of swindle, says John Rawlinson of the University of California, Los Angeles. The book is available in English, French, German, Spanish, Italian and Danish.