this what is the English statement here it is the angular of velocity frame B with respect to frame a right okay so we saw that for the first time now a little bit on the low of angular velocity that you've seen in previous classes but we we Plunge in anymore um the first thing is can of Point have an angular velocity now can a frame have a velocity kind of no because if a frame's rotating some point different points will have different velocities so yeah a frame can have a Velocity but doesn't really mean much and you tell me which point in the frame you're referring to right. If I change the order in which I add angles they don't add up right so if I said 45° up and I'm going to trade 45° my arms up here right why is the angle adding up here a has something changed over the weekend if I turn 45° anyway. But infinite decimal angles do add up you remember this you did this in physics. If I rotate about one axis a certain amount 30° and then rotate about another axis 30° right if I reverse the sequence they don’t add up. But it turns out that here if I take a very tiny rotation not 90° but like. 1° then the sequences do actually add up okay. of thing you need to kind of walk around with a book you know and people will think you're nuts but you know do that and you'll see that the angles kind do add up you get it. Angle of velocity is a measure of the rate of change of angle so it's a d Theta. It's a tiny angle get it in a moment of time right in a very tiny moment oftime so angular of velocity does add up so you can treat it as a vector in the math. here so will you please expand it for me what does that come out to be this is the left hand side of that formula right and we'll do the right hand side separately and show that the two are the same I'm trying to prove it to you right so I'm not you know I'm doing just very boring stuff but we need to do it just establish it what is d by a d by DT of U1 cosine Theta it is U1 do cosine theta right minus U Theta do sin Theta. yeah okay using um frames uh using angle of velocity so the problem was we have the ground, the spider and the Frisbee. We characterize this situation with three parameters okay and the parameters are the positions of the center of the frisbe right and the distance of the spider. And the angle of theSpider from theCenter of the Fr Isbee right and assuming the spider is only moving in a straight line with respect to the FrIsbee away then we just need a distance. the the acceleration the velocity and acceleration of the of the insect anybody how do I begin write down the yeah always begin by writing down the position Vector so r o s is equal to U A1 Plus V A2 plus L B1 L is the distance of the spider from the center of the fris oh oh I call it Q sorry sorry I'm sorry q h say it again ah let me ask you when I write a position Vector does it need a reference frame doesn't the only thing where I can get away without writing a a uh reference frame is when I writing a vector at a vector is just you know the frame when the frame is implicit in the basis vectors. with respect to a what do we call that say again it is yes it is if I take the derivative of this it is right plus the derivative, this so in fact if you want I'll expand it I'll write it in smaller steps so you you you can follow it right right I've just written it out right. So this is the velocity version of the magic formula and I'm sure you'll admit that I did nothing particularly profound in deriving this okay and then that handout the typed handout that you you hopefully downloaded and read from the web you will see this EXP expand it out for you. yeah sorry and plus this thing okay we'll end now because Professor Socrates needs to take over this is it this is correct acceleration of P acceleration of Q with respect to B Oiler coris centripedal and you know why it doesn't go to zero because I'm not taking a Omega B cross a omeg B. I'm taking a omega B cross this whole term which is at 90° to a OmegaB got it got it? Yeah sorry and Plus this thingOkay we'llend now because professor Socrates need to takeover. Last week we looked at the we first saw our first magic formula which you've probably forgotten because it was a wonderful weekend so I'll remind you and um then from there we will uh resolve the spider problem and then uh we're going to solve uh the super magic formula. The Machinery I provided you is powerful enough to solve pretty much any kinematics problem because it's based purely on Geometry angular velocity is a kind of a madeup concept that just simplifies the math and it's kind of intuitive stuff.