Glycogen phosphor is U an enzyme that's regulated in several ways. It exists in two forms it exists in the glycogenosphor a form which is the form that has the phosphate on that people describe as the more active and it has the form without the phosphate known as the glycogens phosphor B that is less active. Def phosphorilation involves a kise or phosphatase right the r&t involve allosteric affectors okay all right okay so that's uh where we start now um. has to itself be regulated just like everything else has to be regulated because if we don't regulate it then everything's going to be def phosphorated all the time and cells aren't going to have energy like they need okay so we need to think about that Def phosphorilation and that's the wrong slide okay here's what we're after okay now what you see on the screen is a um a scheme that shows the regulation of phosphoprotein phosphatase that's pp1. put them in the same tube I've got purified pure glycogen phosphor and Pure glycogen synthes I put them together in a tube and I want to see what happens I add glucose and something very odd happens. The first person that answers that gets a free metabolic Melodies calendar for 2012 are they different active sites in the the same nope what' you say def phosphorilation come by and get your a calendar okay this Santa Claus is here okay all right so defosphorilation is happening but I only had two enzymes here. 5m I'll have my car pack with information so I don't have to memorize it and I'll feel like aart with my party just one to go and then ho I'll be all right I think you got it thank you. [Applause] oh yes thank you thank you [Music] sh if if if you're too crowded for the final and I don’t get a chance to say it I hope you have a great holiday and I will see you next time thank you indeed you too study hard. okay folks let's get started how's everybody doing pretty good Santa Claus has come to town and you know Santa does with naughty kids Hees them finals he gives them finals. He gives them very evil finals is what he does okay so look out for Santa Claus he's really a really a bad guy uh let's see let's think about a couple of things in terms of announcements. We have a couple surprises today one of which is standing in front of you with all this on and there's more surprises as well.