is that electricity, as you know, in an electric car it's not going to be useful if you have to have it plugged in all the time, right. So storage of electricity is clearly really, really important. And so we get to sort of how do you think about storage technologies, and again, I just want to kind of gently introduce us to energy storage and we'll go into batteries. Now so the kind of plot that I'm showing you here, talking about Ashby plots, but this is actually a different kind. It's a special kind because it has to do with energy storage. Theory of electricity was similar to theories for motion of the human body. Galvani wanted to make a connection between things that move and electricity. He hooked up his lightning rod to a frog. The frog was not alive. The motion of a frog, and all motion of all living creatures, generates electricity. That's what he said. He deduced that the motion itself is something that generates electricity, and that's how he came up with the theory. It was like, ah-ha, motion, electricity. lots of metals. That's what he did. And he showed that the frog moved with most of them, so it's the metals. So let's take these two classic metals and show what happens. You've got copper and you've got zinc. Now, in this case, I'm just going to have a zinc. This is the zinc piece of metal, and this is a piece of zinc, and I put it in a solution of copper ions. And we got them sort of bonding. The zinc that goes into solution is 2 plus and 2 electrons. And the copper in the solution plates onto the zinc, plus those 2 electrons goes to copper like that. The zinc is leaving the solid and it's becoming 2 plus. But the thing is that now, you've got to be careful here. What about those two electrons? Where do they go? A zinc atom leaves its metal strip and goes into that beaker of zinc ions. But now you have two charges, two electrons on the strip because it left a zinc 2plus. Just that now we're talking about the metals and whether they're more interested than the other metal in having those two electrons. That's what a potential is. And you know, when you look at this, you might say-- this is from Averill so he actually is missing the f's because this is just taken right from the textbook, but anyway, so that's the potential. Look at this. This is like an energy diagram but these aren't electronics. These are just potentials, but the potential is related to which one wants the 2 electrons more. standard hydrogen electrode. So sometimes you'll see it as the SHE in the battery world. And what it is it's just a very nice platinum electrode that doesn't change. So it doesn't plate or lose atoms. And it's a reaction that on that electrode happens with hydrogen, hydrogen gas. And so what you do is you hook this up on one side, and then you put all the metals against that. And you measure their potential. So hydrogen electrodes gives you that ability to standardize it and create huge tables. renewables at large scales unless you store it. In fact, we're really at essentially the tipping point. If you look at-- this is Germany, now. Huge penetration-- these are these six years, seven years of adding PV. They're now at 7%. 2016 is 7%. This is how much the price of electricity was in Germany when they added. They can sell it for a lot of money. But as they add more of this renewable to the grid, its price goes down when it's available. need. So that's a real challenge for chemistry. I hope you guys have a great Thanksgiving and maybe hook up some different metals. And I'll see you all next week. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @cnnireport. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the CNNOpinions page.Back to thepage you came From. Back from the CNN Opinion page. Back in the page, click here for the latest from CNN. The planet is kind of a storage device. It's an energy storage device for that thing over there. Most sort of energy storage needs are going to be around a year or less. Why electricity? Because electricity is more and more important in our lives. We've got a whole lot of limitations as well, just to give you the abbreviations, Superconducting Magnetic Coils and so on. And then we're going to talk about the chemistry of batteries and throw in a couple of, why this matters.