In the year 2000, four-year college grads actually earned more with their entry jobs than they're earning today. In the year 1970, only 1 out of 100 taxi drivers had a college degree. In today's world, the momentum is moving toward people who are trained, says Tyler Cowen. The labor market is more about skills than ever before, Cowen says, and college degrees are no longer enough to get a job in the U.S. Today's labor markets are ruled by supply and demand, and supplies and demands are changing all the time. Kinds of labor. Well, skilled labor -- working with computers -- is much more powerful. The computer enhances the productivity of the skilled laborer. And information technology makes it possible for skilled labor to sell their products around the entire world. At the same time, with information technology, that can be pretty hard to learn. So changing technology has made wages rise more at the top, but has held wages down for a lot of other jobs. And new college graduates are experiencing that when they go into the labor market. in information technology, who work well with computers and who can exploit growing global markets. When supply and demand are ruling labor markets, the people who do well are those who have an economic understanding of where is demand high, and where is supply scarce. Check out our practice questions to test your money skills. Next up, we'll show you where to find data to help you decide which career to choose. We'll also show you how to get the most out of your college degree, including how to apply your knowledge to the real world. Technology has altered supply and demand in the U.S. labor market. The number of start-ups in the American economy has been declining each decade since the 1980s. A third set of factors has to do with slower economic growth, slower productivity growth and slower dynamism. Next up, we'll show you where to find data to help you decide which career to choose. The Daily Discussion is CNN Tech's weekly, offbeat look at what's happening in the world of business.