Milton Friedman: What really matters to you in a consumption decision is not so much your current income, but what you expect to get on average during your lifetime. So you don't consume all you have because you know there are many years ahead of you where income will be lower than your consumption needs. So when you start thinking about consumption in those terms, what really matters, then, is total wealth more than income. How wealthy you are will pin down more or less the consumption you have. expect to inherit or whatever, minus the debts you have. So very much as we discussed in the previous lecture in the context of asset pricing, the expected present discounted value of the cash flows of all the assets you have, that's your financial wealth. You have more financial wealth, even if you have no income today, you will probably borrow against that wealth to the extent that you can. And so you're going to fund the consumption, which is above your current income just because you have morefinancial wealth. In fact, the very rich seldom sell assets to fund consumption. not be worth a lot simply because interest rates are very high. The discounting of the future cash flows is very high, and in that environment, investments that give you a return, a quick return, are worth more than things that have a pay-off in the very long run. So the decision, for example, of buying a machine needs to look at the price of the machine right now and then at the expected present discounted value of the cash flows, OK? So let's think a bit more carefully about that decision. If the Fed cuts the interest rate but doesn't persuade anyone that this rate will remain low in the future, then it is going to get very small effect on output. However, if we convince people that there will be future changes, that the rates will remain lower for a long time, that means that this IS now will shift to the right, OK? That's what we have here. So again, expectations mattered quite a bit. If you convince the markets that-- and the markets and consumers, households, and so on-- that you're cutting interest rates, with that, you'll be successful in. Most of the time when you have episodes of fiscal consolidation in environments that are not of very high distress, financial crisis, and so on, it typically sort of-- how successful that is depends a lot on whether people expect to be a sort of implicit deal between the central bank and the Treasury. So, for example, if you have a fiscal contraction that leads to an anticipation of a big cut in interest rates in the future, that may be expansionary. It can offset quite a bit of the fiscal contraction side. was expansionary. That was contractionary. But it was overwhelmed or offset, more than offset by the improvement in the outlook that you had. And that also happens with monetary policy. Countries that have high inflation problems and so on sometimes get-- and they have to go through dramatic tightenings. Yes, most of them get very short-lived recession. But sometimes they are veryshort-lived recessions because eventually the reduction of the instability caused by high and unstable inflation sort of ends up dominating any direct contractionary effect. Expectations play a big role in the decision of all economic actors. We'll look at investors, asset pricing and so on. We will develop a life-cycle theory of consumption, which says people know early in life that they have a lower income than they will have later on. Traders, given the opportunity, will make a difference, that will do a lot with wealth, CABALLERO says. "There is a lot of interesting stuff that is hidden in that autonomous component of consumption," he says.