Professor Steven Smith: I want to talk today about Aristotle's discovery of America. He says Aristotle's mixed constitution differs from ours still in certain important respects. Smith: For Aristotle, it is not the liberty of the individual so much as the functioning or functional well-being of the city that is the highest priority. In these parts of the Politics, Aristotle is very sketchy here about the structure, institutional structure, the make-up of the best regime, acknowledging the best men where the best rule. In Book II, Aristotle criticizes at considerable length Plato's Republic for the excessive unity it demands of its citizens. He clearly understands, in many ways, the virtues of private property and of commerce. Yet, despite his awareness of the importance of commerce and of property, the aim of the city, he tells us, is not the production of wealth. If wealth were the purpose of politics, Aristotle writes, the Phoenicians, you might say, in the ancient world, would have been the commercial leaders. Aristotle's best regime differs from Plato's intransigent demand for the rule of philosopher-kings. The megalopsychos, the gentleman, whatever else he is, is not a philosopher in the strict sense. He is a person of some inherited wealth, chiefly landed property, but whose way of life will be urban. The gentleman may lack the speculative intelligence of a Socrates, but he will possess that quality of practical rationality, of practical judgment necessary for the administration of affairs. the back door. On Friday, let me just remind you, Il Principe. We'll study Machiavelli. On this very partisan note I conclude. On Thursday, we'll study the life of the Italian statesman and play a game of chess with him. We're going to see how well he can play the game of poker. I'm looking forward to it. I hope you'll join us for the game on Friday night at 8 p.m. ET on CNN. Aristotle's proposal for a mixture of oligarchy and democracy seems, in many ways, to anticipate, 2,000 years before the fact, Madison's call for a government where powers must be separated. Aristotle could never endorse the view stated by a famous American president that the business of America is business. He would to war, but in fact to peace. The citizen of the best regime must be able to sustain war if duty requires, but only for the sake of peace and leisure.