here-- in other words, at a certain distance r away, how much does the area of this sphere-- does this detector take up? And a simple formula for the solid angle is just the surface area of whatever you've got over r squared. This approximate formula-- the blue curve-- is a pretty good approximation of the red curve until you get really, really close to 5 centimeters away, or about this distance right here. But this is actually not that good of an approximation when you put a source very, very up close to a detector. If you were to take this detector and bring the radius down to 0, if that solid angle went to, well, infinity , then the count the sphere or how much tin foil you had to use. Michael Shorter: Counting for longer can decrease your standard deviation. He asks, how long do you have to count in the smoke shop to be 95% percent sure? Shorter says the more error you allow, the shorter time you've got to count for. He says sometimes, do you necessarily have to be95% confident of your result? Depends on what you're doing, he says. But if you can't get within 5% error, there's always some trade-offs you can make. you have to give an answer that will relate two times this standard deviation. And now we know the formula for standard deviation of this net counting experiment. So then we can substitute in our expression for sigma-- our uncertainty in quadrature-- and find out things like, well, it depends on what the information we're given is. And so let's actually look at that on the graph. If we keep on scrolling up just by adding stuff to the y-axis, eventually we see that it gets all straight. The standard deviation is the square root of the count rate over the time. So the standard deviation squared is just count rate overtime time. We've got too many variables, but it's easy to get rid of one of them, either C n or C g. Do you a question? MICHAEL SHORT: No, I was just going to say [INAUDIBLE].. MICHAELSHORT: Great. Now that everything is corrected here, what's next? We've Got Too Many variables. bag. MICHAEL AMES: We're going to let this count until Tuesday. Because, why not? And I don't feel like coming in over the weekend and turning it off. So this is just picking up all the gammas coming out of the bananas, and everything else that happens to get through the [INAUDIBLE],, and all the contamination on the inside of that. And we just let it count. And then you guys can calculate how much potassium 40 is in your ashes. You'll need to do the background subtraction. When you're running NAA, you really want to avoid having all these fast reactions. There's usually an energy threshold for the fast reactions, like 1 meV or so. If you're near the reactor, you're also getting some fast neutrons, which can give you an n p reaction. And that's a pain in the neck, because if you've got iron, you've always got a little cobalt floating around-- you maybe need to do a correction.any questions for Mike on what you've just heard? Well-timed, because we were just talking about this stuff all week. The experiment we're doing is basically change reactor power by half a megawatt. And we're currently at 500 kilowatts. We're going to bring the reactor up to 1 megawatts and then bring it back down. So before we can do this, you have to log into our log book as a trainee on console. We'll show you the proper way to make the entries. As you make those entries, you'll go ahead and then do the actual movement itself. using a regular rod to move the reactor power up. You want to be careful when you raise reactor power. When you get to about 80% of the power level you're going to-- since we're going up to 1 megawatt, that's about 800 kilowatts. You'll drive the regulating rod inwards. It'll slow until it actually starts to go down again. Once it reaches that value and you see it going down, you now know that you could control the reactor and keep it from going away. where it started, the 13.42 inches out of the bottom of the core. It might not make it all the way back up to [INAUDIBLE]. FRANK WARMSLEY: It'll be close. Compensate with the reg rod if you need to. 30.8. OK. And that's the end of the exercise. We'll be back in a few minutes with the results of the test. We hope to see you on "Larry King Live" next week. Michael Short: How do you know what, let's say, your dose distance relationship is? And how do you calculate all this stuff? Short: So I've actually laser-cut out a little Geiger counter jig from a previous class. And you guys can all do this too. And we'll take a look at the solid angle subtended by this detector right here. And what we notice is that except for extremely short distances, this approximate formula for theSolid angle does not compute.