marketing is about creating communicating delivering and exchanging value the way that we communicate the value is through the brand. The brand is what's wrapped around the product so all products in a given category have the same generic functionality. What makes one car different from another is the brand and we're going to talk more about perceptual maps where our brand is positioned in the marketplace relative to our competitors. It's not a question of whether or not our product is expensive or whether it's a high quality the issue is the perception of the target market the people that we want to buy our product. Chanel: If our target market doesn't think it's high quality then we have a huge problem. Instead of going home crying what we do is what chanel said is develop a compelling advertising campaign to communicate that our product is of a high quality. We need to have pillars of support that means that we need to having proof points we get not enough just to say ourProduct is a highquality we have to support that. We have to provide proof in our commercials in our print ads on our website so think of marketing another way to think about marketing. is that going to cost a hundred and fifty thousand dollars to do more intercept in multiple cities and get approximately 1500 respondents now when we do focus groups we also do multiple rounds of focus groups because each round is iterative so we learn from the first round of focus group and then we incorporate that in the next round before we do the quantitative research. i recommend that do the focus groups then we're going to do quantitative research before that now both of those focus groups and questionnaires qualitative and quantitative research as i describe that. Marketing is about four things creating communicating delivering and exchanging value. Value is a function of the price the quality and the benefits so let's make sure that we don't think that value means low price. For something to be of a good value it doesn't need to be a low price it could be a high price but it's a very high quality and it has a lot of benefits do you agree who could explain that further good tell us your name theresa bad um i mean would you consider that clothing yes.