If you have a complex polyhedron, we found general unfoldings. They work. We proved one of them. If you want an edge unfolding, that's the centuries-old open problem. For non-convex polyhedra, we know this is too much to hope for. Even if it's topologically convex, there's not always an edge unfolds. But for general unfolding, we don't know. So today's lecture is actually mostly about these two open problems and different variations of it. This is actually the base case, if you will. So in general, I just pluck off two or three triangles, repeat until I get one of the base cases. So imagine those guys as being done. I'm left with these four triangles, actually, a little boring because I don't get the Mickey Mouse case. But then, this will be an ear. This will be a second-level ear. And so I'll end up doing this. And this is an ear, and this will Be an Ear. So ideally, k is one, and you're not subdividing at all. But maybe, you take every rectangle, divide it in half. Maybe that's enough to then be edge unfoldable. That would be sort of a refined level two grid-like unfolding. There are a ton of results about this. They're all partial. But one thing you could do, with merely 5 by 4 refinement, is something called Manhattan Towers. Let me show you a picture of Manhattan Tower. This is more crazy examples of what it's like to visit. is what I have written here. I haven't actually read that paper. What else do I have? Orthotubes. Orthotube is just sort of thickness one orthogonal tube. It could even be closed, I think, in a loop, but here I've shown it open. And here, grid unfolding is enough. You just do all the grid refinement. You could even just do it locally. Technically, there's a slice here that might slice over here, but you don't have to worry about that. is to say, suppose you have two convex polyhedra, and suppose they came from the same sort of intrinsic geometry. So there's the geometry of the faces, and there's how they're connected together. Different faces can be different, but they're identical in pairs. That's what we're claiming. Is this one any better? Yeah, it's better. This is an old theorem. You may have heard of Cauchy, famous French mathematician. He proved a lot of things. This theorem he didn't actually prove. The average degree is 5? Slightly under 6, 4, 3, 2, 1? Let's see. Should be like 3 n minus 6 edges, so that should be 3. So most of the faces are going to have low degree. So 3 and 5 really matter, but out here, it doesn't matter so much. This is kind of a magical proof. It shouldn't be intuitive where it came from, but it's really beautiful. You'll see as it all comes together. compute the shortest paths between all pairs of vertices, something like this picture, except you don't know what it looks like in 3D. You know every edge must be a shortest path. So the edges are some subset of these guys. And so you've got lots of little convex polygons here. We know it must make a convex polyhedron. If it made two, Cauchy's rigidity theorem would tell you that they're the same. So even once you fix the gluing, you know that there's a unique convex realization. Theory of the facet-path: A path that alternates between visiting faces, triangles, and vertices. Professor: It's an open problem for something like a cube where you actually have quadrilateral faces. He says the claim is facet- Paths always exist for any triangulated, connected surface. The theorem works not only for a polyhedron-- it works for any manifold, any sort of locally, two-dimensional thing, he says. "It's useful because then, we'll get to Mickey Mouses, as we'll see"