hey everyone it's sarah with registerednessrn.com and in this video i'm going to be covering sinus tachycardia. Whenever you're done watching this youtube video you can access the free quiz that will test you on this content. Let's get started what is sinus Tachy Cardia? Well sinus tells us that we're dealing with a heart rhythm that originates in the sa node this is also known as a sinoatrial node and it is found here in the upper part of the right atrium. you want to look at those p waves make sure that they are normal. Make sure that there is only one p wave in front of every qrs complex and make sure they're upright. With sinus hack the atrial rate is going to be greater than 100 beats per minute and then whenever you're looking at the p wave take your calipers and go from p wave to p wave and make make sure there's the same distance between those because that means it's occurring at a regular interval. sinus tac because the rate is so fast remember with sauna's bradycardia the qt interval was a little bit longer and then after each qrs complex you should have a t wave present as well. Now let's analyze this rhythm together using this criteria we just went over here we have a six second ecg strip and the first thing what I want to do is i want to look at those p waves and make sure that they're normal if you look at this rhythm with me you can notice that you see these squiggly lines throughout we refer to that as artifact. Sustained sinus tachycardia can actually decrease cardiac output in your patient. As a nurse we want to assess for any potential causes for why our patient is running this rhythm. The patient can wear a halter monitor if they're at home having this and this will monitor their rhythm and then it'll go back to the cardiologist who will read can be ordered to bring down the fever and then the nurse's role is to report the rhythm change to the physician and let them know about it. cool extremities and then you want to teach the patient if you're able to avoid any activities that could further increase their sinus tag like if they're smoking or drinking caffeine or using any other stimulants because we don't want their heart rate to get up any higher okay so that wraps up this review over sonos tachycardia. If you'd like to watch more videos on this topic you can access the link in the youtube description below. Click the link below to access the video. of the electrical conduction system and the whole goal of the electrical Conduction system is to stimulate your heart muscle cells so they will be and pump blood throughout your body so it all starts here with the sa node which again is located in the upper part of the right atrium. If a patient develops sinus tachycardia it could be that their disease is worsening and it's a warning sign that hey this needs to be investigated more so anytime you have a patient and they're going in to sinus tack you want to investigate it you don't want to just write it off.