The goal is to understand solar cell conversion efficiency, which is the ratio of output to input energy. For most solar cells, this breaks down to the following progression, from the solar spectrum to charge collection. After we get through the fundamentals, we'll be in a good position to understand the different technologies and finally the cross-cutting themes. The lecture will focus on charge separation, incorporating elements of either side but mostly focused on Charge separation. The final lecture will be on the diode under illumination. When we reverse bias our device, notice the separation of the quasi-Fermi energies. And the diffusion current increases. And that's why we have current now a positive value. We've defined the electrons traveling to the left as being a positive current. We have now electrons traveling from the n-type to the p-type material. And so instead of electrons flowing from n- type to p- type, where we had defined as positive current, electrons are flowing from p- Type to n-Type in that, which we defined as negative. Solar cell researchers often do is they say, OK, let's normalize the current by the area to get a current density. At the y-intercept, there is maximum current a lot of it, right? That's the maximum power point. This is the point at which the solar cell is producing the maximum amount of power output. It's where this blue curve reaches a maximum. That is where the solarcell is outputting the maximum Amount of Power. The maximum power is truth in advertising. point divided by the solar insulation, fill factor being defined as the ratio of Vmp Imp product divided by Voc Ioc product. These parameters right here are fairly easy to measure using the solar simulator that you just put together. And so from an engineering point of view, when we break the solar cell output down into these three parameters so that we can better understand what's going wrong with our solar cell, we can get a better idea of what's wrong with the device, the professor says. pay more for a high-efficiency cell because I'm using less area, you can use this type of calculation to get to the answer quickly. This is a really back-of-the-envelope envelope engineering approach to estimating costs of a solar system. So I think this is a great place to stop. And if anybody has an idea, a fun idea, for a class project, I'd invite you to give a pitch up here at the front of class, or you're welcome to send it on an email to the class listserv. The total system efficiency is the product of each individual component going on here. So now what we're going to do is just quickly revisit the diode in the dark and construct the energy band diagram for pn-junction in thedark. Now let's try to imagine what will happen under illuminated conditions, and let's start out in a very simple case. We'll assume that the principle of superposition applies here, that the photo-excited carriers-- in other words, when light shines into our device, essentially exciting electrons.