Professor Christine Hayes: God's choice of Israel, Israel as the chosen one, occurs for the first time in the Book of Deuteronomy. She says the idea that Israel is a holy people entails separation from alien peoples and practices that are inconsistent with the worship of God. Hayes: The ban on intermarriage here is quite specific. It is directed against Canaanites only, not all non-Israelites, for a very specific reason: religious purity. The Israelites are sitting in the sixth century, the time of the final editing of the Deuteronomistic history. Wellhausen: Priestly source represents a late degenerate stage in the evolution of Israelite religion. He argued that in 586, with the destruction of Jerusalem and the people were taken into exile in Babylon, that was when the priests were able to assume control. Wellhausen says the priests built a new identity and religion that stressed the sinfulness of the people, and the need for ritual purity and ritual observance and legalism as the road back to God. And this, according to Wellhauson, was a degeneration. Deuteronomy contains northern traditions from before the fall of Israel, which was in 722. There are many passages that make it clear that it's written from an exilic perspective. The most salient feature of the Deuteronomistic School is the conviction that Israel's residence in the land is a function of its means for us today that it did happen. Another theme that we see in these books is the emphasis on what we call the Yahwist prophets -- prophets like Elijah and Elisha. They are held up as heroes and champions of religious purity. the Bible is divided into two parts we refer to as the "Former Prophets" and then the "Latter Prophets." The Former Prophets will concern us for the next few lectures. The Latter Prophets is a collection of books, each of which bears the name of the individual whose prophecies it purports to contain. These prophets delivered their oracles at critical junctures in Israel's history, in the nation's history. So their words are only going to make sense if we first understand the particular historical crises that they are addressing. In the past 4000 years more wars have been fought for the possession of the tiny strip of land known as Canaan. Canaan is about 150 miles long and 70 miles wide, about the size of Rhode Island. Control of these international highways brought a great deal of wealth to the area. In times of peace it would bring prosperity, but, of course, in times of war the land was perpetually invaded as armies would crisscross the land going off to do battle with the great powers.. priests carry the Ark around the city 13 times, so scholars think there are two different accounts here woven together. Chapter 8 describes the victory at a place called Ai, which is near Jericho. Chapter 9 tells the story of the Gibeonites who join the Israelites; they are a local group that seems to join them. Chapter 11 goes on to stress that Joshua completed the task that had been begun by Moses. The remaining chapters are appendices: 23 is a farewell address, and 24 is a renewal of the covenant at Shechem. According to the Book of Joshua, Israel's tribal structure assumed its classical form at this time. The formation of the nation state, Israel, was much more complicated than the picture that's presented in Joshua 2 through 12. Scholars have proposed three possible models to explain the formation of Israel. The Yahweh cult may have been introduced by people escaping slavery from Egypt. Some elements within this group may have brought with them the story of a miraculous escape from Egypt to become the group that accepted the national god. The Hebrews at this stage were probably not a united people. In Judges, we read that they had not been captured: they were captured later, after Joshua's death. Excavations at Jericho and Ai indicate that both of these towns were laid waste at least 200 years before the probable time of Joshua. Of 20 identifiable sites that were said to be conquered or captured by Joshua and the next generations, only two show destruction layers for this time, Hazor and Beth-el. In Judges 4 and 5, it is still a Canaanite city and Joshua failed to take it. So the conclusion one can draw from all of the Bible is that Joshua was old and advanced in years. of the places from which the Canaanites were not expelled. Also archaeological evidence contradicts the picture in Joshua. Archaeologists have, indeed, found several sites in the central hill country -- which is pretty exciting-- and they were clearly newly established in the thirteenth, twelfth, eleventh centuries. They extend throughout the land, but mostly the central highlands. And these are thought to be Israelite, especially because they appear in places that the Bible identifies as strongholds of Israel. to have been peasant farmers, like other Canaanites. One interesting difference is the absence of any pig bones, which is kind of interesting. But in any event, this suggests that these settlements were established peacefully, not by a group coming in and conquering. Maybe they emerged from within, rather than being established by peoples immigrating from without. The revolt model proposes that Israel began really as a social revolution within Canaan. Some have suggested that Israelites escaping from Egypt may have joined with these disaffected Canaanites in revolt. in exile in Babylon. They are trying to make sense of the tragedy that has befallen them, the loss of their land. Consider how a text like Joshua 23 and Joshua 24 would go a long way towards explaining their fate while retaining faith in Yahweh. We're going to return to this when we reach the conclusion of the Deuteronomistic history in 2 Kings. It would be interesting to see how they would have reacted to the events of the time in which they were living. Deuteronomy seems to be aware of some of the dangers in this idea, the danger of a superiority complex, a moral danger involved in the notion of election. Israel was chosen by Yahweh in an act of spontaneous love--;it does not imply her perfection. God is repeatedly testing and correcting the Israelites until they are ready for the Promised Land. So Deuteronomy's farewell speeches and the death of Moses are fitting to a capstone to the Pentateuch.