All 1,000 individuals are in the 0, 0 state. There are initially no mutants in the population. But they're just replicating at some rate. Every now and then, mutation's going to occur. Now one thing we have to answer is whether these are nearly neutral mutations. Verbally yes or no? Ready? Three, two, one. AUDIENCE: No. PROFESSOR: No, right. And that's because we want to ask for, if it's nearly neutral, is the magnitude of S times N much greater or much less than 1? If they're much greater than 1, as is the case here, then we're in a nice, simple regime. Professor: If we start out with all 0, 0, and then one mutation [INAUDIBLE]? And if that mutation-- are we assuming that that mutation is 0, 1 and then figuring out how to fix it? Professor: You have to keep track of lots of different things, and which regime we're in and so forth. If you had one copy of each of these two mutant individuals in the population, that's the answer to what is the probability that this0, 1 mutant would fix in thePopulation. syllabus that I mentioned. I think the most important thing to stress when thinking about evolutionary game theory is just that this point that we don't need to assume anything about rationality. Instead, you simply have mutations that sample different strategies. And then you have differences in fitness that just lead to evolution towards the same solutions of the game. So it's evolution to the game solutions, so the Nash equilibrium, for example. And the more fit individuals spread in the population. And somehow, you evolve to the same or similar solutions. is indeed the Nash equilibrium. It's to do this strategy D that we're saying here. All right, now the question is why? And part of the challenge here is just understanding how to read these charts. Now, if you look at this chart, you say, well, gee, that is a shame. Because 1 is just not the biggest number you see here. And indeed, the important point to note here is that if both players had followed this strategy C for cooperate, D for defect, then both individuals would be getting fitness 3. So the problem here is, it's always better to play D. cooperator and for the defector. Do you understand? So what should these things look like? I'd like to encourage you to-- I'll give you 30 seconds to try to draw what this should look like. This is going to be the expected payout for a lone individual given the rest of the population is following some fraction of cooperator. DoYou guys understand what I'm asking you to do? Because I'm a little bit concerned that there are very few plots in front. are lines. But you can imagine that the only thing that's important are how these lines cross each other. So for example, there are only a few different things that can happen. You can have one strategy that dominates, which is what occurred here. And surprisingly, that does not mean that that strategy is higher fitness, in the sense that you may evolve to a state of low fitness. That's what's weird. YouCan have coexistence, or you can have bi-stability. In a population, if you have genetic A's and genetic B's that are each giving birth to their own type, then you evolve to some coexistence of genotypes. Whereas in this situation over here, we have coexistence. Does not matter where you start. So long as you have some members of both A and B in the population, you'll always evolve to the same equilibrium. And indeed, one of the things that we've been excited PROFESSOR: Exactly, so the Nash equilibrium mixed strategy plays A with probability. not the definition of that. But this thing is true, which means that it's a Nash equilibrium. And if you have questions about this, I'm happy to answer it. It's explained in the book as well. We are out of time, so I should let you go. But good luck on the exam next Thursday. If you have Questions and you want to meet with me, I am available on Tuesday. So please let me know. I'll be happy to talk to you. Professor: We're going to start with a short review problem on rugged landscapes. Then we'll get into the core topic of the class, which is evolutionary game theory. We'll discuss why it is that you don't need to invoke any notion of rationality. And we'll say something about the evolution of cooperation and experiments that one can do with microbial populations in the laboratory. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu.