can think about this in the absence of a motion. If the motion exists, surely you can take this derivative and evaluate it. But if there's a way to get started moving, that doesn't actually mean you could actually move. I'm just defining an infinitesimal motion to be a velocity vector for every vertices, such that this property holds. This is a dot product between two vectors. If you have two vectors, a and b, you take their their direction or derivative of v. right part has no real intuitive meaning, but it involves this thing-- some velocity vector for w-- and the velocity vectors for v. It's actually a very intuitive relation. Basically, we want to understand how this length changes to the first order. So this is a dot product in d of w-- that vector-- dot product with C of v minus C of w. It turns out dot product corresponds to projection. I'm projecting onto this one. That's how you'd write it algebraically. And same deal over here. can be done in polynomial time. So this is good news. intuitively what it corresponds to is the number of useful edges. And this thing is theNumber of degrees of freedom. So it turns out these will always be equal to d times n in summation. And what we care about, infinitesimal rigidity, means that-- or let's say it's infiniteimally rigid if and only if the nullity of the matrix is the space of rigid motions, which I have to look up. In general, in d dimensions, it's this-- d plus 1 choose 2. and rigidity, and the relation to the generic case. So there as we have before, this definition is not quite the same, but it's effectively the same as the last one. Almost every configuration is generic. So if you want to tell whether a 3D graph is generically rigid, you take a random realization in 3D. You compute the rank of this matrix generalized to the 3D case. You see is it 3 n minus 6, and that will tell you whether that generic realization is infinitesimally rigid. This one is rigid. The only way to move the square-- or in fact, any generic convex configuration-- is one of these pairs has to get shorter. So we lose generic rigidity. But infinitesimal rigidity still works, and generic configurations are still meaningful. It's just that they're not all the same. There's not, in this case, for four vertices, there's two kinds of generic configurations. So this is the same graph, and the same labeling of which edges are bars and which are struts. Theory goes back to Roth and Whiteley, 1981-- good year. If you can find a stress that is nonzero on every particular strut or cable, then all of those things are effectively bars. Every infinitesimal motion holds the length of that edge fixed. This will actually always be true-- the corresponding linkage is rigid-- because I put in every edge is in there. If I turn them all into bars, this thing's not moving at all. Strut can have zero stress-- the weight is zero. A spiderweb is something where every edge is basically a cable. All of the edges can have a positive stress, and it will be in equilibrium. In spiderwebs, in fact, this is the same-- these two-- rigidity and positive stresses are the same thing. This is a brand-new result from this summer at [? OSMI ?] by Robert Lang and Alex Bateman. Here is an example of that-- a spiderweb, so to speak, but drawn visually. And you turn it into a crease pattern, fold it flat and it works. Theorem: All pairwise distances between vertices increase or stay the same. Key to proving it is by making the theorem stronger. Tensegrities will force things to be expansive. So if initially you're non-crossing, you will be non-Crossing forever. That really makes life easier, because crossings are hard to think about. This lets you not worry about crossings. How do I worry about distances increasing? Tensegrity. You compute an equilibrium stress, which is easy to do by linear programming, and draw-- you can directly construct from that the 3D lifting. still buy them at the hardware store. That's it. You can't buy them online. You have to buy them from the store. They are not available online. They can be bought at the store, but you have to pay for them in cash. They're not available on the internet. You must buy them in the store to get them. You cannot buy them on the Internet. They must be bought from the hardware stores. That is it. They have to be bought in the stores. "Between the Folds" is on PBS at 8 p.m. ET Tuesday. Professor: Today we're going to talk about infinitesimal rigidity. He says it's a variation of generic rigidity, but in a different way. "Infinimal motion" is a first derivative of a motion, he says, and it's useful to realize that it's real, honest to goodness, smaller than anything else. The professor says the idea is useful to us, because it's determined by taking a motion and taking its derivative to show it's rigid.