Psychologist David Frum: What matters most for the moral blame that we assign is not what happened, but what Grace thought she was doing. He says that in scenarios like the one he gave you, what matters most is not how bad the outcome was, but how much blame Grace deserves. Frum says the scenario isolates one important feature of our moral judgment and also an important feature. of a lot of the rest of our social cognition. He asks: How much blame does Grace deserve for putting the powder in the coffee? And how much do you think she deserves? This ability has been studied all the way to understanding some of the most complex, abstract ideas that we ever encounter. The debate about whether this capacity for thinking about other people's thoughts is or is not shared with which other animals has gone on continuously since the late '70s. That's the origin of this debate, and it's not resolved yet. But it led to the construction of this particular task as a litmus test for what one person knows about somebody else's thoughts, called the false belief task. false belief task looks like. This is being given to a five-year-old human child. Do you know what pirates really like? CHILD: What? REBECCA SAXE: Pirates really like cheese sandwiches. So Ivan puts his sandwich over here on top of the pirate chest. And while Ivan is away, the wind comes, and it blows the sandwich down onto the grass. And now, here comes the other pirate. This pirate is called Joshua. And Joshua also really loves cheese sandwich. So which one do you think Ivan's gonna take? How do we think about other people as containing internal mental lives, mental representations? I'm going to talk about just fMRI, although I do use other methods to study this problem. I think fMRI has been both an incredible gift to our ability to understand the human mind and also imposes a huge number of limitations on what we can discover. And so what I want to tell you about is just a tiny bit of my phase one investigations using the early strategies that fMRI allowed us. And then a more in-depth look at how I'm using more modern techniques in fMRI to try to get further. mind is that, with respect to the representation of other people's thoughts, that doesn't tell us anything about how our brain does it. So the things that would make something a theory of mind-- a representation of who thinks what, why, and with what consequences-- we can't see in the univariate signal. What I think we're starting to make progress on using MVPA, is getting beyond that this brain region is involved in theory ofMind and trying to ask something about what is represented in this brain area. V1 is called V1 because information goes from your eyes to the LGN of your thalamus. It's the first cortical stop of visual information. One way that we know that it's very involved in vision is that if you're seeing visual stimuli, you get a big response in V1. That's a selectivity type measure. What we want to know about V1 is what transformations over the information coming from LGN is V1 implementing. And that's why theories like Marr's theory-- which say that there are receptive fields-- are important. Haxby style analysis is the first form of MVPA introduced, and they were introduced by Jim Haxby in 2001. The idea is, take a region you care about and ask this basic question. For some future that I wonder if it's represented, is the correlation across neural responses more similar when the stimuli share that feature? So that gives you a pretty robust measurement, because you're using all the voxels in the region to get one number out-- the correlation. right TPJ more similar, suggesting that which part of the right TPJ is more or less active contains information about whether or not the person who committed the murder knew what they were doing at the time. This is specific to the rightTPJ. So these are a bunch of the other brain regions involved in theory of mind and social cognition. And none of them contain any information about this dimension at all. So this dimension is represented in theRight TPJ and not represented anywhere else. Some people think that basically what you thought you were doing is all that matters in these stories. it differs across regions. So we could show that this was present in the right TPJ but not present in other regions. That's a whole bunch of extra information than we ever were able to get before. Another way to do this is to build stimulus sets that, for example, have two orthogonal dimensions and ask about both of them. So that's another way that you can use this method-- hypothesize two or three dimensions within the same stimulus set. And then we can get interactions between these to say, OK, the rightTPJ does represent some dimensions, doesn't represent other dimensions-- in principle. stories vary. So here's a bunch of stories. Leslie has just been in a big, important interview. And he sees himself in a mirror, and he sees that his shirt has a big coffee stain down the front. Another one is-- Eric gets to a restaurant to meet his fiance's parents. So that's two completely different stories. And then the third story-- Abigail is painting her dorm room, and she hears somebody's footsteps down the hallway. And the footsteps sound like her beloved boyfriend's. So these stories are all different. more general way of thinking about fMRI data. This particular method, using spatial correlations, is very stable and robust. But it's a special case of a much more general set. It's a very stable, robust method, but it's not a very general way to look at fMRI. It doesn't work for all fMRI patients, but for some, it could be a very useful tool. It could be used in the future to help people understand their brain's responses to stress. When people talk about social cognition they do actually mean all of those things. The scope of tests of our ability to think about other people's thoughts or internal states is very large. I'm almost exclusively going to talk about the first one, so how we think about what other people see, think, and know-- but not want or feel. At the end I'll come back to wanting you watch the video, you see that the knowledge the kid is bringing to bear is a way richer than just his correct prediction.