In the early days, if this was the drain, it was called a drain. But this is a local interconnect. It only extends over a very small distance. A very short metal wire locally on the chip to do interconnect from, say, one neighboring device-- in this case a transistor-- to another neighboring device, a resistor. Talk a little bit about historically about how contacts were made. And in fact, if you recognize that this is an NPN device, and this little n region right here is the emitter-- this is the P-type base as shown here in red. we want to talk about that is shown here on slide 6 is called the specific contact resistivity. And we usually use the Greek letter rho sub C. It's defined as being equivalent to the derivative of the voltage current density characteristic at a metal semiconductor contacts. And so we usually assume a structure where the current density is uniform across some contact area. Then you can calculate the contact resistance R in ohms, which is just the voltage divided by the current flowing through that contact. in the limit of very, very high doping. So we form these-- you see we still have this barrier, phi B. But the distance, the depletion layer thickness in the semiconductor, is very,very small. And that happens when you make the doping high. So what people do in practice is you dope very heavily above, say, above mid 10 of the 19th, you get quantum mechanical tunneling. That's really what's dominating. So for low contact resistivity, to get this number down, I need a small barrier. So you would choose a particular metal. silicide sheet resistance in ohms per square, it needs to be in this range of 6 to 10 ohmsper square. That's not a problem. None of that-- that's all in white, which means people know how to do that. The real problem is making these really good low resistivity contacts to the silicon. I just want to show an example of how-- so you get a feel for how the numbers work of how one does a contact resistance calculation. This is for a MOSFET. Ti-silicide has a tendency to agglomerate when it's very thin at higher annealing temperature. Cobalt bisilicide does not have that narrow line effect, but it gives you a slightly higher resistivity. The modern silicide that I mentioned here is this nickel silicide, NiSi. It's formed at very low temperatures, 450 or 500. And it's a little bit less than the case of titanium. It consumes 2.2 or 2.3 or so nanometers of silicon per every nanometer of metal. Nickel silicide has the lowest silicon consumption. Nickel is a very fast diffuser, remember, in silicon. Nickel contamination of equipment and of the wafers is has a low consumption, only 1.8 nanometers of silicon consumed per nanometer of metal. So if you're using a nickel silicide process, you're going to be limited to a lower backend temperature. But you can get reasonably low sheet resistance. And we'll go through these calculations at the end of the lecture. Slide 26 shows you some of the different uses of silicide in silicon technology. Silicide are used, as you can see, to strap the poly. It also forms a barrier layer, as we mentioned. And finally, it can be used as a gate material. And here's an example of nickel silicide, fully silicided gate that was published about six months ago by annealing at 450 degrees and using a thick enough layer of nickel. And you get a silicide all the way down to the gate interface. depletion of the polysilicon at very high gate biases. So people are concerned. They want to get rid of poly as the gate material. But poly is an extremely easy material to integrate. People know how to etch it. It's not reactive with SiO2. That's not the case for metals. So it here, what they had to do is put a metal and maybe some other harder material-- no, sorry, sorry. They had to put, yeah, contact material, and then maybe a dielectric. This is a very ultra-thin body device, or reasonably thin body device. This is an SOI, it's only 25 nanometers thick. The point they were trying to make with this was that the nickel did not diffuse in to the silicon. This looks like it's fairly stoichiometric, almost 1 to 1 silicon to nickel. Maybe a little bit nickel-rich. And these are sidewall spacer layers. They've made a very short channel device, only something between 35 and 40 nanometers. about your oral report or whatever, please get back to me. OK, thanks. About your oralReport.com. About. Your oral report. About Your Oral Report. Please get. back tome. about your oralreport or whatever. about. your oral Report or whatever,. please getback to me about.your oral Report. about Your OralReport.org. OK. Thanks, thanks, thanks for your report. You can send it to me via e-mail at jennifer@dailymail.co.uk. JUDY HOYT: Hopefully everybody's recovered from their Thanksgiving feast. What I'm showing up here is the schedule to orient us. This is lecture 22. We'll talk about silicides, device contacts, and I've added in a new material this year on novel gate materials. And then next week we have two class periods scheduled. There'll be four speakers in each. And those will be the oral reports and the student reports given on Tuesday and Thursday. And I just want to remind people, if you're doing an oral report, you're expected to provide handouts.