Jeremy Bentham's principle is "the greatest happiness of the greatest number" He thinks all utility is quantifiable. He allows interpersonal comparisons of utility. Diminishing marginal utility is the principle of diminishing marginal utility. If you don't have a car and somebody gives you a Porsche Turbo, you're going to get less utility from the second Porsche than you had from the first one. If it turns out Leonid Leonid has a vastly superior capacity to anybody else, then we could get a huge increase in total utility. taking a lot from B and C and giving it to Leonid, so that we would say "allow," right? Or we could think of this change from the status quo-- we go to a more inegalitarian society and, again, the greatest happiness of the greatest number has increased. We have a world here where there are eighteen utils and a world in which there are nineteen utils. If the utility that the Aryans gain from practicing genocide and ethnic cleansing against the Jews exceeds the utilities that the Jews lose, there would be no reason under Bentham's doctrine not to do it. Shapiro: utilitarianism was a doctrine that was thought to be profoundly radical and frightening to rich men. He says Bentham completely saw that this was an implication of his doctrine. Shapiro: If you assume diminishing marginal utility, utilitarianism becomes a very radical doctrine. He adds: You're going to get into a very messy world of macroeconomic predictions and counter-predictions about whether and when you reach this point of practical equality, or when the gains from downward redistribution are offset by the losses from shrinking of the pie. Bentham: In principle absolute equality would maximize the greatest happiness of the greatest number, but in fact if a government set out to do that, the rich would rebel. He's saying you have to work with individual motivations. In the transition to democracy in the South maximize utility in the society, individual motivation is vital. The rich will burn their crops before giving them to the poor. You have to see individuals as the basic generators of utility. The great enemies of public peace are the selfish and dissocial passions-- necessary as they are. classical to what we're going to all neoclassical utilitarianism is a subject with which I will begin on Wednesday. See you then for the next installment of this week's Daily Discussion, which will focus on the role of utilitarianism in the development of the modern world. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the first installment of the Daily Discussion. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @jennifer_newton. Econ professor: We say that utility is quantifiable and expressible through money. But related to that, we can work with a doctrine of revealed preference. We can vary the price that we charge admission for the course. We could even influence your behavior without actually changing your preferences, he says. Professor: Any other examples of where this becomes problematic? The next, and the next, the fourteenth, isn't going to be going to some aspirin, or taking an aspirin, isn’t it?