Olympic Games will be a dedicated event to celebrate Gamers and eorts F and why was the decision made to go down that separate route so instead of having it scheduled alongside Paris next year uh to put it in its own year. I would say that it's pretty clear that the sem Olympics bringing value to the community to the to the players to the fans and they are clearly positioned. I think there's room for new events in addition I wouldsay we are very focused on let's say Counter Strike or do 2 maybe League of Legend which are games that don't have enough stage to play on. The first edition of the Esports Olympics will be held in LA in 2028. 50% of the athletes will be women 50% will be male. The goal is to reach this target from day one. It will be a game changer not for the Olympics but for Esports. It's got its own separate event but there might be some people who might feel a bit disappointed about that potentially it's not my role to say yes or no because I'm not decision maker but I'm very positive and affirmative. opening ceremony under the the Olympics logos this is amazing the pride in their eyes is the fact that the parents had to find a passport for them to travel to represent I think this is what I want for every single players of G2. I believe this will also help us to connect with the BBC and talk to a mainstream audience about something that they don't know and and be discover this amazing Community this amazing passion the the Quest for excellence and the individuals that will become the heroes to win the trophy for the national team. "Everybody wants to see what a dennish team will do against Corin I I would love to see it too you know so um I've seen a lot of players making the the guess or what the team could look like so his aspiration to be part of is is clearly part of the discussion," he says. "You follow a bit like the conversation about but uh rocket league and OverWatch back in the days at the at the World Cup for for their game and and and League of Legend also often have this conversation about creating the Euro Cup or World Cup" Al shalot is the CEO of GT Sports. He is also a member of the Esports commission the international Olympic Comm. The turning point for him are the Asian Games the people from the Olympic Committee when they attended this event they're like okay now we get [Music] it hi there my name is Al Shalot I'm the CEO. GT Sports uh it's an Esports organization pretty Global they call us the real Madrid of Esports. We have 13 teams in 10 games on three continents.