copyright law doesn't protect US writers from being pirated abroad. It does nothing to prevent US publishers from publishing pirated editions of well-known books already circulating in the continent. So that seems like a bad thing for the aspiring US author. On the other hand remember what I said before, there is no patronage system in place in the early republic; therefore, what is emerging is a kind of marketplace for writing. Without that market, a young American author wouldn't be able to sell his writings and sustain himself as a writer. Edgar Allan Poe's novel, The Grapes of Wrath, is about a young man who finds himself in a state of sleepwalking. Poe's character, Clithero, is accused of killing his friend, Waldegrave, but he refuses to believe it. He believes in reason and the primacy of reason, but in his dreams he descends into madness. Poe says Clit Hero's story is a counterweight to reason and a dramatization of enlightenment principles. in my rambles with some traces of this man, but might he still not live? His words had imparted the belief that he intended to destroy himself. This catastrophe however was far from certain. Was it not in my power to avert it? Could I not restore a mind thus vigorous to tranquil and wholesome existence? Right, we get back to that. So one of the things that Brown does as you might say maps the woods onto Edgar's mind. In exploring the woods, Edgar starts exploring facets of his own mind that have remained hidden from view. and I never sleep but with a candle burning at my pillow. Right, so from the confidence of enlightenment, now it's the pathetic I need to have a nightlight on, right? That's what Edgar has sunk to. What has caused all of this? His experience in the woods. And we'll take it up again on Wednesday, the experience of the woods, the story of Edgar's pit and the panther. I want you to look for the motif of light in the Panther scene, and also track one particular word, and that word is savage. Charles Brockden Brown: The Enlightenment is a critique of a kind of impoverished view of mind or consciousness that over-relies on reason. We started to look at it a little bit with Barlow's [assumed spelling] Raven poem with Poe. The idea that in fact there is something wrong with reason as a faculty, and this can take a couple of forms. One is that all of those nice ideals that come along with the enlightenment may in fact be parasitic precisely on the kinds of negative types of thinking that they are designed to get rid of.