Aluminum copper stainless steel cast iron and carbon steel aluminum pots and pans are the ubiquitous pans that you'll find in most every kitchen. copper is one of the best conductors of heat it heats and cools rapidly whenever necessary and it's fairly heavy weight. Additional cooking materials include things such as non-stick coatings like teflon terracotta which is used in cooking things like tangents glass such as corning ware enamel wear which is also used in things like crock pots. interchangeably in many ways but believe it or not though there is a difference between these two does it make a difference in your cooking if you use one instead of the other. A saute pan or satwa is one with the straight sides and has a larger surface area which makes it ideal for tasks like searing meat or reducing a pan sauce. A sawtooth or skillet has a slope side and is used mainly in sauteing the slope sides providing the ample and perfect angle for flipping your food. From full size hotel pans two-thirds pans half pans third pans fourth pans six pans and ninth pans and various other sizes each size is available in six six inch four inch and two inch deep models the name of the pan refers to how many of each would it take to equal a full size pan for example the nine it takes nine of the one-ninth pans or ninth pans to make one full-size hotel pan here you can see various different configurations depending on the usage needs many of the configurations require the use of a spanner bar to prevent the pans from falling in. it takes up too much room in your coolers and takeaway number six you can never have enough hotel pans no matter what size you have. This presentation will attempt to give an overview of the different small wares and pieces of equipment that you'll experience in a restaurant environment. It's not an exhaustive list for more information i suggest ktom.com which can be accessed at the link on the screen. For more information on the different types of hotel pans, visit hotelpans.com. Stainless steel is the preferred cooking utensil for most kitchens it's heavy duty easy to clean surface typically clad which we'll discuss later resists pitting and metal reactions with acidic foods works with induction cooktops and holds its heat well if clad however it's much more expensive than the aluminum varieties cast iron has been preferred for many years it's very heavy duty if seasoned correctly it can also be non-stick it gives a unique flavor to foods and promotes browning better. If you drop it things like the handles and even the lids or even the pan itself can break.