people earn more income base they are attacked a smaller amount of smaller percentage of the rounding. People pay a small person their income tax as their income goes up so only if their income go down they're going to pay a larger percentage of their income. With the 4-channel it's the same so here you see people pay the same percentage whether progressive its detect ops as progressive people pay lark there and so it's not the dollar amount it's gonna be obvious that everyone is must and a larger dollar amount in taxes. Sales taxes are a regressive tax even though rich people buy more stuff I'm going to pay more and sales tax dollar amounts as a percent of their income it's actually usually profit or loss. This marginal tax rate is the percentage change in taxes any tax paid from some changing our average tax rate beer is just going to be tax paid so there's my tax rate's tell us how much additional tax event played based upon our so they so they.taxes redress property tax can be kind of course non-progressive can depend upon how many things that is your taxi in the race and things like that. go coming back to that they have passed out here we've got these marginal tax rates here with you guys. Let's assume that we made for $90,000 you're single and we wanted to know how much you pay so that's how I come here and in essence what you've done is you've got different amounts of here and of these dollars in here. If you're at $8,000 and you go out and earn another hundred dollars you're going to pay $10 and times but if you're making eighty six thousand dollars you need to have you earn another 100 dollars. 17,000 Orlando will go to top Bill and Hillary will both oh eight thousand each so our total BAM attacks if we put this way 19,000 if we tax the household this goes back to this idea we discussed the horizontal language all right we want to treat people that are in similar circumstances the same those people are being treated decide why do we have this front why are we having these different taxes why is the why are these numbers larger than these numbers was because of the progressive nature of the task. a beautiful fiscal policy we have this new classical view of fiscal policy and we have those called the supply side now. What we'll see on Wednesday and what these guys actually do is what we'll hear on Wednesday. We'll see what they actually do and how they do it. It's going to be very interesting to see what happens in the next few days. It will be a very interesting week. It'll be very exciting to see how they go about it. We will find out what happens. Taxes can have all kinds of different applications [Music] that's hot let's look at a tax that looks like this. McDonald's gonna hold want to penalize people for being married does that make sense right. If our expansionary fiscal policy here we're seeing the decrease in taxes or an increase in government spending. If we have a deficit the deficit is going to get larger or if you have a surplus what would happen in the surplus it'll get smaller by contraction fiscal policies exact opposite here.