When we write out peptides, we always write them N to C. If you don't always remember to write things in this order, and you tell your friend, oh, go and get this peptide made, they'll make the wrong peptide. When I write the MIT peptide, I write M first, I second, T third. If I wrote TIM, it would be a completely different chemical structure with different chemical properties, so the directionality is important to understand. The process whereby you go from the extended primary sequence to the folded structure is called protein folding. It's not simple because what you're doing is you're solving a massive energy diagram, where as you fold a structure up, you're trying to maximize all those non-covalent forces for maximum thermodynamic stability. What I'm showing you here is what's known as the alpha helix, an ordered structure exclusively made up from the hydrogen-bonding interactions of the peptide backbone. A single amino acid change in the primary sequence of collagen can destabilize the structure, so it is no longer viable. The disease type I'm going to talk to you about is a set of diseases known as collagenopathies, and the particular one is called osteogenesis imperfecta. A lot of babies with this defect can't even be born through the birth canal because it would crush the bones, and many of them don't survive very long at all. Some survive with different kinds of cases, but their lives are greatly impacted. well-aligned as the rest of the structure. And then that defect gets propagated into all the fibrils and results in the weakening of the bones. Either the collagen fails to form properly, or the collagen, when it forms, it has much less mechanical stability. So I think that's a good place to stop and I'll pick up next time with hemoglobin. There's a great link on the website to the Protein Data Bank to see how enzymes work. These slides are posted with these reading assignments, and they're posted in color if you want to look at them again. Lipids are mostly hydrophobic, which can also be referred to as lipophilic. In those fatty acids, they could be fully saturated. This is a very important semi-permeable membranes are made up through the non-covalent, supramolecular association of phospholipid monomer units. If they were fully permeable, anything could come and go and they wouldn't be much use frankly. But because they're semi- permeable, only a few things can come and going without extra help.