the atom-- the same hyperfine state-- but with two different momenta. Then it is a Raman process only in the external degree of freedom, in the motion away function. The only change is you change the momentum. We need our intermediate state, which is often an electronically excited state. We are detuned. And now we have one photon going up and one photonGoing down. Historically, people distinguish between the situation where the final state is lower or higher in energy. But as long as you use laser beams to stimulate it, you don't even care. In perturbation theory with the field one, the state a has now a probability, given by this term, that it has now an admixture. And now, if we have sort of-- we have dressed up our state a with admixing for the near-resonant field some probability of state k into it. And this stressed state now has sort of a stepping stone here. And from this stepping stone, it can now absorb the photon omega 2. So that's how we should think about it. If you have a single photon, you always transfer momentum to the atom. But if you have two photons, the two momenta can cancel. This is actually a powerful method to avoid Doppler broadening in spectroscopy. For two-photon absorption, if the two laser beams are counter-propagating, the total momentum transfer is zero. If we arrange for the two photons to be absorbed from opposite directions, we reach the situation where the Dooppler shift is really zero. of methods of practical importance for eliminating the first order Doppler shift. Since hydrogen is of methological importance, measurements of-- fundamental measurements of the Lamb shift, comparisons with QED calculations, measurement of the Rydberg constant-- these are all done by hydrogen spectroscopy. But you cannot, of course, suppress the process where you absorb two photons from the left or from the right. And therefore, you have sort of a broad pedestal. So the pedestal is where you take one photon-- both photons from same side, whereas the Dooppler free peak is whereyou have photons from counter-propagating directions. Coherence exists if there is a well-defined phase between two or more amplitudes. We can only observe it if else than the time integral over the energy difference between two levels. So therefore, when we are talking about coherence, how can we maintain longer coherence between energy levels? How can we create coherence in three level systems? This is actually intricately related to the fact that we can obtain more precise information about the energy levels. This is a very general introduction to coherence. The first form of coherence I want to discuss is the coherence involved in exciting atoms. of spontaneous emission. The system involves with the following operator, and this is the operator which completely describes the interaction of an atom with the electromagnetic field. The fact that we have a unitary evolution with this operator is 100% or 110% true. But this operator will actually lead to final states of the photon field, which may not have a specific phase. And this is actually what I want to work out with you in-- maybe even today, I think ten minutes may be enough-- what is really the information-- the phase information-- which we have in a photon, which has been spontaneously emitted. one is we know for sure the atom is in the ground state. However, the excited state with zero photon will actually do Rabi oscillation. And it has just swapped excited zero to ground state one photon. So what I suggest is when we, really at the fundamental level now, discuss spontaneous emission, we allow this part-- excited atom, empty cavity-- to undergo half a vacuum Rabiscillation. I just allow half a cycle to evolve. And the result of that is, well, nothing happened to this part. this is what we want to discuss on Wednesday. And this is what I referred to as the fundamental limit of spontaneous emission because we have not lost any coherence here. It's just if the phase is only imprinted in one particle-- one particle quantum physics sets us a limitation. Oh well, we can read out the phase phi. OK. Any question? To be continued on Monday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full interview. Professor: In almost all cases when you address atoms, you do two photon courses because a photon is scattered. In reality, it is a two photon process and not two single photon processes, he says. Professor: If you have any doubts about some subtleties about how is light absorbed and emitted, the correct answer is always obtained from the two-photon picture. He then asks the audience to guess how many terms you would expect when you do the most basic light atom interaction.