Jonathon Gruber: What stops people from just bingeing on everything? It's their budget constraint. He says we can use budget constraints and the utility function to describe how consumers make choices. GRUBER: We'll talk about what budget constraints are. We'll then come to talking about how consumers made constrained choices. And then we'll end with an example of food stamp use, which is very different from binge-buying in terms of the amount of food you eat. you as well. We write the budget constraint as saying that your resources, your income Y, can be spent on either pizza or cookies. You can essentially devote your income to some combination of pizza and cookies, but you have to consider how much they actually cost in doing that. Now this class is not alchemy. We are not literally transforming pizza into cookies. That would be kind of cool, but we're not doing that, OK? But it's effectively doing the same thing. your goal is to lose weight. So we're going to give you the budget constraint. We're not going to tell you what to eat. That's why it's better than dieting because, once again, Adam Smith was right. People like to have choices. They like to let choice drive things. So, for example, vegetables are like zero points. Snickers bars are like six points, et cetera. They have various point systems, OK? For example, suppose your budget is 30 points, which would be pretty typical. The poverty line is essentially a measure of what's a minimum level of resources you need to live in America. The poverty line for an individual is about $14,000. For a family of four, it's about $28,000, depending on where you're from. If you're below the poverty line in America, roughly speaking, you get help with buying food. And that comes through a program we now call SNAP, which used to be called food stamps. It's basically a program the government has that provides money for individuals to buy food. Be used to purchase food. So here's the question. Why go through this rigmarole? Why not just give people cash? This fancy thing, if we want to give poor people money, why don't you just give them money? And we're going to-- I don't want the answer yet, OK? What I want to do is show you graphically how we think about the trade-off. So hold your thoughts. Let's go to figure 3-5A. And let's start with a cash transfer. constrained optimization. Jonathan Gruber: People always get to the point that makes them happiest. He says if you force them to spend $500 on food, they must be less happy. GRUBER: Do people-- I don't want-- I just want to know if people understand the graphics here and the conclusions I drew. "This is not normative economics. It's positive. The positive thing is, given their utility function, they move from point y1 to y2," he says. stop there. We will come back on Monday, and we'll talk about how we actually go from this stuff to the demand curves we started the class with. Back to the page you came from. back to CNN.com home. Follow us on Twitter @cnnireport and @CNNOpinion. Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter. For more, go to www.cnn.com/lifestyle and www.dailymail.co.uk/lpin. The median American household has $400 in the bank. The opportunity cost of a slice of pizza is two cookies. We're going to do a lot in this class of what we call comparative statics, which is, essentially, making changes in one thing or another and seeing what it does to the system. We think about a set as a line, but it's just a way of representing the same thing as the line. We care about the area because it represents the area we care about.