. Without using the representation in terms of. derivatives, with respect to a coordinate, without using the representations, in. terms of translations and rotations along the sphere, right? When we just used the commutation relations, and nothing else, what we found was that the states corresponding to these guys, came in a tower. And we quickly deduced that it is impossible to represent the half integer states with a wave function which represents a probability distribution on a sphere. We observed that that was impossible. can measure that angular momentum by measuring the deflection. The bigger the angular momentum, the bigger the magnetic moment. If the electron weren't rotating, it would just go straight through, right? It would have no angular momentum. And thus it would not reflect. If it's rotating, It's gonna deflect. Here's the experiment we do. And here's the experimental results. The experimental results are every electron that gets sent through bends. And it either bends up a fixed amount, or it bends down. over r? PROFESSOR: Oh shoot! Yes, that's supposed to be one of our-- Thank you. Yes, thank you for that typo correction. Thanks OK. So, anytime we have a system which is rotationally. invariant, we can write the energy operator in this fashion. And now, you see something really lovely, which is that this only depends on r, this only. depends on the angular coordinates, but only insofar as it depends on L squared. eigenvalue equation. This is the result of acting on phi with the energy operator, and this is the energy eigenvalue. Cool? So, the upside here is that when we have a central. potential, when the system is rotationally. invariant, the potential energy is invariant under rotations. Then the energy commutes with the angular momentum squared. And so, we can find common eigenfunctions. When we use separation of variable, the resulting energy eigenevalue equation becomes nothing but a 1D energy eigs equation. by multiplying the whole equation by r. If you see this, declare in your mind a brief moment of triumph, because you know what technique to use. You can do this sort of rescaling by a power of r. And more generally, if you have a differential equation that looks like. a derivative with respect to r plus a constant over r times phi, you know how to solve this. OK? Very useful things to have in your back pocket for moments of need. So, let's pick up with this guy. would've got the same equation. And that means that the energy eigenvalue can depend on l, but it can't depend on m, right? So, that means for each m in the allowed possible values, l, l minus 1, [? i ?] minus l-- and this is 2l plus 1 possible values-- for each of these m's, the energy is the same. And so, here we have a degeneracy. And this degeneracy isn't fixed by rotational invariance. And why is this the right thing? Rotational symmetry? they're all wrong. Every single model you ever get from physics is wrong. There are just some that are less stupidly wrong. Some are a better approximation to the data, OK? This is not hydrogen. This is going to be our first pass at hydrogen. OK, so let's solve it. So, if V is minus e over r squared, then the equation for the rescaled wave function, u, becomes minus h bar squared upon 2mu prime prime of r plus the effective potential. The form of this differential equation is, OK, it's not different in any deep way, but it's a little bit easier. As rho goes to infinity, which terms dominate? Well, this is not terribly important. That term is gonna dominate. If l is equal to 0, then this is the only term that survives, so we'd better make sure that that behaves gracefully. So, this tells us, having done this in analysis, we should write that rho to the l plus 1 times e to the minus root epsilon rho times some remaining remaining terms. nice bit of experimental data, but we've discovered the energy is, in fact, not just independent of m, but it's independent of l, too. Why? What symmetry is explaining this extra degeneracy? We'll pick that up next time. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the rest of the article. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to reads the rest. Back into the pageYou can now read the full article on this site. Professor: Imagine take a magnet, a little, tiny bar magnet. In fact, well, imagine you take a little bar magnet with some little magnetization, and you send it through a region that has a gradient for magnetic field. If there's a gradient-- so you know that a magnet wants to anti-align with the nearby magnet, north-south wants to go to south-north. So, you can't put a force on the magnet, but if you have a gradient of a magnetic field, then one end a dipole can feel a stronger effective torque then the other guy.