How good it is to be alive is a matter of adding up all of the--call it the contents of life. It's as though we've been assuming, and I have been assuming up to this moment, that being alive per se has no value. Life may have value in and of itself, but it's not mere life. What we want is the life of a human. We want a life in which we're accomplishing things, there's agency. The life of somebody who can have an emotional side. The central bad thing about the fact that I'm going to die is that because I'll be dead I will be deprived of the good things in life. But although I've been at pains to say this is the fundamental bad thing, I think it's arguable that this isn't the only bad thing. There are other features of death, as we experience it, that at least add to the way that death occurs for us. Or conceivably for some of these things, perhaps it mitigates it; it minimizes it. different aspect of death worth thinking about. What about the variability of death? After all, it's not just the case that we all die. Some of us make it to the ripe old age of 80,90 a 100 or more. Others of us die at 20, or 15, or 10, or younger. We could imagine a world in which everybody dies--everybody dies at the age of a hundred. Does it make things worse or better that there's this kind of variability? fact that there's variability and so some people get less than average--that extra bad, I suspect, outweighs the extra benefit of some people having more than average. We've had inevitability; we had variability. What about unpredictability? Not only is it inevitable that you're going to die; not only do some people live longer than others, you don't know how much more time you've got. We could imagine a world like this where it's inevitable; everybody's got some date on it. ask--so I'll throw the question out and we'll call it a day, start with this next time--then we have to ask, would it really be better to know? would you want the birthmark? Would you want to know exactly how much time you've got left? All Right. See you next time. Back to the page you came from. Click here for more from CNN iReport. Back To the pageyou came from, back to thepage you were from. Professor Shelly Kagan: Life on the experience machine is perfect as long as you've got the right tape playing. But the vast majority always says, no, there's something missing from that life, she says. Different theories of well-being might answer that in different ways, he says. He says we don't have any kind of accomplishments, we're not in the right kinds of loving relationships, because we want to have explanations as to why we're valuable to be with.