Whenever your patient is low on red blood cells they're going to have some side symptoms that can present especially if they're really low they'll be very pail. They can feel very fatigued they can be short of breath any activity they're just like really wore out and they can have an increased heart rate. If they have received a lot of blood transfusions in the past they're at risk for febrile nan hemolytic transfusion reaction where their body has just built up these antibodies from all those previous transfusions. A lot of times physicians like to pre medicate them and you'll want to let the physician know if they do have a history of that and sometimes they're pre-medicated with benadryl or Tylenol acetaminophen before hand orally or when about 30 minutes before you start the transfusion. Look at the health status of your patient are you giving a patient who is in fluid overload or congestive heart failure has renal failure and but they really need blood you need to be looking at that. You typically want an 18-gauge or larger IV site. It takes anywhere between two to four hours for a unit of blood to transfuse. You use special tubing which is called Y tubing with an inline filter which helps filter some of those substances out of the blood before it actually goes to the patient and keep in mind again it depends on hospital protocol a lot of protocols say only one set of Y tubing per unit that you transfuse so you'll have to use multiple sets. Trash now let's talk about transfusing okay done all your prep work the blood bank calls you and says hey your blood is ready let us know whenever you're ready for us to send it to you because they're keeping it refrigerated for you. Some key things you want to remember you will be giving one unit at a time patient needs two units you're gonna give one unit now and then whenever that's done call blood bank and say send me the other unit and then they'll send it. breath headache backache or nausea and vomiting and if this happens you'll immediately want to stop the transfusion okay now it's actually time to start the transfusions so you're gonna have your blood ready hung and it's going to be controlled by an infusion pump which will deliver it to the patient. You want to start  slowly about two milliliters per minute for those first 15 minutes in addition you want to stay with that patient at their bedside looking at them monitoring them. bank who's going to test it look out and see what went wrong. Of course you're going to document you want to document the time it happened. What actions you took what the patient was given if you gave them anything. What labs you drew all that and how the patient is currently doing okay so that wraps up this review over blood transfusion. thank you so much for watching don't forget to take the free quiz and to subscribe to our channel for more videos. Back to the page you came from. As a nurse we will transfuse a patient who is low on red blood cells with new blood cells via a venous access of some type. Red blood cells are very vital for our survival and how our body works. Most hospitals require that you're a registered nurse in order to transfuse the blood so again follow your Hospital protocol with that. Never use dextrose containing solution because it can clump together and we will be using 09% normal saline to prime the blood. Never ever put it in the regular blood bank whenever you're ready to start that transfusion.