into things like voids or loops and super structures that have end up having macroscopic effects on material properties. The amount of energy it would take to actually cause this material to fail is a measure of toughness. The strength of the material is how much stress you can put in until it starts to either plastically deform or it hits its UTS, ultimate tensile strength. And finally, stiffness is more of a response function, so it's how much does it deform in relation to how muchstress you put into it. build up, then what Jared said could happen. You could crack the material because it could get weaker, less ductile, less tough. Weaker is the opposite of strong, and what's the other one? Toughness-- oh, and harder, actually. So the origins avoid swelling I'll start with the humble vacancy. A void is nothing but a bunch of vacancies or a pocket of vacuum or gas in a material, and it all has to start with these single vacancies. As they cluster together, they reached this threshold in terms of free energy where putting a few of them together is not quite energetically favorable, but not so unfavorable that it never happens. Dislocation movement is irreversible. You can't just snap it back when you relieve the stress. By making something stronger and stiffer, you make it more difficult for those dislocations to start moving. And you can do that by throwing any defect in their way. Since radiation creates pretty much any and all defects, it's a great way to stiffen and strengthen the material. If something is stiffer and stronger, then the stress strain curve would be drawn more like that. Problems and no release of radioactive material. Pretty cool. What you want to happen is for dislocations to move on the easiest planes. If you don't push too hard, you can actually see these perfectly symmetrical slip planes at 45 degree angles to the axis of compression. And this is what you Want to happen to nuclear materials because you're really trying to balance this between slip and fracture towards the direction of slip. That means that something will deform a little bit before it just shatters like those channel boxes from the Russian reactor. Every kind of defect takes energy to create. You either have to raise the temperature of a material or in our case, irradiate it. The energy of those incoming neutrons that bounces around different atoms and creates all these different types of defects. So those defects are storing energy in the material. And so if you think about how much energy does it take to destroy something, it would have to be the energy that it's already stored plus the energy you put into it during the transmission electron microscope. the vessel too much, it's no longer a code stamp vessel. Pretty tricky spot that we're in, huh? But we're trying to science our way out of it. I don't want to keep you longer, but I'll open on Thursday with a little story about how mass attenuation coefficients can get you out of apartheid South Africa. I'm serious. And then we'll move into dose and biological effects. It's a couple minutes after. Well, it was just a few minutes. Michael Short: Radiation damage and nuclear materials are the biggest research field in 22.01. Short: The basic mechanism of radiation damage is like you might imagine. A DPA measures the number of times that each atom has moved out of its original site, but it has nothing to do with how many times it stays in its original place. The DPA part only measure is what we call the ballistic stage of radiationDamage, he says. The net effect on the crystal material is nothing, Short says.