The world woke up this morning to worldwide chaos caused by a global outage. Thousands of flights have been cancelled Banking and health care has been affected including the NHS and some TV channels have been taken off air millions of people have been affected. The firm behind the outage crowd strike has held up its hands but admitted that it'll take time for things to get back to normal. The company is deploying a fix but not before widespread Mayhem tonight we'll be looking at exactly what happened and how it's affected patients passengers and businesses. Disruption on what was set to be the busiest day for UK flights since before the pandemic will take time to sort out. GP practices in England and Northern Ireland that have been most affected with doctors struggling to access their records and online bookings Pharmacy Services have also been hit. GPS can only hope the problems are resolved quickly huim BBC News. Katy Austin BBC News and just a reminder you can get all the latest on the Travel turmoil online and that's at bbc.co.uk. This just goes to show how dependent we are on it and how vulnerable we are I think it really highlights the fragility of our digital lives. There are some calls for people saying actually we shouldn't be so reliant on on a few big companies for everything. Other people are saying well actually if we have lots of smaller companies doing this stuff then are we leaving ourselves more open to vulnerabilities to weaknesses to attack so it is a real dilemma I think but nobody has seen anything of this size. saying well actually if we have lots of smaller companies doing this stuff then are we leaving ourselves more open to vulnerabilities to weaknesses to attack so it is a real dilemma I think. Nobody has seen anything of this size you know I've been covering outages now for a long time and normally they're over before they start so to see something like this have such a huge Global impact I think is really going to um make people sit up and think it certainly made people get cash out of the bank today. Faulty update meant millions of Microsoft users saw this screen pop up if you know it it'll make you shiver the blue screen of death it pops up when there's a critical error affecting the operation of your PC. Microsoft says some people have had to do it 15 times so it could take a while spare a thought for it departments there will be someone In Crowd strike who will be in a lot of trouble right now for not getting this right. from travel chaos to grocery shop payment problems there'll now be tough questions about the Damage Done by one faulty update how did it slip through Microsoft safety nets the cyber security world.