Robotics is a really cool and important direction for the future. I really believe that in the future we will have AI assistance whether they are embodied or not to act as our guardian angels. These agents will help us with cognitive and physical work. With AI we will see such a wide breadth of applications for instance these technologies have the potential to reduce and eliminate car accidents. We have three types of learning and you have seen different aspects of these methodologies throughout the course we have supervised learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning. The most popular Benchmark for measuring the accuracy of image classification is imagenet. Machine learning is very powerful for building systems for building robots but as robots it's important to keep in mind the scope of machine learning in the context of robots. It's quite easy to take a stop sign and perturb it in such a way that you can't tell with a naked eye that there is a difference between the two images with all of the images and all with all the images. We employ thousands of people to label the objects that we have. to do given input reinforcement learning is causing a huge revolution in robotics and so um and and why is that. Reinforcement learning is concerned with how intelligent agents ought to take action in an environment in order to maximize the notion of a cumulative reward. In order to get the simulation to drive a real robot we actually need to think about the Dynamics of the robot and so in other words we have to take into account what the vehicle looks like what are its kinematics and its Dynamics and so here is a vehicle that is running the policy learned in simulation. In 1986 German engineer Ernst Dickman started thinking about how he could turn his van into an autonomous vehicle and so he put computers and cameras on the van and began running tests on an empty section of the German Autobahn which had not been open for for public driving. Computer processing improved from one frame per 10 minutes to 100 frames per second and this has been a game changer for autonomous cars. Today we have very effective and Deployable solutions for robot cars that move safely in Easy environments where there aren't many static nor moving obstacles. of agent to agent interaction and and so the the Vista simulator has been recently open sourced you can get the code from vista.csel.mit.edu and a lot of people are already using the system. What we get from Vista are is the ability to simulate different physical sensing modalities that means including 2D cameras 3D lidar event cameras and so forth and then you get the possibility to to simulate  environmental situations and perturbations you can simulate weather, lighting and different types of roads. vehicle that is executing the learning based control and here's Alexander with his vehicle that was trained using data from Urban driving and now he's driving to the soccer field. The decision engine has about a hundred thousand neurons and about a half a million parameters and I will challenge you to figure out if there are any patterns that associate the state of neurons with the behavior of the vehicle. The attention of the solution is extremely focused as compared to other models like CNN or ctrnn or lstm which are much more noisy. do some computation at work inside the intelligent boardroom the temperature could get adjusted automatically by monitoring people's comfort and gesture and just-in-time Holograms could be used to make the virtual world much more much more realistic much more connected. There's the garbage ban the garbage bin that takes itself out and after a good day when it's time for a bedtime story you can begin to enter the story and control the flow and begin to interact with the characters in the story. These are some possibilities for the kind of future that machine learning artificial intelligence and robots are enabling.