Protein three-dimensional structure and its implications for the binding of small molecules such as drugs. How can we use these basic motifs to recognize other macromolecules, other proteins and nucleic acids? We have these motifs that we could find, weight matrices for them by aligning lots of sequences. Now instead of aligning sequences, let's see what we can do by mutating both the protein part and the nucleic acid part. And then we know from the three dimensional structure that it interacts mainly with the middle nucleotides. sequence that you're interested in is present. And what you do is quantitate the fluorescence of the zinc finger protein indirectly by the binding of the covalently-attached phage to the antibodies, which are fluorescently labeled by [INAUDIBLE] fluorescence. But how you relate that to the binding constant we had in the previous slide is the subject of this slide number eight. Now we call this the apparent equilibrium association constant because these experiments, just like many binding in living cells is not at equilibrium. groove of the DNA. And the reason the textbook is wrong, first of all, it emphasizes the non-helical part of the zinc finger. In contrast, the textbook where it does the sharp right hand turn and in some way poorly schematized there, it goes coaxial to DNA. That's not what happens. The helices are more or less direct extensions down from the dimerization region of the protein maintaining almost perpendicular to the DNA axis. But again, so on the left is the three tandem repeats, and on the right is a dyad axis. into two major classes. Class 1 is the single letter amino acid code [? CEL, ?] so forth, cysteine, glutamate, and so on. Class 2 is structurally dissimilar to Class 1, but they are similar within the class. You can arrange to make a new amino acid by carving the pocket the amino acid recognizes and grafting on the appropriate nucleotides. You have to have feedback, synchrony, so on that you can basically program the almost digital nucleic acid world inside the cell. not inside the cell. But the whole complex gets internalized. Still, topologically, it's as if it were outside the cell when it's inside this little vesicle. It has to get through that membrane. But now the pH change that happens when this vesicles goes in the cell, part of the natural cell biological processes causes some act. The seven-mer complex of proteins does yet another conformational change and turns into this hairy beast that allows the lethal factor to get into your cell and kill it. of six angstroms of difference between the predicted structure and what it actually is by the more precise methods up higher on this. As you get to 1 Angstrom or better in your accuracy, as you can get from NMR and X-ray crystallography, you now are in a position to study catalytic mechanism and design and improve ligands, such as drugs. There may be a day where we can do this all from ab initio prediction or modeling at very great distances. But for now, modeling atvery short, say, 80% to 90% amino acid similarity is important. letter is the new amino acids. So for example, D67N means a [? sparcade ?] at position 67 and wild type changes to an asparagine. And that causes a drug resistance in the HIV, with unfortunate consequences for the patient. We can take-- now, making mutations in polymerases is not entirely of negative consequences. And I'm going to show you a really beautiful example where a DNA polymerase, you want to change it so that it can now handle what would normally be an inhibitor. There are ways that you can program, and conditional, proteins. You can regulate under what conditions the protein is expressed or not or active or not with an entire domain, or with single nucleotide polymorphisms. Another way is by modulating the activity of the proteins from the outside with drugs or drug-like molecules and chemical kinetics. In the case of the zinc finger, we made an altered specificity. We made new zinc fingers with bind to completely new trinucleotides. With the DNA polymerase, by changing one amino acid, we could make it now accept almost four logs better. increases the risk of Alzheimer's, and probably increases cardiovascular fitness through ApoE refers to its involvement in cholesterol metabolism and transport. The ancestral form of this, for example, found in chimpanzees at nearly 100%, is this arginine 112, instead of what's now common in human populations was cysteine 112. One explanation for that might be that our nutritional standards have changed. We now eat a lot more fatty things. And so maybe this was something that was-- this bad allele, E4, was good in chimpanzees that have different diets or lifespans. very important thing to lose. If you introduce a proline into what would normally be an alpha helix, this is something where knowledge of the three-dimensional structure would say, oh, that proline, this a priori, without any knowledge of conservation, could be a huge change. Multi-sequence profiles are a good way of looking at the conservation. That's a way of prioritizing single-nucleotide polymorphisms that might have impact on pharmacogenomics or disease in general. Protein synthesis is a completely synthetic way of getting short peptides. You can think of these as drug-like molecules. These are naturally related-- they can be analogs of nucleic acids and proteins. And we'll talk about opportunities for making these analogs. A large class of pharmaceuticals, including most of the antibiotics, are made by a fairly small class of organisms, streptomyces in certain plants. And this process by which it's made in more detail, is very akin to fatty acid synthesis. to a template-independent polymerase, [? thermotransferase, ?] which will extend a few nucleotides of completely random nucleic acid sequence. This is one of the examples in biology where you generate sequence de novo. We're just beginning to talk seriously about protein interaction assays. In next class, we'll talk about ways of getting direct information on protein through cross-linking and mass spectrometry. and indirectly setting up these reporter assays, where you take advantage of the binding properties of known proteins. In structural genomics, we look at how to select targets for binding drugs or solving the structures of proteins. We have hundreds of proteins for which we have three-dimensional structures, and from some of them, we have information on what ligands they bind. But these are other criteria that are sometimes used in the field for target selection. So this is an example of a strategy where you use a little bit of prior knowledge, which can be empirical or it could be purely computational, about how to limit your library. If they are homologous to previous interesting targets, then that puts them high on the short list. If they are conserved and you knock it out, then you might expect that to be lethal. If you want to limit the action of your therapy to the surface in order to, say, reduce the cross-reaction with internal molecules, you can sometimes restrict yourself to surface-acceptable proteins. A very large class of drugs is aimed at surface-accessible membrane proteins. And so very often, those are prioritized high. is kind of the big race or bake-off between the different methods. But unfortunately, over decades, it's still hovering around 77% for secondary structure and about 25% for ab initio three-dimensional structure. Then even if you have the three- dimensional structure at adequate accuracy, getting the ligand specificity is problematic. We'll pick up this thread right after a break and carry on to actually how we get the three dimensional structure, whether it's predictive or experimental, and the computational tasks.