HONG LIU: Last time, we talked about this IR-UV connection between the bulk and the boundary. Now let's talk about some further aspects of the duality. HONG LIu: Once you realize there's such relation, since the two sides are completely different objects, so the game is that you really have to do lots of guess work. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu. HONG LIU: So here on this side, there is a conformal symmetry which we explained before because this is a four dimensional theory. On the right hand side, we still have some SO 5, S5. So this is more like a space time symmetry. In N equals 4 super Yang-Mills theory, we discussed last time there are six scalar fields. You can rotate them each other. So essentially, you have eight supercharge of the [INAUDIBLE]. So this all together is 32 real superchargers. In super gravity, the supersymmetry is local. The isometry is a subgroup of diffeomorphism. For each global symmetry in the field theory side, there's a corresponding local symmetry on the gravity side. The Yang-Mills theory is all global symmetries on the global side and not on the local side. But the level is even though space time fluctuates, but the AdS5 times S5 specifies the asymptotic geometry of the space time. HONG LIU: Conformal symmetry of the component of the field is the Minkowski space. So on this side, you have isometry of AdS, on the other side you have conformal symmetry. Even for the local supersymmetric transformation in the gravity side, there's also a part which does not vanish at infinity. And that's the part corresponding to the global supersymmetry on the field theory side. The story actually works more general. This is the statement for the N equal to 4 super Yang-Mills theory. SO(6) gauge symmetry. And some fermions indeed are charged on this SO(6), so it's just more general. So whatever things, anytime if you have some global symmetry here should be mapped to some gauge symmetry here. So now let's move to the matching of parameters. And again, first N equals to 4 super Yang-Mills theory. And then this is type IIB on AdS5 times S5. So the N is the gauge group N. Do you have any other questions? expanding 1 over N squared. So as we said before, we often do dimensional reduction on S5. Then G5 divided by R cubed, again only related to N given by pi divided by 2N squared. These relations are often useful in the future. So now let's look at [INAUDIBLE] limits of this relation. So let's first look at the classical gravity limit on the gravity side. So essentially, we are dealing with quantum field theory in curved space time. The decoupling of the string effect requires on the field theory side the strong coupling. If you look at just those [INAUDIBLE] diagrams, of course you don't see a space time interpretation because they are just planar topology. The strong coupling, then the diagram with many, many vertices will dominate. And then the most dominated diagrams are those diagrams with not a lot of vertices. And they essentially are going to continue to limits. So this will tell you that the strong. coupling limit is described by classical gravity. a general correspondence between some conformal field theory and some AdS gravity theory. HONG LIU: If the two theories have to be the same, then you should be able to map their spectrum. For example, in the boundary, if there is some scalar operator, there must be a corresponding scalar field on the gravity side. And similarly, if you have some symmetric tensor, then this must also be related to some symmetry tensor. Yes? AUDIENCE: So we proved that the super Yang-Mills theory really lives on the boundary of the AdS? HONGLIU: No. We did not prove that. This is just a postulate. you can imagine that this is the boundary, this relation is related to the bulk and the boundary. And this is a postulate based on that fact. In the field theory side, there's no massless spin to particles. They map to some field in the gravity side in the five dimensions. Then this maps to some five dimensional fields. And that is a nontrivial prediction from thinking the boundary and the bulk relation. Now you can generalize it. You can argue from the symmetry point of view also, but that language is more direct. In the '80s, people have worked out the supergravity spectrum precisely on this space. So now, as an immediate check, you can now just open your old papers. And then you can immediately see they actually map to certain representation of operators on the N equal to 4 super Yang-Mills theory. So if there are other symmetries, then everything should match. But on this side, so this appears as isometry on the S5. But when you dimensionally reduce on S5, then in AdS5 then there will be a pure gauge field corresponding to each symmetry generated [INAUDIBLE] a few minutes. So now, given this mapping, any operator is due to a bulk field. Then you can ask some immediate questions. For example, the quantum numbers of these operators will map to the quantum number of the bulk fields. And that's something I said you can check their symmetries. So for local operator on the field theory side, we can immediately ask questions related to operators on this side. And ask the story about the field on the gravity side, and ask what's happened. We can start developing the relations. HONG LIU: If field theory has a gauge field, then I can write O as trace F squared. Then this corresponding to changing the coupling for trace F square. So immediate question is, what does this operation-- so in the field theory point of view, you can always do this operation. So here, I write partial AdS means the boundary of AdS. So this is the value of Ad S, value of phi at the boundary. So expectation value essentially can be associated with the boundary value of the field. HONG LIU: We have established a connection between the Yang-Mills theory coupling with the value of phi at the boundary of AdS. If we deform the Lagrangian, say, change this coupling, deform the boundary by changing the coupling, which corresponds to you add some delta G. And this corresponding to you essentially change the boundary value of dilaton. So now, this example gives us the answer to this question. In real life, what you will do from this example, you will say, ah, this must be the case. Then you will start to find examples to check it. And we will describe it later. N equals 4 super Yang-Mills theory and this type IIB gravity. It's that any conserved curve in the boundary theory must be equal to some gauge field in the gravity side. So now I'm going to use this argument to make that a little bit more natural. So let's first consider this. So suppose I have a conserved current, J, J. I've a J mu. And then according to this identification, the A mu must be A mu-- we should be able to identify it as the boundary value of some bulk field. T mu mu to the boundary Lagrangian. And this is the source to the stress tensor. When we consider the information, we always consider the source is small. But now, we can argue this thing, mass corresponding to boundary value of the metric in the gravity side for the following reason. So this is a very general statement valid for any correspondence between the gravity and the field theory. If you have a dynamical metric, then you have gravity. So you can say, if any field theory is due to a theory of one higher dimension, that theory must involve gravity-- nothing about quantum gravity.