The coherent state of the electromagnetic field has a simple definition, simple but subtle. It's an eigenstate of the annihilation operator, and it has a complex eigenvalue alpha. The person who popularized those states was Glauber, and he got amply rewarded for that. The coherent state has a time evolution. It moves in a circle. And this is really the phasor of the electric field associated with it. So coherent state, the alpha value is directly related to an electric field. That's why this state is closely related to the classical limit. In quantum theory, alpha is like the best description of an electromagnetic field. We ask, What is the probability that the electric field is alpha in the complex description? So that's what those quasi-probabilities are-- Q of alpha. And we immediately looked at some examples, of course, of probabilities. We showed that the vacuum state is sort of an area. It's a Gaussian. And the area is-- it's an area on the order of 1 or 1/2. In quantum mechanics, number and phase are complimentary. If the number of photons is fixed, you know nothing about the phase. The energy is sharp of a number state, since the energy is e squared. But what you get is also something blurred on the order of unity. And the time dependence is very easy. After all, we're dealing with an harmonic oscillator. In this plane, the quantum state is just rotating circle, a rotation with omega. And indeed we showed that when we apply the time evolution operator, it moves with e to the minus i omega t. And therefore everything rotates in a clockwise way. which is less fuzzy than the coherent state. So this fuzziness here is the intrinsic uncertainty of quantum physics. But then we will immediately start with non-classical states. And that is, well, if this area is determined by Heisenberg's uncertainty relation, what can be maybe deform the circle into an ellipse, and these are three states of light. That's what you're going to do in the second half of the class. But before I do that, I want to be a little bit more accurate about quasi-probabilities. the coherent state is now not this Gaussian. It doesn't have thisGaussian distribution as a course of probability. It's what you want-- what maybe some of you wanted to see-- oh, by the way, it's a delta function. The probability of the coherent state alpha has a delta. function peak at alpha, which is sort of nice. And the number state is not a ring of a finite radius. You would naively expect the energy is sharp. The square root of the energy's electric field, shouldn't it be sharp? And indeed, it issharp. on the level of whether something is a delta function or has widths unity. But if you map out something on a bigger scale, they are all related to each other. For P, it is-- the P operator is a dagger minus a. If we act with a on alpha, we get alpha, because alpha-- the coherent state-- is an eigenstate of alpha. Now, with P squared and Q squared, you have to use one or two more steps to get rid of the products. But ultimately, you can express space all that just in powers of alpha, alpha squared, alpha star. In quantum mechanics, the g2 function is not necessarily larger than 1, it can be smaller than 1. It's only possible if you have a truly non-classical state. The only way how you can measure the intensity of light is with a photomultiplier. This suggests that experiments where we look at the correlation function where we determine the expectation value should be defined as a dagger, a dagger squared value of absorbing 1 photon, which is a dagger. In many many textbooks, many many, many, textbooks would start with this expression. single mode-- and what is a single mode? It's just a sine wave. And nothing happens as a function of time. It's constant. Coherence time is the time for 2 modes to get out of phase. But if you have 1 mode, there is no coherence time. And when you find, for classical light, that the g2 function. has a peak which decays with the time, it is the. time for modes to getting out ofphase. But in a singlemode picture, this is absent. G2 for a single mode of the electromagnetic field is nothing else than a function. When you know what is an average and n squared average, you know your g2 function. There is another quantity, which we often use to characterize the fluctuations in the photon number. And this is called the Fano factor. If you use-- kind of pluck together -- kind of put them together, you get g2 of 0. For the coherent state-- remember, this is as close as we can come quantum mechanically to the ideal of a pure electromagnetic wave. This means it's Poissonian. the results we have obtained, it has a Fano factor of n-bar. So this is super-Poissonian. If the occupation number n is large, you have fluctuations which are much, much larger than Poissonian fluctuation. The g2 function, which classically cannot go below 1, is now n minus 1 over n. It is smaller than 1. The biggest violation for g2 is to go to minus 1 for the case of a single photon state. me first address one misconception. Coherent states, as I've just shown you, are very classical. They've always a g2 function of 1. And attenuation is not changing it. So a coherent state with an expectation value of 1 photon is not a single photon. But of course, there are ways how you can get single photons. And this is, well, you start with single atoms. If you have a single atom in the excited state, it can emit only one photon. one photon. Usually, we don't have the tools to prepare a single photon. We can prepare single atoms. And then we can make sure that single atoms create single photons. It's a little bit a way that we cannot control the bullets which are fired. But we can control the guns. And we make sure each gun can emit exactly one bullet. So that's a way how we can create non-classical states of light. Yes. So let's now look for those single photons at the quasi-probability distribution. Professor: "You have to prepare single atoms, which is difficult" Professor: "With n atoms, they have a super-radiant factor n with n atoms" "It's a very rich field. You have a rich field of possibilities," he says. "Spontaneous emission, pretty much by definition, goes into all spatial modes" "We don't have perfect single photon sources," he adds. "But we have a very, very high probability of finding this photon" The Hanbury Brown Twiss experiment was the first experiment which really looked at g2 functions correlations. It was the beginning of quantum optics and modern experiments with light. The classical limit is always a limit of high intensity, so at any given time, you have a ton of photons. If you put a light bulb into a cavity or couple the light from a light bulbs into a fiber, the light becomes spatially a single mode. That's the only way how you can distinguish a lightbulb from a laser beam. In an open system, you couple the system to a light source, which is always replenishing your experiment. But in those situations, we actually do not have the way-- we have actually a beam. And this requires a little bit different description. In the beam splitter, the other port of the beam Splitter should do some stuff, right? PROFESSOR: Yes. Even if you do not put in any light, we put in the vacuum state. Any question? I know I have to stop, but. The way we can distinguish from a thermal state and a coherent state is through the g2. Colin says there are actually more different light sources that just the laser and the thermal light source. There are LEDs or semiconductor devices, which provide photons with interesting statistical properties. OK. We have to stop. Colin. I'll see you on Wednesday. Back to the page you came from."Could we do most of experiments if we just had thermal sources that were very single mode, so to speak?"