NORVIN RICHARDS: Today is phonetics, which means that today we begin making funny sounds at each other. Let's see. I'm trying to remember if there's anything that I ought to announce. You remember, maybe, that problem set 1, which confusingly is your second problem set, is due on Thursday. I just figured out how to get the projector to project over there instead of in the middle so that I won't have to write everything twice running back and forth across the room. Linguists have a system for writing sounds down so that we'll all know what kind of sound we're talking about. A lot of the symbols of the International Phonetic Alphabet resemble letters of the English alphabet. The symbol for the sound at the beginning of "paint" is the letter p. As we go along, we will be seeing weirder andWeirder symbols from the International phonetic alphabet. We'll talk about other kinds of articulation that English doesn't use, but that one just doesn't exist. "R" is one of the kinds of sounds that people classically have trouble with. "z" is voiced and that "s" is voiceless. "S" and a "z," those are both alveolar sounds. But they're not the same. If you think about-- if you go back and forth between them, s, z, s,. z, S, z,. you can feel a buzzing. It's like whistling with a blade of grass, or playing a reed instrument.  phonologist: "cat" and "dog" end in sounds that differ in voicing. Is it possible to whisper "z"s and "g"s? Are they-- NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. So if you think about what you're doing when you're whispering, first of all, (WHISPERING) your vocal cords are not vibrating at all. That should mean that you're not making the distinction between "s," "z," or "f" or "v" In Polish, "g" becomes "k" at the end of a word. Voiced "b" becomes the voiceless version, which is "p" The way voicing works is that you've got air flowing across your vocal folds and making them vibrate. For a "b," well, the air only has so far to go, yeah? That's one reason you can't keep a " b" going for very long. But you do it for as long as you can. That's the sense in which it's voiced. The sounds that we have mainly talked about have been either stops or fricatives. There are three ways of categorizing these kinds of speech sounds-- place, and manner, and voicing. "n" is voiced-- nnnnn. And it's a stop in the sense that you are stopping the air from flowing through your mouth. For "d," the airflow is stopped at the alveolar ridge. For an "nabial nasal sound," also known as a bilabial sound, the air goes through your nose. English doesn't have a bilabial fricative, but there are languages that do. In Japanese, when people write an "f," like when they write the name of this mountain, they'll write it with an "F" In English, we have a labiodental "f" with our lower lip against our teeth. In Japan, your teeth are not involved. It is only your lips, yeah? Yeah? What would a buh bilabials sound like? Fh, fh. What would it sound like if it were voiced? There are dialects of Spanish where if you have a "g" between vowels, it'll get this kind of sound, in words like "agua" English doesn't have that, but there are languages that do, like Hmong, for example. What would a velar fricative sound like if it were voiced? Lhg. Or you can have an alveolar nasal, right? "n" You can have a glottal nasal, "ng" English has interdental fricatives-- thuh and thuh. English has alveolar stops, "t" and "d." There are languages out there that have what are called dental stops. Part of your job, if you're learning Tagalog, for example, is to learn to make dental 't's instead of alveolars. If you're thinking about linguistic "t," but let's say someone doesn't-- NORVIN RICHARDS: Have teeth? Yes. Yeah? There are places in the vocal tract that English just does not use. And yet other languages do. There are what are called retroflex sounds. So instead of a tuh, you're making a cuh-- [NON-ENGLISH]. So your tongue is curled back a little bit further than it would be for a "t" And it's making a closure, if you're made a stop, right there. So you can make stops there. You can make fricatives there, like [NONSET] or [Nonset] And you can even make nasals there. Uvulars are kind of like "k" except more so. Pharyngeals involve constriction near the pharyngeal wall. Arabic has these. The Berber languages have these. You're getting the back of your tongue to get against the back. of your vocal tract. You can also do a uvular trill-- [TRILLS]---- where you get your uvula to flap in the breeze, but not everybody does that. And then there's a retroflex lateral, too, right? uvulars, retroflexes. And for some reason, the dental stops are still red. Have to fix that. OK. Now people keep asking me about sounds that I've been carefully avoiding, so let's talk about them. There are what are called approximants. Approximants are not stops, and they're not fricatives. And they are sometimes divided into glides and liquids. And I'm hoping that nobody will ask me how you know whether something is a glide or a liquid. English has a very large number of vowels and a not-very-good system for writing them. This is one of the things that makes English spelling so difficult that we can actually have competitions where you watch people spell. If you tried to do that in Finnish, the spelling bee would just never end because every word is pronounced exactly the way it's spelled. OK. So we've done consonants. We have not done all the consonant. So what I'm going to do is show you some vowels. So we have high, mid, and low vowels. But we also have front and back vowels, like the vowel in "hoed" And we have some vowels that are rounded, like in "he" and "hoe" For "ee," where is your tongue? It's in your mouth, but where is it pointing? "Ee" And then for "ooh," where does it go? It moves, right? So you aren't just rounding your lips. English is supposed to have five vowels. It does not have five. It has 14. Why do we only have five letters for vowels? Who gave us this alphabet? The Romans, right? In Latin, there in fact are 5 vowels, which can be either long or short. English monosyllables don't end in lax vowels that are either front or high. "Flay" means to remove the skin from. But we don't have those three words at the end there. English doesn't have words that end in "ih," "uh," or "eh," with the possible exception of "meh" English monosyllables can't end in lax vowels that are either front or high. Not all speakers of English distinguish schwa from wedge. There are people who pronounce "caught" and "cot" the same. We're just about out of time. Let me just give this to you as an exercise. Anybody want to try to pronounce the first of those? this exercise next time. As we go along, I'm going to be asking you to read things in IPA. So I'll start putting IPA on the slides more and more. So start trying to familiarize yourself with it and get to where you're familiar with at least the symbols for sounds that we use in English. Do you want me to read the rest of them? I'll do some more IPA. OK, so what's the second one? STUDENT: "Sue says he's a bad egg."