Professor: We're describing interaction between the electromagnetic field and atoms. Professor: I want to show you what are the tools to treat those infinity source divergences in a consistent and a systematic way. "I can reproduce this result by going to infinite order in perturbation theory," he says. "Who of you have actually seen those kind of diagrammatic tricks and summation? A few, OK. So it's maybe nice to see it again. But for those who haven't seen it, welcome to the magic of diagrams" at the end of the class on Monday, I told you, well, let's simplify things. Let's get rid of those temporal integrations and multiple integrals by simply doing a Fourier transform. And so therefore, we introduced the Fourier. transform, or the Laplace transform, of the time evolution operator. And this iterative equation where we get the nth order by plugging the n minus first order on the right hand side, this turns now into a simpler algebraic. iterative equations for the Fouriers transform. Z is the energy. And it is the initial energy. If it's a ground state and a resonant photon, we have a problem. The other parts are simple. They don't have any divergences. They are not resonant and such. So what we want to do is now, in some way, give special treatment, factor out the problematic terms. And for the easy part, which has no divergence, we can make any kind of approximation we want. But the resonant part, this needs special attention. N equals 3, so we have to start in state b. We can go from here to there with any combination of states you want. But one thing is not allowed-- to involve the stateb. And everything else other than the state b has already a symbol. It is the square symbol. So this is the exact representation for n equals 3. And the contribution to the resolvent G, the Fourier transform of the time evolution operator, is-- well, we have factored out three occurrences of the state B. started out with U, which we couldn't calculate with Fourier transform. We had G, whichWe've expressed G in R, which of course we cannot calculate exactly. But there is an importance. We have made progress for the following reasons. Namely, those resonant terms, which appears in the time evolution whenever the system goes back to the state b, is now fully accounted for. We've given them special treatment. And therefore, and this is the main result, the exposition which now is the non-trivial expression, the function of the kernel, has no divergences. light scattering. I just go now and apply to an excited atomic state. So the state we are interested in is the atomic state b and no photons. And the property of the atomic. state is obtained when we know the function Gb of Z. And this is the matrix element between state B0B0 and the time. evolution operator. So we are calculating, of course, the Fourier transform of the time evolution of the state b by the. Fourier. transform through the resolvent G. The real part is this matrix element squared, but double sum. But what we use is the principle part of it, which is well defined in the theory of complex functions. So the imaginary part gets us Fermi's golden rule. And the real part has actually-- remember when we discussed the AC Stark shift. And such AC Stark shifts which appear as self energies, as energy shifts created by the state, this is nothing else than the famous Lamb shift. But remember, we worked so hard with diagrams to make sure that the triangle-- first the square, and then the triangle. we calculate here-- has no resonant structure at the energy Eb. So therefore, we can neglect the energy dependence of that and simply replace the argument E by the energy we are interested in, namely energies close to Eb. This replace, neglect E and set, or replace the dependence by E, by taking the value at Eb, this corresponds to the Markov approximation. And that means in the temporal domain that we have a delta function. And we obtained, as promised, the imaginary part, which we can approximate by Fermi's golden rule. And you should now-- well, this is what we may have expected. Prof. Robert Schloss: " exponential decay is a simple approximation. It works very well. But at very early times, it will break down. Because then, the energy dependence matters" "We have to include now radiative shifts and an imaginary part for the decay to the time evolution" "The critical part is really the propagation of the state b, which is problematic" "If you're off-onant, you don't have a black line shift in the line widths" many modes. It emits photons and reabsorbs them. And you can often neglect that in the simple description of your experiment. But if you take certain expressions seriously, they would have divergences. And that's what we discussed without this infinite number of processes which happen. And yes, what we really need for a number of phenomenon in AMO physics for laser cooling, light forces, and much more are the optical Bloch equations. And so in this section, what I want to address at the most fundamental limit is, what is the step where we go from reversible equation, unitary time evolution, to something which is called relaxation, which is dissipative, where entropy is increased. at vacuum Robi oscillation and a few really neat things. But what happens is that the system is an open quantum system. You can have spontaneous emission. And if your mirrors are not 100.00% reflectivity, some light leaks out. So this is our system. And of course, if you write down the total Hamiltonian and do the time evolution, something will come out which, in general, is very complicated, very entangled. The atom is entangled with a photon which was emitted to the right side. And the recall of the photons push the atom. Einstein's rate equations describe the evolution of an atomic system by coupling it to the environment. But can you engineer the environment in such a way that it does something really fancy to your system? Well, you can dream of it. But you dreams are restricted by the mathematical structure of all possible master equations in the world. The environment can only do for you what can come from all possible Hamiltonians. The time evolution as a Hamiltonian, if you now bring in the environment, cannot be simply included by adding a term. display that, that we do not get any form of damping without at least the fundamental quantum noise. So what we need is we need a description of the quantum noise, which comes from coupling to the environment. The tool which we use for that is the density matrix. The density matrix can be written as a probabilistic sum over states. This will actually play a major role. We will make certain models for damping. And it's really beautiful. On Monday, I will give you the beam splitter model for the optical Bloch equation.