JACK HARE: Let's do a little recap on electron cyclotron emission. We expect to have multiple different peaks, even from a single particle. These peaks are going to be occurring at frequencies. These frequencies depend only on the magnetic field. And so, if you see some emission at some certain frequency, then you know that it's been emitted by a region of plasma which has this magnetic field, he says. He says the exact shape will depend on exactly how big these two terms are with respect to each other. optically thick regime. So that is the region of plasma that's emitting is emitting as a black body. And that means the black body spectrum I of nu, is equal to T nu squared upon c squared. And so, for example, we might have a region down here corresponding to lowish frequencies at low magnetic fields. We might have another region where the frequencies correspond to the center of the plasma. And at each of these points, if we measure the intensity, we then know straight away what the temperature is corresponding to that frequency. what we want to do is measure very small temperature fluctuations. And that 1% is actually extremely hard to measure. And this is because the noise is just too high on these systems. But there are some clever tricks that we play where we use correlations. And I'll talk now about what exactly these correlations are and how they provide us with information that allows us to get a signal out despite the overwhelming [INAUDIBLE]. So our setup here is borrowed from ASDEX Upgrade. And, in effect, I referred to Alex Creely's PhD thesis, which you can find online if you want more information. We're not trying to measure the temperature profile throughout the entire plasma. We want to measure it inside some very small region. So the size of our turbulence of R turb, is on the order of 100 microns. That's the width of a human hair. We're zoomed in on only quite a small frequency range. Each channel samples a non-overlapping region in frequency. And, therefore, in real space, because, again, we've got this very strong link between our magnetic field and our spatial position. The idea here is that there was some region over which, in the transverse direction perpendicular to your collection volume, you have a very narrow scale. You can actually collect from a very small region on the order of 100 microns. And if it collimated that beam, that would mean there'd be a focus point at some distance f away-- if this lens has a focal length f, then it will diverge afterwards. So, because of reciprocity, that means that, as opposed to launching rays this way and seeing where they focus, we have rays coming from this. The technique is incredibly powerful because it's enabled people to measure, again, delta on the order of 1%. Someone called it nominative determinism, and they've done it on 1%. And it's used in a variety of applications, but this is an example of what these angle brackets are doing. There are actually lots of different ways of doing this, but there are a few different ways to do correlations, and I'm not going to go into them, but I will give you a citation at the moment. we have positioned these two volumes, which are producing frequencies omega 1 and omega 2. And we think that that distance is smaller than the size of our turbulent eddy. The temperature should be the same going up and down. And if you do this correlation and you get out nothing, that probably means your volumes are too far apart because there is-- this T correlation would just go T1 T2. And there's no good reason to believe those temperature fluctuations are correlated, because they'll be part of a different turbulent Eddy. Bremsstrahlung is a term used to describe a type of radiation in a nuclear reactor. It involves electrons being deflected and breaking and emitting photons. There are lots of different ways of doing this, and Hutchinson lists a few of them. What's remarkable about all of these approaches is they all give the same answer with a very slightly different coefficient. But, in some sense, although it's important to get the exact coefficient, it doesn't matter exactly which one of these techniques you use. from the point of view of this course, it makes no difference. Yeah, I think it's kind of remarkable that it doesn't make any difference. So, again, if you want the full treatment, go have a look in Hutchinson. And there's also a long treatment in Jackson of this same problem. I'm just going to quote some results. I kind of already spoiled it now. It's here. For the Maxwellian average, because we can have all sorts of different distribution functions, but our plasma tends towards a Maxwellian. The bremsstrahlung is the irreducible minimum amount of emission from your plasma. Cyclotron emission is a very specific frequency. This is everywhere inside your plasma at all frequencies, like a black body kind of spectrum here. That goes down to very low frequencies and goes up to very high frequencies. We're going to talk about lots of other effects which produce emissivity which is higher than the brems stahlung. But, often, when we're doing power balance calculations, we will just use this. emits. And then the wave has to ask itself, well, what sort of wave am I? And, in reality, there'll be some emission in O mode, some emission. in X mode. And the exact coupling between those will be related to the polarization of the bremsstrahlung. And so, that means for any reasonable distance of plasma that I'm looking through, that will be absorbed, and it will become black body. There's another effect, which is in Hutchinson's book, which I haven't covered here. But it's in there if you're interested. Jack Hare: I don't know if people are using it as a diagnostic. I've not heard of someone using it. But synchrotron light is used as a source of X-rays for diagnosing many other things. So it's interesting in its own right. But I'm not interested in [INAUDIBLE] This is a diagnostics course. JACK HARE: Any questions online while we pause? We're going to do free-bound radiation or recombination radiation. where we have a range of different discrete energy levels that the electrons can occupy. These energy levels are labeled by the principal quantum number n. And the energies of these levels are given by this unit, Ry, which is the Rydberg z squared of our ion over n squared. Up here, infinity, this is ionization. If your electron gets this much energy, it becomes free again. And so, what we're going to see in our spectrum is that this is only allowed if the electron energy fulfills this equation. I understand. So I was just wondering, because it's not the condition that there are photons that are released with greater than 12 mv squared the kinetic energy. It's the photon energy that's-- yeah, maybe we're doing this backwards in some sense. If you see a photon being emitted with more than 1/2mv squared, then the electron has over-emitted. And the only way it could have done that is if it fell down into one of these principles. The energy levels are in different places inside here. And the energy levels shift by the ion charge here. One use of this is a diagnostic called bolometry. It cares not at all about the detailed spectrum of what the emission is. It just wants to know how much power is being radiated by the plasma. So this is what bolometry is trying to measure. And a really simple way to do it is the integral d nu of j of nu. Any other questions? Let's keep going. do bolometry is we have some radiation coming out of the plasma. We apply some voltage, V0, over this resistor. And we also put another resistor that is shielded from the plasma that we call R. Effectively, what we're trying to do is measure this volt-- this resistance M of T. And the voltage that we measure, VR, is equal to whatever voltage we used across all of this system R divided by M. And, from that temperature, we can make an estimate of the radiation power incident upon it. setup is your entire bolometer is going to heat up. And so, what you want to know is not just how hot they are, but howHot they are relative to the vacuum vessel. So, this is why we have this system where we're trying to measure a very small change between R1 and R2, which would be identical, and M1 and M2. And it's this small quantity here, delta T, that's due to the radiated power that we're really trying toMeasure. have a thick block some distance in front of it so it can't see the plasma. It's the heat transport kappa grad T that gives us the time constant for thermal conduction through the substrate from the absorber to the resistor. The larger tau is the slower our measurement of the radiated power is going to be. And if tau gets very large, because we've got a very thick substrate here, or it doesn't have very good heat transport, then we're going to have a very poor time resolution.