Judy Hoyt: We're going to discuss the accurate control and placement of active dopant regions through a process called dopant diffusion. The placement of those regions determines many of the so-called short channel characteristics of MOSFETs that we'll talk about. The doping of other materials, not just the silicon itself, but of the polysilicon gate affects things like gate depletion and limits how well the gate voltage controls the channel potential, Hoyt says. "We really need to understand the placement of these atoms," she says. have a cube or a chunk of material-- we're usually measuring the resistance of a thin sheet in the near surface region. And that sheet generally has dimensions of L length and width that are much larger than its thickness. If we have a shallow junction, we can calculate its resistance as follows, again, using the same formula at the top of the page. It's the resistivity in ohm centimeters times the length now divided by the area. So that's a simple way and a convenient way of calculating resistance of various structures in semiconductor devices. In general, as we scale devices, the channel length becomes shorter and the channel resistance goes down. We similarly need to scale down these extrinsic resistances of the source drain and the extension regions. To reduce those resistances, we would like to increase, in general, the junction depth xj. However, there's a problem that if we make the junctions deeper, it will make it easier for voltages at the drain to affect the current flow in the channel. So this results in a fundamental design tradeoff for MOSFETs. The threshold voltage is an important parameter as far as the device and circuit designers are concerned. In the short-channel case, that threshold voltage equation has to be modified to a certain extent. And it's essentially because charge sharing-- that some of the charge under the gate is balanced by the charge from the source-drain regions. The L prime is actually shorter than the actual gate length. So there's this tendency as we scale devices for the threshold voltage itself to drop or to roll off. Dopants are typically introduced at their solid solubility limit. At 1,000 degrees, you can get something like 3 to 4 times 10 to the 20 electrons per cubic centimeter by introducing arsenic into the lattice. If you introduce more arsenic than that, it may still be below the solidsolubility, but you won't get any more electrons. It's not electrically active. It may not precipitate until you get up into the 10 to 21 range. That turned out to be a bit of a mystery to people for a number of years. And it was subject to a lot of discussions in the literature. When the concentration gradient goes to 0, essentially, the dopant or the atoms are uniformly distributed, say, in the solid, and the flow would stop according to Fick's first law. In this case, the proportionality constant is called the diffusivity D. It has units of length squared per time or centimeter squared per second. D is related to the atomic hop rate or the jump frequency over some kind of energy barrier. And in the silicon lattice, by symmetry D is isotropic. In semiconductor processing, linear scales for dopants are not all that useful because, in fact, we often care about how the dopant falls off over many, many orders of magnitude of concentration. So we typically like to use a semi-log type plot. OK, so we have one solution for one case. Let's go on to slide number 28 and talk about the second case, which is a fixed dose Q, just like we talk about, constant in time. But now we're diffusing near a surface. And the third case, essentially, that we can solve analytically is called the case of an infinite source. dopant at 1,000 degrees is less than about about 7 10 to the 18th. You can use this constant diffusion coefficient. Boron, again, the only really available p-type dopant, is relatively fast. It can be up to a factor of 10 or 20 or 30 faster diffusion coefficient than the slower diffusers such as arsenic or antimony. So this gives you a rough idea of, when we talk about doping diffusion, what we're going to have to worry about a little bit more would be boron. of cases where there are analytic solutions. We talked about the diffusion of a Gaussian profile with a fixed dose. We apply this diffusion to a constant surface concentration. And finally -- we talk about the diffusion of a complementary error function, which we apply for a constant level of surface concentration. The diffusion of this error function can be applied to a fixed level of surface concentration, or a constant level of substance on the surface, for example.