A random variable is a number that's produced by a random process. The number of alpha particles detected by a Geiger counter in a second is believed to be a random number. Number of faulty pixels in a monitor is also produced from an unpredictable randomness in the manufacturing process. And if I flip coins then the number of heads in a given number of flips-- let's say I flip a coin n times -- will be another rather standard random variable.. Another one is simply a [? 0-1 ?] valued random variable where it signals 1 if all 3 coins match in what they come up with, and 0 if they don't match. a convenient use of random variables is to use them to define various kinds of events. C is greater than or equal to 1 when there is at least 1 head. M greater than 0 means all the coins match. This is an obscure way of describing the event all heads, and it has a course probability 1/8. Now we come to the formal definition. A random variable is simply a function that maps outcomes in the sample space to numbers. It's a total function. Usually this would be a real valued random variable. A lot of the event properties carry right over to random variables. A bunch of random variables are mutually independent if the events that they define are all mutually independent. In order to explain it I've got to set up the idea of an indicator variable, which itself is a very important concept. If I have an event A, I can package A into a random variable, just like the match random variable was really packaging the event that the coins matched into a [? 0-1 ?] valued variable. this can have value 0 and 1. If R is independent of S then R is really independent of any information at all that you have about S. And of course the notion of k-way independence carries right over from the event case. If I have k random-- if I have a bunch of random variables, a large number much more than k, they're k- way independent if every set of k of them are mutually independent. The notion that there's an odd number of heads is simply the mod 2 sum of the Hi's. hold in circumstances where pairwise does hold. So this is good to know. We'll be making use of it in an application later when we look at sampling and the law of large numbers. Back to Mail Online home.back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the pages you came From. Back then, the page was: "The first page of the first week of the second year of the Second World War. The first page was the first day of World War II. The second was the second day of the First World War."