John Stuart Mill is the principle expositor of neoclassical utilitarianism. The rights-utility synthesis signals that we're looking for an attempt to put together both a commitment to utilitarian efficiency that's grounded in science on the one hand, and respect for individual rights on the other hand. What you're also going to get as a by-product of today's lecture is everything you ever needed to know about neoclassicals economics in 45 minutes. All we're going to talk about today is the transition from Bentham's utilitarianism to the doctrine championed by John Stuart Mill. doing is expressing our tastes, our emotional reactions and that there is nothing more to say about ethics than that. Now, you could say this emotivist doctrine is an endpoint in a philosophical evolution that really begins in the seventeenth century. If you think about the idea of doing interpersonal comparisons of utility, and making the judgment that taking that dollar from Donald Trump and giving it to the bag lady increases her utility more than it decrease his, you're assuming that they basically all have the same kinds of utility functions. as I said, when we get to the anti-Enlightenment and, in particular, Alasdair MacIntyre's book, After Virtue. But today we're going to focus for the rest of our time on the economics of the transition from classical to neoclassical utilitarianism. And I'm going to ask you to suspend disbelief for the whole of today's lecture and just trust me, because what I'mgoing to do is I'mGoing to go into this backwards. I'm Going to look at a very different problem that the neoclassicals economists were concerned with that had nothing to do with utilitarianism, or rights. Prof: If you have a huge amount of bread the next loaf of bread is less valuable to you at the margin than the previous loaf. So that is the idea of diminishing marginal utility. The idea of indifference curves is that you want to go from P toward Q. You want to get onto, as they put in the jargon of neoclassical theory, you wantto get onto as high an indifference curve as you can possibly get, Prof says. "We don't know where Q is. It's out in the stratosphere"  neoclassical economists didn't want to do that because they were actually concerned with quite another problem. The problem they wanted to solve was to understand the behavior of markets. They wanted to be able to more precisely to predict what prices were going to be in markets. So moving from cardinal to ordinal utility is going to turn out to have huge ideological consequences, which I'm going to unpack for you towards the end of today's lecture. These indifference curves cannot cross. Can anybody tell us why? Why can't they cross? Wait for the mic. same utility even though they're different indifference curves. We're saying two is preferred to two-point-five, okay? The jargon, anybody happen to know? Yell it out. Does anybody know the jargon for this? Prof: Transitivity. The preferences are assumed to be transitive. So if you prefer A to B and B to C, you must preferred A to C. That's all that transitive means. If the different distances are taken to imply that A's happier than B disabuse yourself of that thought right away. Pareto said there's not an infinite source of utility. He said if you can anywhere into the northeast quadrant both of them are better off. On the other hand, if we went anywhere in this quadrant, southwest as it were, obviously they're both worse off. And about those two quadrants Pareto says we can say nothing at all. We can't assume with Bentham and Hume, with Sedgwick, we can't assumption that everybody's basically the same, perhaps they aren't. John Rawls: The trouble with utilitarianism is that it doesn't take seriously differences among persons. He says classical utilitarianism says, "Well, if taking all of your utility increases overall net utility then we should do that, because we don't care who has the greatest number of the greatest happiness" John Rawls' argument is half-right, he says, because the truth is that's the classical utilitarianists' doctrine. John Rawl's Theory of Justice: The Case for Justice, the Case for Liberty, and Other Essays, is published by Oxford University Press, priced £16.99. which the radical fangs of classical utilitarianism have been ripped out and it is now a doctrine that is very friendly to whatever status quo happens to be generated in a market system. So it ceases to be this radically redistributive doctrine, and in the process imports into utilitarianism a very robust, some would say, hyper-robust doctrine of individual rights. We'll see how that played out in political theory when we come to look at John Stuart Mills' harm principle next Monday.