HONG LIU: Today, we talk about chiral fermions. He says the Dirac equation requires, actually, psi to have four components. But there are two ways to reduce it, and one is called the Majorana fermion, he says. HONG LIu: You don't need four components to be able to transform under Lorentz. You just need a smaller unit, OK? He says this tells you that at least two components already can transform. The property that you can reduce to two components should exist for all choice of gamma matrices. So, now, let me tell you how to do it for the general gamma matrix. The beautiful trick to do this is to introduce the following object-- what is called gamma 5. So gamma 5 is defined to be i gamma 0, gamma 1, gamma 2, gamma 3, OK? And then you can also check the gamma 5 anticommute with any gamma matrice. So mu here is, of course, from 0 to 3. HONG LIU: Gamma 5 actually have 0 trace, OK? So, this, I will leave as an exercise for yourself, what you can do is you did before with other-- yeah, in your homework. So, now, from this properties-- now we can say the following things about the gamma 5 matrix. And, also, this is Hermitian. So its eigenvalues are all real, and gamma 5 squared equal to 1-- that means its eigenspace is either plus or minus 1. HONG LIU: By definition, this is the analog of psi L and psi R for the general choice of gamma matrices. So, indeed, you see-- so, from here, from this definition, you can check this is true, OK? This is a one-second check. OK? So, now, it's easy to check they actually transform among themselves. So you can also check the gamma 5 actually commutes with sigma mu, nu. Any questions on this? Yes, you have a question? Yes? HONG LIU: In the Dirac Lagrangian, as we discussed earlier, so we have a U1 symmetry. Psi goes to exponential i alpha psi, OK? But, now, psi L and psi R-- they are separate. So, when m equal to 0, when you don't have coupling between the two, you actually get the extra symmetry. So these are called chiral symmetries because they transform the left and the right separately. Yes? AUDIENCE: I'm a little bit confused why you can't write psi as the sum of the two projections? HONG LIu: Sorry? HONG LIU: Symmetry is one of the most important aspect of physics. He says it plays a very important role in particle physics, for example, the pions. Without the chiral symmetries, there's no pion, he says. The pions have to do with-- I will not go into detail, but they essentially come from chiral symmetry. HONG LIu: The bottom line is that the symmetry is very important in many aspects of physics, like liquid helium. HONG LIU: In physics, actually, the massless case actually gives you very much richer structure, normally, than the massive particle. In the Dirac spinor, which we have talked about so far, is four components. And then the chiral spinor we talked about-- essentially, you have two complex components. So the next one I'm going to talk about is the Majorana, in which case, I would argue, we have 4 times 1 real component. very important role in modern-day physics. Say, for example, people suspect a neutrino could be a Majorana spinner, OK? So to check whether a neutron is a spinner has been pursued by many years. And, also, in condensed matter, in quantum information, and Majorana spinor play a very important role. Because it's heuristically half electron, it has very stable topological properties, which a single electron does not have. And whether you can engineer in your condensed matter systems, Majoranaspinor then became a Holy Grail. C, of course, also relates to the spinor. And so psi M will be related to psi by C. And now, since the psi M is equal to psi M star, so that means that C star psi star should be equal to C psi, OK? So that should be the condition which you impose in the general basis. So you have to introduce this C. So if you find that the transformation between the general gamma mu and the gamma mu m, and then you can use that to find the B. I wrote down before, so if you stare at that expression, you find that gamma 0, gamma 1, and gamma 2 are imaginary, pure imaginary. And the gamma 2 is real, OK? So this pure imaginary means, when you take the star of them, you get the minus sign. So, now, in this chiral basis, these three are pure imaginary, that means B needs to anticommute with them. But this is real. It means B need to commute with this guy. Then what is B? to impose in this basis. And this is now independent of massless or massive particles? HONG LIU: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, this is-- yeah. Good? So this concludes our discussion of the Majorana spinor. Do you have any questions on this? Yes? AUDIENCE: So is the orthogonal component of this Majorana species-- like, possible-- in the chiral one, like, psi L, and then you [INAUDIBLE] and then psi R. just reverse one direction or reverse two directions, OK? That seems also to be a discrete symmetry. And indeed. So if you just change the directions, say, in the x direction, that's also a discrete. And if you only change the direction in both x and the y direction, That's also an independent symmetry. But if you change-- if you do the reflection in two directions,. that's equivalent to a 90-degree rotation. And so it's part of the continuous symmetries. And now, when you change all three directions compared to change one direction, you differ only by changing two directions.