In this lecture, we're going to talk about how neurons function and how researchers are able to control that function in order to modify behavior. And this is going to involve also sort of understanding how certain antidepressants, like Prozac, work. And then we'll end by talking about how researchers did this experiment to wake up the mouse. And it all starts with something that I told you about at the beginning of the semester, which is that the plasma membrane separates distinct compartments the outside of the cell from the cytoplasm. of signal known as an action potential. In order to have an electrical signal propagate, we need some sort of electrical property that the cell has that enables this. In a resting state, the cell's resting potential is negative 70 millivolts. If the cell is not getting stimulated by something like a neurotransmitter, the resting potential will be negative 70 million. Stephen suggested opening the sodium ion channels, which would depolarize the cell and make this situation less positive. And so if you open these channels, positive ions are going to flow out. restored to its resting state, OK? So it's a transient process. When we think about the neuron at higher resolution, what you're going to see is not only is it transient, but it's also a traveling wave that propagates along the entire length of the cell. And one thing that you can notice about these neurons, or the action potentials here, is that they all depolarize to the same extent. So this illustrates a key property of neurons, in that the level of activity of a neuron is not determined by the size of this action potential. In this case, it's a sodium channel. So it's going to be-- whether or not it's open depends on the presence of the ligand. So if we take a neurotransmitter like serotonin, if it's not bound to the receptor, the receptor is closed. But if serotonin binds to the receptors, it opens up the channel, which can selectively let in a type of ion. In this case,. this is an activating channel, because letting in sodium is going to depolarize the cell, OK? So this ligand receptor binding uses a ligand-gated sodium channel which starts the depolarization. insulates the plasma membrane of the axon such that-- so here is an axon. You have glial cells that are wrapped around, and it sort of forms like beads on a string. And so there are these gaps between the myelin sheath that are known as the nodes of Ranvier. And these nodes perform an important function for the neuron, because the membrane is electrically insulated. And that allows the action potential to travel about 100-fold faster along theAxon. There are different types of signals that nerve cells can send. Signals can be excitatory, meaning it will tend to depolarize the neuron. There are other signals that bind to different receptors that are inhibitory. So it's in this way a neuron is able to integrate signals coming from different neurons. And that influences whether or not it will send the signal to a downstream cell or muscle or another cell. The way that multiple neurons communicate with each other are through a type of signal known as a neurotransmitter. Neurons are a case of where luck favors the prepared. They have everything ready to go when they get word from upstream, and they're ready to send signals to the next cell. So prior to the action potential, there are vesicles filled with neurotransmitter that are docked at the plasma membrane. In order to fuse, there needs to be some signal inside the cytoplasm to tell the vesicle to fuse. That signal is increased calcium ion concentration. When you get fusion, that's exocytosis, and the serotonin is now on the outside of the cell. sucks the neurotransmitter back into the presynaptic cell such that it can then reuse it later on. So this process of reuptake highlights a very important process that's been utilized by drug companies to create antidepressants. antidepressants like Prozac and Zoloft affect this reuptakes process. And what that does is it keeps the neurotransmitters in the synaptic cleft for longer, such as it enhances the signaling. All right, now I want to end by telling you how this experiment works, where we're able to activate specific neurons in a brain and that leads to the animal sort of waking up. you to test the function of the neuron in the behavior of an organism. So, in this case, this mouse, the light is shined into its brain, and they're testing a specific type of neuron that is involved in arousal of the mouse. And it's going to wake up right now. There it goes. It woke up. You see now its muscle activity is going, OK? So you can test thefunction of specific nerve cells using this approach, and it's because you have a light-sensitive sodium channel.