The famous example was posed by Comte de Buffon back in the 18th century. It marks the beginning of a subject that is known as the subject of geometric probability. The problem is pretty simple. We take a needle that has a certain length-- l-- and we throw it at random on the plane. So the needle might fall this way, so that it doesn't cross any line, or it might end up crossing one of the lines. But we will make the assumption that the length of the needle is less than the distance between the two-- between two adjacent lines. The model is going to involve two random variables defined the way we discussed it just now. What is the range of these random variables? Since we took x to be the distance from the nearest line, this means that x is somewhere between 0 and d over 2. How about theta? So the needle makes two angles with the part of the line. It's this angle, and the complimentary one. Which one do we take? Well, we use a convention that theta is defined as the acute angle that the direction of the needle is making with the lines. much more streamlined. There's not going to be any choices. We just need to consider the event of interest, express it in terms of the random variables that we have in our hands, and then use the probability model to calculate the probability of this particular event. When will the needle intersect the nearest line? This will depend on the following. We have an intersection if and only if the vertical extent-- which is this vertical green segment-- is larger than the distance x. Or equivalently, if x is less than the Vertical extent.  Monte Carlo method uses simulation to evaluate experimentally the value, in this case, of the constant pi. There are many applications in engineering and in physics where certain quantities are hard to calculate, but they can be calculated using a trick of this kind by simulation. Consider the unit cube in n dimensions, which is an object that has unit volume. Inside that unit cube, there is a complicated subset which is described maybe by some very complicated formulas. The description of the subset is so complicated that using integration, multiple integrals, and calculus is practically impossible. What you can do is to start throwing at random points inside that cube. unit cube. So you throw points. Some fault inside. Some fall outside. You count the frequency with which the points happen to be inside your set. And as long as you're throwing the points uniformly over the cube, then the probability of your complicated set is going to be the volume of that set. You estimate the probability by counting the frequencies with which you get points in that set, and so, by using these observed frequencies, you can estimate the volume. It turns out that these days, physicists and many engineers use methods of this kind quite often and in many important applications.