Adam Martin: How do you go from something you're interested in learning about an organism to actually identifying genes and mechanisms that are important for that? Martin: The two heroes of today's lecture will be the roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans, and the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. He also highlights a couple important vertebrate-model organisms-- the zebrafish and the mouse. Martin: We'll talk about yeast a lot more later, when we start talking about the regulation of cell division and the cell cycle. Many models in mice that mimic cancer have been useful for elucidating mechanisms of cancer. We are related to each of these model organisms through evolution because we all arose from a common ancestor. Most of them are fairly small, and they're easy to house large numbers of them in a lab. They're often cheap to house in the lab and work with. Also, they develop fast, and especially when we consider genetics, the rate-limiting step in genetics research is the time it takes from conception of an organism to the time that that organism can reproduce sexually. are involved in a specific process, but you want to identify them. So in a forward genetic screen, you're looking for a phenotype that you would expect if you affected a certain process, if you disrupt a process. So the goal in genetics is to identify a mutation that alters a gene function that gives you a phenotype. And rather than taking a gun and shooting members of the orchestra, in genetics, you try to identify mutations. And these mutations could be spontaneous mutations, meaning you didn't do anything to induce it, but they just appear as a variant. Adam Martin: Mutagenizing an organism isn't specific to genes. You're just inducing random mutations across the genome of the individual. In model organisms, we can actually find these types of mutations, he says. Martin: You don't know which are the ones that you want until you look at their phenotypes. "Wingless" mutant defined a gene that has a homologous gene in humans, Martin says. But obviously, we don't have wings, so this gene didn't get discovered in humans. Drosophila larvae has segments that alternate between smooth cuticle and hairy cuticle. Because there's a lot of hairlike projections here, it reminded the researchers of a hedgehog, and so this mutant became known as "hedgehog" The hedgehog gene was the founding member of an entire signaling pathway that plays important roles in human development and also, human cancer. There are now a number of drugs that are being developed to target the hedgehog pathway, and one was approved back in 2012 for use in treating basal-cell carcinoma. Robert Horvitz's lab identified a pathway of genes that were involved in cell death. Researchers in the C. elegans field started isolating these cell-death-abnormal mutants. They then mutagenized these ced-1 mutants, and they are homozygous, meaning they are in this case, hermaphrodites. And so they're essentially looking for mutants in this animal that will affect the death process that will be present in the remainder of the generations. Adam Martin: circadian rhythm is a behavior. We are awake during certain parts of the day and are asleep at night. If you're hidden from the light-dark cycle, you continue this cycle for some amount of time. Martin: There's something intrinsic in our system such that we want to exist on this 24-hour wake-sleep cycle. He says the Nobel Prize-winning researchers identified a gene called "period" that is associated with familial advanced-phase syndrome, which is a sleep disorder.