The amygdala is closely connected to the basal forebrain. In discussions of aging in human pathologies, you always hear about the basalForebrain. The amygdala primarily projects to the more caudal one here. This is where they overlap. That's the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, which we mentioned last time. And I've indicated in blue there the acetylcholine containing neurons that you see in the medial septum. You see them in this diagonal band of cells. And then the basal nucleus at the bottom here. Schizophrenics have larger brain ventricles, an indication of early damage. Schizophrenics are the hardest to treat and often are in mental hospitals for most of their adult life. The earlier the lesion in these other systems, at least, the greater the plasticity, that is, more sprouting, more chances of regeneration, and so forth. But here we're talking about sprouting. These are the connections I'm talking about. In green there I show the very widespread projections of the catecholamines. Early in evolution, there was no dorsal striatum. It was a link between the olfactory, [INAUDIBLE],, and motor control. And we also know the outputs of that region go to hypothalamus and subthalamus. They influence the endocrine system and motivational states by these projections. They also have some connections in the midbrain, where they can influence the stacking patterns, especially locomotion. If the prefrontal cortex is functioning abnormally because of sprouting of these axons, then binding to the receptors will move it more towards the normal. The subthalamic nucleus excites both segments of the globus pallidus and the nigra. So it's unique in that way. And it's critical for the balance of this system. So anything that goes wrong with it can cause major problems with movement. For people to see how knowing these connections explains some of the disorders. So we'll leave it here. But just note, if there's just a subthalamic nucleus-- here's the Nigra down here. So these are the two main satellites of the corpus striatum.