Jake Xia: This is the second time we are having this class. We had it last year in a smaller version. That was for six units of a credit, and we had it once a week. And mostly practitioners from the industry, from Morgan Stanley, talking about examples how math is applied in modern finance. And so we got some good response last year. So, with the support of the math department, we decided to expand this class to be 12 units of credit and have twice a week in this classroom. are in finance and business major? Just one. And how many of you are a math major? Most of you. A few engineering majors? A few. Great, because last year we had quite a few, so I want to specifically tell you that you're very welcome to attend the classes here. So anyway, today-- VASILY STRELA: And all of us got MIT emails. We all have MIT emails, which are listed on the website. Peter and Choongbum and Vasily's classes. So I'm going to talk about vega. On his first day at Morgan Stanley he asked a question about volatility. His desk quant look at him, said-- this is supposed to be options trading desk, so he look at me puzzled. So instead of answering my question, he handed over a training manual for new employees and new analysts. He opened the training manual and looked it through. He actually found his answer. At Morgan Stanley this is not called vega, it's called kappa. So now, I remember to call it kappa, which is actually a Greek letter. I did that in the last 20 years. So the point I'm trying to tell you is, before you dive into any details of mathematics or any concept in finance in this class, just bear in mind, this is a field developed in. the last mostly 30 years, or even shorter. And what you really need to ask questions is-- it's not really is it right or wrong in mathematics, is it wrong in physics? So, how the concepts are established and defined and verified. has money to lend out, someone needs to borrow money. Loan is really a private agreement between two counterparties or multiple counterparties. When you securitize them, they become bonds. Commodities, actually, you know. Metal, energy, agriculture products are traded, mostly in the futures format and some in physical format, meaning you take deliveries. And the real estate, you're buying and sell houses. And further of all of these, you heard probably a lot about the derivative products, that started with swaps, options. Banks typically organized by institutional business and asset management. Fixed income, which trade the debt and the derivative products. Equity, trade stocks and the derivatives products. Investment Banking Division, which really covers corporate finance, raising capital, listing a stock, IPO, and merger and acquisition, and advisory. Outside banks, other players, basically, the asset managers, are obviously a very big force in the financial markets. The question a lot of people ask is, is this a zero sum game? I'm sure you've heard this many times. brokers. So, brokers don't really take principal risks. If you want to buy something or sell something, if I'm a broker, I don't make you a price. I go to the market makers. I actually put two people together, matchmaking, make that trade happen, so, I earn the commission. Mutual funds, who actually manage public investors' money, typically in the long-only format. Long means you buy something. Insurance companies has large asset. They need to generate a return. stronger, you just leave it. But if you think it will trade weaker, so you may want to hedge it, meaning you want to sell euro and buy US dollars. And so that's the hedging type. The second type, as I mentioned, is a market maker. So, market maker also takes principal risk, but the main source of profit is really to earn the bid offer. And the third type is really the proprietary trader, the risk taker. They need to focus on generating return and control the risk. Risk management, nowadays, becomes pretty widespread responsibility. It's not just the corporate treasury's responsibility. Even if you are not a finance guy, you work in a corporate, you just do you import, export, or building a factory, you have to know, actually, what the exposure is. Let's talk about market making. If it's a simple transparent product, everybody pretty much knows where the price is. But if it's not transparent, so what do you do? So, if instead of asking you where Apple is, probably you're going to tell me $495 today. that liquidity, and then takes the risk. They manage the book by balancing those Greeks, which I mentioned earlier. Gamma is really the change of the portfolio. Take the derivative to the delta, or to the underlying spot. Delta is the first order. So gamma, now you have curvature or convexity coming in. And theta is really-- nothing changes in the market. Nothing changes in your position. How your trading book is carrying or bleeding away money. And on top of that, what are the tail risks? What are the events that can actually get you into big trouble? So people use value at risk. There are many examples mathematical relationship which gives you the arbitrage opportunity. Fundamental analysis, you're really trying to understand what's going on in the world. And there are special situations. Some companies are going through particular difficulties, assets are priced very cheaply. So, math is very useful in risk management, which I will give you more-- which is very much a very interesting and challenging area. It's easy to observe a stock in the market, but when it comes to more complex products, they just take one step forward on the complexity, which is the option. Risk management is not a purely mathematical question, but yet, math plays a very important role to quantify how much exposure you have. Trading is really all about how do you risk manage, have the discipline, and how to manage your losses. A lot of people with math background, or in general, people are looking for the so-called holy grail trading strategies. The robotrader, a robotic trader, is a dream. It has its place or its use, but it's a fast evolving market. You have to constantly either upgrade your research and adjust your strategies. If your bank account balance is $800, your choice will be very different from someone has $100,000 in his bank account. Market cycles are typically very long, but people tend to have short memories. How do you really build models? Is the market really efficient? What part is efficient? How do we really apply those theories in our day-to-day risk management or trading activities? So learn the math, learn the finance first, but keep those questions along the way when you are learning. VasILY STRELA: [INAUDIBLE] mentioned that, Apple trades, that now it's $494.4 Yeah, just a couple of [inaUDIBLE]. Well, first of all, no offense to people who were [INAudIBLE], but I just wanted to give an example of [INA UDIBLE]. AUDIENCE: [inaudIBLE]. VASILY STREELA: --because he was working in our group, and it just will give you a little bit of an idea what we will be talking about. what we had, we had the noisy observation of broker data and it was coming out at different non-uniform times. So, we decided to use Kalman filter and to study how it can predict. And that's one of the nice graphs [INAUDIBLE] produced, which again, we will use this strategy and the Kalman filters which he constructed in our e-trading platform in Moscow. Just to remind, the website is fully functional. We will be posting a lot of materials there. Probably most lectures will be published there.