then we are going to continue with the second part of the lecture today which focuses on the problem what actually happens if the gaussian assumption that i have about my constraints doesn't hold. As you will see in some small examples having this outliers in your optimization problem is something which hurts dramatically which actually screw up your solution. Already a few outliers can lead to a environment model which is completely unusable for doing any navigation task so where the geometry of what you computed doesn't fit to the real world geometry anymore and one of the questions actually how to handle that. have also experienced and if you look to those poses over here in the poses down here how those individual structures match um if you just apply let's say scan alignment you may say this may match so maybe someone has opened the door which was closed before or here is a door now closed which was open all the other scans map actually quite well. So even as a humanism you say okay there is definitely a misalignment between the skin so they don't fit perfectly but that's something which actually can result from small changes in the environment. and in this case screwed up the measurement how can we incorporate that into the graph based slam approach um so the problem that we actually have is if we look to our um an individual constraint so the lack of an observation given the given the current configuration of the nodes was a gaussian distribution so that's what we had before. If we have this this number of constraints is the product of gaussian distributions if you compute the log likelihood this turns into a sum of the exponents exponents therefore we have these sum of squared error terms. done you know he said oh damn i can't do that what would be the ugliest trick that you can do in order to make that work even worse no that's not quite what you're going to do i mean the sum is kind of the the the bad thing what can i do with the sum instead of the sum i can i can get rid of thesum in some nice way sorry oh the integral of some to the integral actually makes our life typically worth um so that's that's going what's going to fly. The max mixture idea is actually a pretty easy idea pretty simple idea just reply funny no one has done that in robotics until recently a few years ago the first one it was actually edwin olsen and pratik um who came up with that particular with this idea of using max mixtures. It can handle both things at the same time data station errors as well as multimodal constraints. It's actually kind of a nice interesting way to to use this to deal with multi-modal constraints and even if you look to the to the runtime error if you do. actually compute these so the main changes we go to this formulation we have the scaling factor over here and we need a good way to compute the scaling Factor so how can we actually do that and there's actually closed form you can derive that under certain properties. This leads to the case that constraints which are far away from what we expect have a smaller influence on the optimization so we can actually visualize this so what we what you see over here is um the black curve is the the parabola which results from the squared arrow. Max mixture as well as for dcs is that kind of the tails of this gaussian distributions contain too few probability mass they're too close to zero. If you have constraint which introduce large errors these are these outliers this can actually screw up the optimization. If we have one outlier which is really far away from the current estimate the whole mole is tracked in this direction that's the problem that we have with a gaussian distribution. The max mixture approach is actually kind of similar to this corrupted gaussian so if you plot both of them together. here that by changing this function you can't get much better behaviors kind of deciding which function to use for the underlying optimization problem is not on it's not always an easy and easy choice so this requires some expert knowledge some good intuition on coming up with the way with one of those functions. Next week which is the last week of the term i will briefly talk about front ends and give kind of a short summary on what typical front ends exist obviously we're not going to all the details as we did that here.