Aristotle was born 384,15 years after the trial of Socrates. He was sent by his father to study at The Academy, the first university. Unlike most of you, Aristotle did not spend four years at the Platonic Academy. He remained attached to it for the next 20, until the death of Plato. He then left Athens, first for Asia Minor and then to return to his home in Macedonia. Here he established a school for the children of the Macedonian ruling class. It was here that Aristotle met and taught Phillip of Macedonia's son. story in a minute, because I think it's very revealing about Aristotle. In any way, this story helps to underscore some important differences between Plato and Aristotle. Aristotle appears from the beginning to look more like what we would think of as a political scientist. He collected constitutions, 158 of them in all, from throughout the ancient world. He was the first to give some kind of conceptual rigor to the vocabulary of political life. Above all, Aristotle's works were explicitly intended as works of political instruction, political education. Aristotle says man is, by nature, the political animal. He says participation in the life of the city is necessary for the achievement of human excellence. A person who is without a city, he says, who is apolis--without a city--must either be a beast or a god. The city is natural in that it allows human beings to achieve and perfect what he calls their telos, that is to say their end, their purpose. But there is a second sense for him, in some ways, in which he says the polis is by nature. Aristotle's Politics is considered the most antidemocratic book ever written. It offers a critique of the modern theory of freedom, which is living as one likes. He argues that freedom does not mean living as we like, but a sense of restraint and self-control. In a stunning admission, he says--listen to this--that "while nature may intend to distinguish the free from the slave, it often misses the mark," he says. "We need to avoid the temptation, in many ways understandable as it might be, to airbrush or sanitize Aristotle," he adds. Aristotle might, as a natural aristocracy? I leave you with this question to think about. Before we reject Aristotle as an antidemocratic elitist, take a look at yourselves. So are you, or you wouldn't be sitting here today. Think about that and I'll see you next week. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @dailymailonline and @jennifer_newton. Back To The Daily Mail home.