In this chapter we will discuss two applications, one price control and second taxation, so right. Sir, does this slope of this graph denote anything price demand upon, some price upon some quantity? So, wait little later we will talk about that that topic, right now we are just talking about movement and shifts, the direction of movement. We are not talking about the slope. So, what is price control what do we mean by price control? Price control is how we can regulate the prices of the goods in the market. In India we have pagadi system and it is more prevalent in Bombay because in Bombay, we have more we have stringent rent control laws. Pagadi is something that security deposit that land the house owner or the apartment owners they take from the person who would like to rent their house. So, to compensate they charge pagadi in name of security fee and this is in a way when they say that it is a security fee it is not illegal. Now, we can also think about the black market, the rise of black market or in other word illegal trade at prohibited prices. The farmers like people who are putting in more effort, but not getting the proper returns of their effort that is why. It is to incentivize the production for a few like for wheat or if we talk if there is a new production of potato and if we put price floor on potato. So, it will incentivize production and they can serve the market better. But for this example that at least everyday news we hear that so much of grain is rotting in government depots. Sir, that is also one more reason now that we do not have a proper distribution system. my point. That if aim is to serve poors why cannot government buy these products at the market price and sell it as you have already said that we do not have proper distribution system. So, what we are doing basically is that we are buying at the minimum support price and leaving grains to rot in open. But I am not saying that price control does not have advantage that when we talk about the welfare economics towards the end we will talk about it. But what I am saying definitely that there are definitely better ways to cater to the welfare of public.