Inflationary cosmology is a relatively new subfield that's known as cosmic inflation. It's a framework for trying to understand the evolution of our universe over a huge expanse of time. It uses tools at the interface, not just of Einstein's general theory of relativity, but also ideas about particle physics and high energy phenomena. The asterisks are to remind you there's a set of strictly optional lecture notes on the Canvas site which go into a little bit more detail of some of these parts from the lecture. century, for 100 years or even more, that when astronomers turn their telescopes to the sky and look at many different length scales. Matter is not uniformly smushed out in space. There is actually teeming pockets of activity separated by large voids where very little matter or energy is located. It turns out that ordinary gravity-- even Newtonian gravity, let alone Einstein's fancier version that we looked at in class, general theory of relativity-- that these gravitational frameworks are sufficient to help us make sense of this hierarchy of scales. more and more uneven over time. So a challenge for astronomers for a century or so has been to try to make that account more precise and more quantitative and compare it with more and more kinds of observations. And there have been two main conceptual ingredients, especially as we'll come to in the more recent versions of this in the era of particle cosmology. One of the sets of tools, not surprisingly, is some theory of gravity. And the other main ingredient especially, as I say, refined in recent years with insights from high energy nuclear and particle physics. satisfy Einstein's equation. They took three particularly simple forms. Depending on the amount of stuff, depending on the distribution of matter and energy. If you had more than some critical value, a. critical value that came from the equations themselves above that, an overdense region. space itself would warp back onto itself like a closed sphere. You'd have a hyperbolic solution or an open geometry with negative curvature. And so you can have these global features, for example, on a positively curved geometrical surface. for an infinite expanse of time. But other colleagues showed at least it was consistent with his own equations to have universes that would change over time, that could either expand or contract. That was actually a prediction made by some of these colleagues even before some empirical evidence began to come in starting in the late 1920s. Hubble found this remarkable trend that the further away from us a given galaxy was, the faster it tended to be moving away from me further still. So you can actually then work backwards and say for how long has our observable universe been stretching? When did this stretching or expanding phase begin? originally Belgian. He studied briefly in Cambridge, England with one of the first converge to general relativity, Arthur Eddington. Then he came to MIT to finish his PhD and then was finding many of these solutions to Einstein's field equations even before Einstein did. And, in fact, Einstein came thinking he must be wrong, and then Lemaitre kept being right. So they became very nice colleagues. But Einstein started off by always being frustrated that Lem Haitre found solutions that Einstein found abhorrent or disgusting. George Gamow was advising two younger physicists, Robert Herman and Ralph Alpher. They realized that if the universe was very hot and dense at early times, then the conditions in which these elementary particles would find themselves should be quite different than what we find commonly around ourselves today. In a series of really quite ahead of its time farsighted work starting in the late 1940s, this trio and a small number of other colleagues around the world began trying to fill in this picture. And in fact, it soon became known simply as the Big Bang model. At early times in cosmic history, the universe should've been opaque. You literally wouldn't have been able to see anything because the mean free path of any given photon would be very, very short. Light can't propagate in a charged plasma because it's always bouncing between these very nearby free electric charges. At that moment, the average energy per photon or per elementary particle would fall so that you could actually form stable atoms of hydrogen. After that time, when the temperature has fallen below about 10,000 degrees Kelvin, photons are free. And then they can now travel large distances. energy continues to redshift. They lose energy as the universe continues to expand. So the energy of those photons would've started at the equivalent of around 10,000 degrees Kelvin and now today would be much, much,much lower than that. The universe has been expanding and draining that average energy per particle over time [CLEARS THROAT] so that today the universe should be filled with this remnant glow. This is all work that they predict around 1948, '49, '50, Gamov, Herman, and Alpher. 20 years later, two radial physicists working at Bell Labs, Robert Wilson and Arno Penzias, were using a new horn antenna sensitive to radial microwave and radial band frequencies. This should've been among the most precise instruments available on the planet for that band of the spectrum. And they couldn't get rid of a residual hum. This residual hum in your receiver consistent with an energy of about three degrees above zero, three degrees Kelvin, was really the leftover photons, that remnant hot radiation from the Big Bang. The idea was the whole universe is filled in the early times with very high energy particles that are at early, early times too high energy to form stable, electrically neutral atoms. And so from every part of space, from every single direction in the sky, those photons began to move freely at this single moment in time. And it's like sitting in a bathtub full of these photons. And they're just losing their energy as the overall size of space continues to grow. So the photons aren't coming from that direction of sky the way we think of with point-like sources. There's a galaxy there, a quasar, a particular bright star in our neighborhood. Astronomer Edwin Hubble was actually pretty lucky. He measured a much quicker average rate of expansion than what we have mostly settled on today. The picture was enough to get a small number of people to pay attention to Georges Lemaitre's otherwise quite obscure mathematical solutions. But it was Hubble's data that got the biggest splash, that made the biggest impact on the community at the time. But regardless of the data, we're just immersed in it trying to measure it as we flow through. whether we agree with the number he inferred of the actual rate, it seemed pretty clear to many people at the time that this was consistent with an actual overall expansion, with the change over time. Friedmann's and especially the follow up work by Georges Lemaitre, that made those mathematical solutions look much, much more curious and interesting than they had prior to Hubble's data. So this is a, I think, safe to say, remarkably successful set of ideas that eventually becomes called the Big Bang model. These convenient coordinates. Then you have to be a little more clever to adopt your clock to make things, again, actually really simple. This is actually called conformal time. That might remind you of our beloved friends, the 19th century Cambridge Wranglers. At least my beloved friends. We looked briefly at the Wrangler stuff at these conformal mappings. We're really doing a Wrangler-ish thing here, very similar idea, to adopt coordinates for the time, for the rate at which we think clocks should tick. Robert Dicke introduced this conundrum in 1969, so soon after the discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation. He goes back to what I mentioned briefly before, that according to Einstein's equations, you can have these very simple geometries. If omega is larger than 1, you have more stuff for volume. You have a positive curvature. You expect it's open or hyperbolic geometry. So far so good. Then Dickes plugged this quantity into Einstein's own equations. And so what Dicske demonstrated is that this solution that looks like the Goldilocks solution is actually an unstable solution. universe should generically become more and more different from flat over time. If a universe started out being close to but not identically equal to flat at early times, it should look nothing like spatially flat at later times. Depending on the sign, it could either become more. and more like a hyperbolic saddle or more. like a closed sphere. That became known as a flatness problem. That was introduced by Bob Dicke in 1969. He introduced the next big real conundrum for the Big Bang model. We receive a remarkably uniform signal on the sky today from opposite sides. But those photons were emitted at a finite age when the universe was only a short portion of its current age. So the horizon distance was actually a factor of 100 shorter than the smoothness scale across which we receive remarkably uniform information. And how could that be? If this portion of the sky never had a chance to become in any kind of physical equilibrium or even exchange a single tweet, to have absolutely no information about what the average conditions are in this part of the universe? The Big Bang model had some amazing successes but some pretty stubborn quandaries as well. We can still ask about the behavior of some randomly drawn sphere even if the global shape of space might not be spherical. Any questions on the shortcomings of the Big Bang as people began articulating them throughout the '60s and '70s? Feel free to jump in or use the chat or either way. And again, there's more on the quantitative details of that in that optional primer you can find on the Canvas site. Alan Guth was studying high energy physics and therefore not gravitational cosmology. He accidentally heard some talks about some of his early work in gravitation. He was not originally asking questions about the cosmos, but he was haphazardly encountering some of those questions, again, very much like Tony Zee around the same time. What Alan was interested in was in things like spontaneous symmetry breaking and the Higgs mechanism, which was all the rage for a lot of particle theorists in the early and mid '70s by then. Alan Guth's notebook is now on display in the Adler Planetarium in Chicago. He realized that this kind of feature could actually lead to a cosmologically distinct kind of evolution. If the energy density, the stuff per volume, remains constant, then very counterintuitively, you have a runaway growth in the size of space. The stretch function, the scale factor going back just to Einstein's equations, will grow exponentially quickly, will have a period of accelerated expansion during which the universe won't just get bigger. Alan Guth was worried about exotic features from these Higgs fields that can get twisted up in some topological shape. He was really just wondering what happens if the universe gets stuck even temporarily such that the matter that dominates it, fills it, can't release or relax its potential energy arbitrarily quickly. That's called a metastable state. And if you go back to Einstein's equations exactly in the form that he began learning from Bob Dicke from that series of lectures, then you have these very different solutions for the average size of space. shape for the potential energy function just when you think about these fields like a Higgs-like field in the early universe. Now you'd see this expression, the deviation of the universe from spatially flat. That deviation should rapidly fall to 0. The universe today should look indistinguishable from a flat universe because the difference from flatness was driven to 0 dynamically. By having even a very brief phase of exponentially rapid accelerating expansion, you drive the universe towards a flat shape rather than having it flow away from aflat shape. we thought there was an origin to all of time, this Big Bang surface, at tau equals 0. And if you add up the time between tau and when those photons begin to travel freely, there was only a fixed horizon distance. Well, if inflation happened, there should've been a very brief period before what had previously been called the Big Bang. So we're adding more real estate along our time axis. We're unfurling a little bit extra time that hadn't been taken into account in the standard Big Bang model. distance and conformal time. You can see that as you trace backwards from today, instead of going back to saying the universe at early times should've been on the order of 1 meter, you say at those early times, the universe was actually exponentially tinier than you had thought. It grew exponentially quickly to map onto where we see today. And so the universe could very easily have been in a kind of equilibrium or at least a causally self-connected state. So during this tiny blink of an eye, the cosmos grew exponentially. why there's a primordial inhomogeneity. And you also have a reason why it's on the right length scales. It's going to seed galaxy formation, not mess around with your atoms like a Lamb shift because you have matter in an early quantum state as the universe is stretching exponentially. So you can go back to now a much more modern picture of a very tiny lumpiness captured in that microwave background radiation. This is from the Planck satellite team. It’s exaggerating with false color imaging the slight one part in 100,000 offsets between the regions of sky that are slightly higher energy photons in the CMB and slightly lower energy photons. solid green line is the generic prediction from the simplest models of inflation, what's the pattern of bumps and wiggles on the sky you should see today. The red dots are the actual observations from Planck team. And in many cases, the error bars are expanded so we can see them with our naked eye. This is such a precise set of measurements that, in fact, sometimes we have to make the error Bars larger. So now not only do we know do we live in a universe that is indistinguishable from flat as inflation suggests we should, but the actual pattern of those wiggled matches predictions to, again, better than a percent level accuracy. Inflation arises from types of matter in interactions that we now know exist that are heart and soul of this particle cosmology community. Cosmic inflation addresses several of these long standing conundra about the standard Big Bang model. It makes specific predictions for what we should see on the sky today, including very minute statistical predictions for things like the cosmic microwave background radiation. So why is the universe lumpy? Why is this cascade of scales? Because space time is wiggly, and matter is jiggly. why the universe is so messy is actually because Alan's been generating the mess in his own office, and it's expanded to cosmic scales. So if you want to study that part of today's lecture, it's probably the most important lesson, you'll ever take away. And I'll be glad to stay a bit longer if people have questions. Again, I'm sorry for running late. Feel free to drop off if you need. Any questions on that? The photos in Alan's office are on Canvas.