Future John Green tells you that in a stunning turn of events the 2020 presidential election will be won by - Harry Styles. We’re going to change the constitution to make it possible. Because… that’s how much we love Harry Styles in 2020. John Green: The Wall Street Wamboozle, the Financial Fartstorm. The Major Recession of 2008 - 2012. Crash Course U.S. History, Sundays at 10pm on CrashCourse.com and 11pm on CNN. The thinking was that the interest people paid on their mortgages would supply the underlying value of the security. When the mortgages turned bad, these securities became toxic assets. The Bush Administration tried to stop the damage by getting Congress to pass the Troubled Assets Relief Program, or TARP, which was basically a $700 billion bailout for banks like Citigroup and Bank of America. Most of the banks that received a rescue from the taxpayers didn’t help the homeowners facing foreclosure, and despite receiving millions of federal dollars, AIG continued to pay huge bonuses to its top executives. In 2008 Obama’s election seemed a political watershed and not just because he was the first African American president. He appealed to young people and minorities, and he harnessed the power of social media to communicate with supporters, and get out the vote. So Obama promised to change the culture of Washington. He would end partisan squabbling…. sorry. I guess the author of the Mystery Document, if I’m wrong I get shocked. No more shocks. The getting shocked part of my life has come to an end. Obama wanted a foreign policy based on diplomacy, he wanted to reduce inequality and increase access to health care. He also wanted to end the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and, as critics mocked, reverse global warming. So how has he done? Not bad either. For instance he launched diplomatic outreach to the Muslim world, but a lot of this was more rhetoric than action. And he did keep some of his campaign promises, for instance he signed into law the Lily Ledbetter Fair Pay Act, which made it easier for women to sue. depends on who you ask. Among 9 large studies, 6 found that the stimulus did have a positive effect on growth and employment, 3 found that it had little or no effect, and economists are equally divided. The stimulus is estimated to have saved about 3 million jobs, but it also increased the deficit quite a bit. Liberal economists see America’s current 7% unemployment rate as evidence that the Keynesian policies should have gone further, while conservatives say that the Stimulus exploded the federal deficit and debt. The 111th congress was one of the least productive in American history. Unwillingness to compromise precipitated a series of mini-fiscal crises over things like the budget and raising the debt ceiling. The Tea Party is right that the founding fathers would be astonished by the extend of the American government and the extent to which it’s involved in the lives of Americans. We have to ask ourselves again, “What does freedom really mean?” Can you be free when you live in poverty or when you’re one injury away from bankruptcy? Can you being free when the government can go to a secret court to read your text messages? Crash Course World History has been on the air for two years. The show celebrates two successful years of teaching history. This has been one of the great professional joys of my life and I’m so grateful to everyone that has helped make the show and everyone who has watched it. Thank you again for watching, and as we say in my hometown, “Don’t forget to be awesome.” You can find a full list of your reading for Crash Course Literature in the doobly-doo.rolling.