SAR Gowan as a ruthless bloodthirsty Warrior um we really don't see him in that regard. Throughout the story of seral when we again come back to what a knight truly is what they believe their practices their nobility you know there there's the PowerPoint on Lut where it talks about their their pentagram their four or five things well must be five it's pentag the five things that you know that the way that they live their life you know being good to women and being chorous and all that stuff. along uh we're going to uh go through this it'll take a little bit of time and uh we'll talk about it upon completion but it's a sir Gowan or G and the Green Knight back to the beginning we start to get those archetypes um page uh 175 or so we come right at the beginning with the Green Knights there the physical description does he come full out armor for B for battle no he simply comes with his ax on his horse and everything that he has is green and so on. own land and look for no further trial so if after the deal I'll tell you where you can find me I will give you my name there are no tricks here. If for some reason I am unable to or I choose not to tell you myname then the agreement's done and you don't have to come and look after me okay. It's kind of like those things where be careful what you wish for that type of thing make sure you understand exactly what agreement what contract you're getting into the night from the wife of bath. will be able to pick it up and still live and survive and so oh crap this is not going to turn out well. The Knight tells him you have a year to find me you can find me. The wife really kind of starts to come on to him over time okay real flirty she's she's a temptress okay very seductive uh she gives him a kiss what does he do when the husband comes home that day cuz the husband's going to share his his food share his everything with him as long as GNE you share with. me and so he gets kissed what does he do to the husband when the husband gets home kisses the husband I'm sharing honor this is what I said I would do so I'm going to do it she attempts to give him things you know jewels and everything and he he rejects that stuff she pretty much throws herself upon him and he rejects it because he is a good guy. She eventually does give him a green girdle um a green corset a a sash some sort of clothing that he can wear under his stuff and he accepts it okay. thing and so he hears it you know happening and um so he screams out and the and the um and the Green Knight comes he says by there said one on the bank above his head and you shall swiftly receive what I once swore to give you. The Knight addresses him they have a little back and forth and he gets ready to hit him and it's one of those kind of like you've had friends before probably have come up to you and go like that. He chastises him and says do it again I will not flinch go on game. "The Green Knight pushed her along hey try to seduce him see what happens we're testing him to see what's uh if he's truly a good uh a good person or a coward as it turns out" "Their Vice and villainy are virtues undoing um uh where I you finally see that now I am faulty and false and found fear fearful always in the train of treachery and untruth go woe and shame" "Can we really call him a villain probably not but yet isn't he that antagonist early on?" good person away with the forbidden fruit you know something similar we could maybe connect uh down the road but it's very similar to to those so um so go and the green. I hopefully you enjoyed it um really story-wise we're done with knights uh. It's a very similar story to the one we did with the knights. It was a very different story but it was very similar. I hope you enjoyed the book. I'm glad you read it. I'll see you next week.