The six Vital Signs are pain oxygen saturation temperature heart rate respirations and blood pressure. The patient is rated on a scale of zero to 10 with zero being no pain at all and 10 being the worst pain they've ever had. If they do have pain ask them the quality what does it feel like and where it is at. A normal temperature is about 97° fit to 99° F okay and take the thermometer out and read it and his temperature is 98.2 and then clean it properly per Hospital protocol. I'm going to take his oxygen saturation every system has different ways of how they measure it um different devices this is a little portable device and what you do is you put this on the nail bed of the finger it has some red lights in there and those red lights read through the nailbed the oxygen saturation a normal oxygen saturation O2 sat as you may hear and the hospital setting is 95% to 100% so let's see what his is. We are going to count the heart rate and respirations generally I like to do this together. I count that for 30 seconds if it's regular and then the next 30 seconds I count the respirations. may have to learn how to do a manual one now my previous video and a card should be popping up I go over the two-step method if that's how you're being instructed. In this video we're going to go over  the one step blood pressure of how to obtain it manually so what we'regoing to do we are going to palpate the brachial artery this is in the bend of the arm and make sure you ask the patient which arm you can take their blood pressure in. Mark now we're listening for whenever it stops and whenever it stopped that's our diastolic okay it stopped right at 65 so his blood pressure is 114 over 65 so that is how you check bottle signs now whenever you're done remember to let the patient know what their bottle signs were and um do hand hygiene and clean your equipment before you go to the next patient so be sure to check out all my other videos on nursing skills and thank you so much for watching and for all your support.