Professor Donald Kagan: We are living in the early years of a polis sometime in the eighth century B.C. The date that's sort of typical for the general phenomenon of colonization coming out of the mother cities of Greece is 750 roughly. But in fact, the earliest date according to Greek tradition, if my memory is correct, was something like 773 where the Greeks date the foundation of what they thought was the earliest colony they ever established -- a place that they called Pithaecusa. The Greeks were terrified of the sea for very good reason. The vast overwhelming majority of people needed to farm land, in order to stay alive. One answer, and it's the one that is most widely believed among Greek scholars, is that the growth of population that we have mentioned in connection with the rise of the polis is still working. The Greeks were ancestor worshippers. They took special care of the dead and they thought that the way you buried people and so on was terribly important. When you leave the place you were born, you leave your ancestors as well. Land hunger is a key explanation, I think, is supported by the fact that wherever we find a polis, whatever other characteristics it has, and they vary. Some of the places where they settled leave us puzzled, and have left the ancients puzzled. One of my favorite examples is the colony on the south shore of the Bosporus, which is called Chalcedon. It's right opposite Constantinople--that doesn't exist, Istanbul. Winston Churchill never, never conceded that it was Istanbul; he called it Constantinople till the day he died. Colony is a Latin word ultimately for colonia and the Roman colonies were, first of all, garrisons that they planted in land they had conquered. The Greek word for this is, apoikia, and most literally it would mean a home away, an away home and that's what they're making. They are establishing for themselves a household, a home someplace away from where they started. They were the antecedents of the Serfs, which we will see later on in medieval history in Europe. of eminence, and yet unlikely to be part of the sort of dominant faction in that city, because otherwise why would they leave? Anyway, the Greeks had a name for this individual. He was called an oikistes; he is the found of the colony. So, now he has decided to do it and he's gained recognition from the town council, let's say, and he can go forward. Now, he has to have an idea. He can't just say, I think I'd like to found a colony. What is more typical is that he thinks, I would like to take and have found a colonies on the southeastern coast of Sicily. Why? Because he knows something about it. came up, where the priestess sat, where all of this came up. Well, archaeologists investigated this carefully, and the French School of Archaeology late in the nineteenth century dug everything up and concluded this was baloney. There were no gases coming up from any of this stuff, and so everybody believed for the next century. Then a young man who once sat in one of the chairs--not in this room maybe, but in which you're sitting, John Hale of the Yale Class of 1973, who is now an archaeologist at the University of Louisville. He decided to investigate this and he took with him a fine geologist from Wesleyan just to go to the place there at Delphi and to see whether it could be true that such gases did come out. They discovered evidence that, in my judgment, but I don't think really anybody doubts it anymore, that totally confirmed the Greek story. Greeks and barbarians, and everybody came to Delphi to consult the oracle. People used to bribe the priests, in order to get moved up on the front on line. The oracle probably gained its fame for being very good precisely at answering this question. The question would have been what will happen if I go and try to settle a colony at the place which I will call Syracuse. The answer would come and the priests would give a response that would be essentially straight. gotten the permission from your city to go forward, and you go to the Delphic Oracle. Next thing, you got to go home and you have to write up what amounts to a charter of foundation for the city. Recruiting is tremendously important because you need to have a certain number of settlers to make the settlement viable. So however many that is, that is what you try to recruit and you recruit typically at a time when it's easy to get people together so you can tell them the story. Syracuse is an independent polis, autonomous, self-governing, whatever regime it wants. It is not a subject of anybody, not Corinth or anybody else. The most typical, the usual, everything else is an exception is that there are friendly relations between the mother city and the apoikia, but keep in mind that they are always independent. In the Peloponnesian War, Syracuse finds itself besieged by the Athenians. They go to Corinth asking the Corinthians to please help us. The Corinthians send very little, send a couple of ships and a general, which turn out to be tremendously important. about it, because Thucydides tells us the details of it. When Potidaea got into trouble with Athens, and found itself besieged, Corinth sent a real army to go in there and fight. At the other end of the spectrum it's again Corinth and they have a colony up in the northwest called Corcyra. The first relationship between them is a navel battle, and thereafter we hear of them quarrelling and fighting with each other just about at least once a century right on down. Kagan: The question is who gave permission for a colony to go in the mother city. The best guess and that's the only thing we have. These would have been aristocratic republics at this stage of the game. Corinth always needs that kind of stuff, so we sell you our wheat, you sell us your pottery, you selling good wine that we can't grow yet and maybe never will be able to grow in our neighborhood, so on and so forth. Everybody--all of this is voluntary on both sides of every agreement. coast of Asia Minor on the west, and even around on the bottom and to some degree on the north, and on the islands in the Aegean. So, there has been a Greek--what's the word I want? There is an expansion of the Greek world already by the tenth century, and these folks are now settled down. I might point out that the way the Greeks did their immigration into Asia Minor actually had a pattern so that you can go from north to south and you will find some consistency. as powerful as it used to be, far from it. It has been conquered by now by other peoples. If you're talking about the year 750 or something like that it's in the hands of the Assyrians. So that is not territory that you can build colonies; you've got powerful empires to deal with. There is one exception. In the sixth century, the Greeks settle a single colony in the Delta of the Nile of Egypt at a place called Naucratis. It is a trading post and it's there by permission of and under the protection of the King of Egypt. In the period we're talking about there are no Romans that you have to worry about. So, south of Rome there is a tremendous colonizing of southern Italy. Greek cities are all over the place. Lots of these towns sent colonists up north into the Dardanelles. Some of the same cities send out colonies to Sicily, so that for the real colonizing states there was no limit to where they would send people who wanted to go in those areas. It is also interesting to notice who does not colonize at this early period and the answer is all the most famous cities of Greece in the Classical Period. they never lived before and their presence has a real impact of a different degree in every place. I would say that typically their impact was greater in the west and the north than it was in the east and the south. It is inconceivable the Greeks could have developed a civilization that they did without contact with these eastern civilizations and learned a great deal from them. But what is undeniably true is that the Greeks learned very important and valuable things, and adapted what they learned through their own way of life and produced something really quite new. did not have great urban cultures and civilizations, long traditions of learning and so on. No, they weren't like that, the Greeks were ahead of them and it's evident that they borrowed stuff from the Greeks in every element of life, although it didn't shape their lives in a potent, fundamental way. Of course, another tremendously important consequence of colonization was the growth of commerce, of trade for the reasons I've already given you, but beyond that the Greeks of course, now had access to food stuffs and other things out in where they settled. is seen to be a tremendously valuable safety valve to the Americans, first as colonists, and then as independent people. Americans didn't have the kind of terrible class warfare and the terrible warfare within cities that the Europeans had experienced throughout most of their history. I mean, fundamentally, Kansas is a colony in a certain Greek sense, all of these places are. So, that's part of the story of why America had the very lucky early history that it had. And that is the proper introduction to the next topic, which I'll discuss next year. No not--it seems like a year, but it's next Tuesday actually.