Bolek Wyslouch: How do you convert a given physical system with all the forces, et cetera, into some sort of fixed form, fixed type of notation? We will discuss various interesting-- even though the system is very simple, just two masses, a spring, a little bit of gravity on top of that. The way they behave could be extremely complex, but it can be understood in terms of very simple systematic way of looking things through normal modes and normal frequencies. into a set of equations. So we have a mass, m, hanging from some sort of fixed support, another mass here, same mass for simplicity. We connect them with a string, and we know everything about this system. The spring is initially at its rest position such that when the two pendula are hanging vertically, the spring is relaxed. But if you move it away from verticality, theSpring either compresses or stretches. We assume that this is an ideal system, highly idealized. for mass 1 in our coupled system. And I could say most of the terms have to do with a motion of mass 1 itself. Mass 1 is its own pendulum. And mass 1 is feeling the effect of the spring force. So we can repeat exactly the same calculation focusing on mass 2. And then the equation which you will get will be very similar. So where m x-acceleration is equal to minus k plus mg over l times x1 plus k times x2. This is what makes those pendula coupled. me do everything. Let's write down everything in the matrix form, because it turns out that linear matrices are very useful for that. So let's introduce to them and show vector, which consists of x1 and x2. So we will be monitoring the change of this x2 as a function of time. We will introduce a force matrix k, which is equal to k plus mg over l minus k here. And then we need a third matrix, mass matrix, which simply says that masses are mass of first object is m and the other one is also m. oscillates at same frequency, both x1 and x2, undergoing motion of the same frequency. So I propose that-- so of course, we use the usual trick that anytime we have a solution in complex variables, we can always get back to real things by taking a real part. So let's plug this into our matrix calculation. And what you see here is that -- so what do we have? So this is the term, which is second time the derivative vector X. And because vector-- or vector Z really. or they go opposite. So to make it more general, I have to give some multiplicative factor there. So if I do everything, I end up with x, the mode 1 will in general have some sort of overall constant C. And the mode number 2 will be C2 cosine omega 2 times t plus phi 2 times 1 minus 1. So the superposition of x1 plus x2 gives you the most general combination of possible motion. And to describe it in specifically-- defined for a specific configuration, you will have to determine the values of alphas and phis. The motion is simply those cosines which are kind of adding up to give you this impression of rather a complicated motion. If you plug it into those equations, if you plug t equals 0, phi is equal to 0, et cetera, you will see that it works. So each of those objects effectively feels the effects of omega 1 and omega 2, but in a slightly different way. That's why their relative motions are different. And we will have time-- since on the computer, you can make things perfect. Let's do it. The magenta is normal mode number 2. And blue and the red are the actual pendula. And the motion of blue and red is simply a linear sum of the two. And this is exactly what-- this is the computer simulation that shows you that one of them is going up, the other one down, et cetera. This is for the certain combination of initial conditions. I could go change initial conditions in my program and have a different behavior. But whatever happens, I would be able to-- it will always be a combination of thetwo motions. BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: I could put it with me some spaceship, and go to a place where the gravity is different, right? Why not? So what would happen? So if gravity changes, then basically what will happen is both this term and that term will change. So let's try to see what happens on the Moon. It's a little bit not completely clear what's going on, but you see, actually the motion is kind of strange. It looks kind of messy, doesn't it? equations. Let's look at these equations here. This is mass 1 and mass 2. So I can rewrite those solutions a little bit different. And what you get is x1-- x1 of t is equal to minus x0 sine of omega 1 plus omega 2 divided by 2 times sine omega 1 minus omega 2 divide by t. So again, we did zero physics here. We just rewrote the simple trigonometric equations. But what you see is something interesting here. There is-- we have those two frequencies which are playing a role. like this. OK? So there are in fact two-- when you look at this picture, you can see two frequencies. One which is clear the oscillation of the-- high-frequency oscillation. But there's also this kind of overarching frequency of much smaller frequency, and this is what corresponds to a difference of two things. So we see this here. We see it on the pendula. But now what we are going to do is we're going to try to hear it, right? So this is a demonstration which maybe it works, maybe not. BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: We were able to set up the system, put in some of the matrix equation, kind of solved it, found two frequencies, et cetera. There is one more-- one additional trick, which you can do to describe the motion of a coupled pendula. And that is, in a sense, force mathematically, force the normal modes from sort of early on, to instead of, so far, when we talked about pendula, we describe their motion in terms of motion of number 1. what is coming out. So if I add and subtract the two original equations of motion, which I don't know if I have them somewhere, and you can look back, then you end up having those crossed terms drop out. And you have one, which has only this coefficient, the other one which has that coefficient. And this immediately-- and it looks-- if I now write it in terms of normal coordinates, then I have that m u1 double dot is equal to simply minus mg over l, u1, and m u2 double dot. All right? So no, the determinants needed no matrices, no nothing. We just added and subtracted the two equations, and things magically separated.