Ahern: I have never had an exam where I had fewer questions. There were maybe 10 questions I got on the exam and that was for a class of this side. I find most students are honest. I've only had a handful of situations where in this class, where I've had dishonesty as an issue. The only students I've ever had with serious dishonesty issues actually were in smaller classes interestingly enough. But it has happened here and I do have taped evidence when it does happen. So that's why I do it. Ahern: How can you have two apparent Kcats? and the answer is it depends on how you calculate the concentration of the enzyme. If you take Vmax and divide it by the total concentration of enzyme, you will see a reduced Kcat compared to the uninhibited enzyme. When the exams go back, there will be a key outside my door. Ahern: Have you ever offered alternate formats like putting out a 5 part exam and saying choose the 4 you want to attack? be large and I can do what you recommend there. My concern is, well, what I always see is there's a bias. Everybody decides to do this question over here. And it seems to me that when I have that bias, it suggests that all of the questions aren't equal in difficulty. But I have considered it and I have done it on some occasions. And I won't rule it out. I always reserve that as an option, but I've shied away from it for that reason. Anybody hate the exam? You can say it. Ahern: I hope everybody got how I start my lecture. I don't live consciously, I just blurt it out. Thank you for your feedback. That's not a lot of feedback, but I do appreciate feedback and I'm always happy to listen to what you have to say about exam formats. And I do take suggestions. The suggestion about having other possible choices is one, as I said, I've done and I won't rule out. But other thoughts or feedback, I'm open to 'em, very much appreciate that. a few minutes talking about today. Using genetic techniques today, it's very easy to alter the genetic code for any of these proteases and change which amino acid is presence at any given place. Doing that, researchers have changed, for example, a serine residue of 221, which is the serine, gives it its name, to an alanine. Or changing the histidine position 64 to anAlanine or changing aspartic acid at position 32 to analine. And when they do that, and they compare the activity, so this is the log of Kcat. Neil Ahern: Are there studies done on [inaudible] such as this where you can replace the serine, histidine, or aspartic acid with something other than alanine and perhaps increase the function? Student: Yes, sir. Neil: His question is what if I mean if I go from serine to alanin, at least they look similar, but they're not chemically similar. What if I change theserine to a threonine for example? Threonine also has an hydroxyl group. The question is, would I see activity? and might it even be better? Ahern: There are other types of proteases that behave very much like S1, well like serine proteases. One of these classes is known as cysteine proteased. Ahern: This class of protease is essentially identical to that of theserine protease, at least for our level of understanding. He says the aspartyl proteases, at first glance, look somewhat different. But those similarities aren't all the way through like we see with the cystine prote enzymes, he says. One of these is an enzyme we've been talking about some already, that's the carbonic anhydrase. Carbonic anHydrase can catalyze the conversion of a million molecules of substrate into product per second, per enzyme. The basic mechanisms are the same. We created a nucleophile, the nucleophile attacks the carbonyl group, the peptide bond breaks, and the pieces go their way. This business of creating nucleophiles is not unique to proteases. There are other enzymes that use nucleophile and generation of nucleophile in their catalytic mechanisms. Most enzymes have a fairly narrow pH range where they work that's ideal. Most of our body tissues are at a pH of 7 to 7.4. At pH 9, this enzyme is far more active than it is at pH 7, indicating that a very, very important step is the removal of that proton. The faster the nucleophile can form, the faster the enzyme is going to be. If the enzyme structure is stable at pH 10, the enzyme will be better at 10 than at 7. Because it's easier to make that nucleophile at 10.  restriction enzymes are enzymes that many of you have used if you've ever worked in a lab that does DNA work. Restriction enzymes catalyze the breakage of DNA double strains and specific nucleotide sequences. A restriction enzyme is a protein. That protein grabs a hold of DNA. So many proteins will grab hold ofDNA. DNA. Saw before. So you really hope, I hope you're starting to see the themes now. Restrictions enzymes are also called restriction endonucleases, I'll take either one, that's fine. is a negatively charged molecule, we would expect that to grab a hold of DNA, perhaps positive or neutral, we certainly wouldn't expect the protein to be negatively charged because it wouldn't interact very well with DNA. The enzyme grabs a hold the DNA molecule and what it does is it literally slides down the DNA molecules. When the enzyme is bound to that proper site, the enzyme goes "oh, whoa!" and it bends. The DNA molecule is physically bent at that point. Now that bending turns out to be critical for the catalytic action.