More than half of large US firms plan to use AI within the next year to automate tasks that were previously done by staff in a bid to cut costs boost profits and make their work more productive. The New York Times reports that generative AI could automate activities equivalent to 300 million full-time jobs around the world. open ai's chief executive that's Sam mman says governments will need to assume the bulk of responsibility in supporting workers AI labor market disruptions and the question will employees just end up training AI systems only to them be replaced by them. We're going to focus on the impact of AI on the world workplace and how some are now fighting back around the world and the UK. There's also now a concern that intelligent chatbots could replace roles that have traditionally relied on a more human touch things like customer service or call center center. We're also going to speak to one reporter who's been researching the threat posed to workers and how they are now fight back around world. We'll also be looking at how we can make AI valuable for everybody and not just the usual people who profit from technology. And we're going back to AI decoded to see if we can teach AI how to do our own jobs. A Goldman Sachs estimate that AI could automate the equivalent of up to 300 million full-time jobs. Some workers are feeling the effects of that already and they're starting to ask who is going to protect us. What entities are stepping in to take responsibility for retraining or providing opportunities for workers whose jobs might be entirely eliminated by AI technology and call center workers in particular are are clamoring to get answers to that question. We'll talk about the case study because you've met with the worker there particularly who was subject to that. A lot of workers want to feel that their voices are part of the process in deciding how AI is going to be used. Popular sentiment toward unions in America right now is at the highest point it's been in decades. You're seeing Union drives at companies like Starbucks and Amazon many companies that hadn't previously been unionized. People are hoping that this kind of momentary shift of power toward unions will turn into a more long-term and sustained power moment for unions. Could we see that that cultural change happening not just in the US but even more widely across the globe? bringing AI to the table and one last quick question a lot of the times when we talk about Job losses as a result of AI it's like in the pyramid we're looking at lower level jobs or maybe middle level jobs could we flip it on its head and say could we actually replace CEOs or Executives and actually end up having AI run companies and just get rid of those High expensive salaries altogether absolutely I think when chat GPT emerged people sort of had to throw out the door any preconceived notions they had about what jobs were most at risk because of automation.