RAFAEL JARAMILLO: All right, let's talk about intermediate phases and line compounds. So I want you to recall intermediate phase in a three-phase system. And I'm going to recall it visually, and we're going to remember what the free-energy composition diagram looked like in such a case. All possible common tangents are going to converge at the same point. That point is x of B equals n. That's that one composition that we find in nature. The magnesium nickel system has a number of different phases. At high temperature, this Laves phase develops some width. It can be made as a solid solution with a very, very narrow range of solid solubility. But when you drop down to low temperature, both of these intermediate phases appear as line compounds. These are very distinct structures, and they're only occurring at very distinct compositions. Even though this is an extended solid, it's extended with fixed stoichiometry. And there are examples of these compounds forming an infinity of compounds. agencies around the world have developed in the last century. There are certain silicon-based bronzes that have been developed for that application. Silicon's not an intermediate phase, but it is a line compound. The solid silicon phase appears to have no equilibrium solubility of copper. Doping semiconductors is why we're able to talk to each other over Zoom. The fact that you can dope some metals into silicon is as important as it gets. It's not just an academic point. Without doping, there is no semiconductor devices. be in the parts per billion. But they're rarely above parts per trillion. So on the last P set, you're going to do some problems around doping semiconductors. So I do want to point that out. There's always a solution. What about this one? This is gallium arsenic system. And so gallium arsenide and alloys, thereof-- which we don't show here-- are the basis for all optoelectronics and photonic technology. But likely, some part of the data between me and you is carried by fiber optic. field of power electronics. Silicon carbide is one of the leading candidates. If the idea of a power substation is a thing of the past, it will be due to silicon carbide and similar high-power electronics that are being developed today. This last one, this is a big old mess. This is the titanium-sulfur system. It has sulfur, which is a liquid below 500 C and melts at 20, and titanium, which doesn't melt till 1,670. RAFAEL JARAMILLO: I don't need solution models because nature doesn't form solutions. So what do I need instead of solution models? AUDIENCE: Just the taut rope, like, the lines. RAFAEL: Yeah. All I need is a number to represent the free-energy change on forming silicon carbide. I just need that point. And similarly, carbon from carbon doesn't take any energy to form. So it's simplified. It's simplified a lot. we have these composition variables. We're familiar with that. The equilibrium condition, the equilibrium condition dG equals 0 satisfied by common tangents. Now let's imagine two line compounds. B3A2 and B4A3. How did I come up with that? Well, I sketched an imaginary phase diagram, and then I had to follow through on my sketch. And the point is not the complicated thing. It's really, I have some two-phase region down here at low temperature. RAFAEL JARAMILLO: I want to introduce this and get this in your minds. Let's imagine reacting metal M with 1 mole of oxygen to form an oxide. So zM plus O2 gas reacting to form MzO2. What's z? How do I determine z? Anybody? Does anyone know some oxides? Name for me a common oxide that you know. And these oxides are line compounds. That z is not a variable. We're going to use this property of being line compounds in Wednesday's lecture.