Prof: You know why I am dressed up? When I do this course and when I do the first half of the French course I do a lecture on the bourgeoisie, the middle classes. Middle class was a form of self-identity that was constructed in the way being a worker was constructed, or being a noble. When you look at me dressed like this, please try to think, knowing me a little bit as you do, why it was that it meant a lot to dress like this in the nineteenth century. In the nineteenth century one of the things that happens with the French Revolution and with Napoleon is that the middle-class values seem to be something to be emulated. In using and indeed insisting on the term "middle classes," what I'm suggesting is the enormous complexity of the middle class. There wasn't just one middle class, yet the middle classes shared some cultural values and symbols in common and when challenged by ordinary people could snap back in an extremely cohesive class-based manner. The word "bourgeois" has really more cultural connotations, maybe, than objective or social categorization. The French Revolution, and here's an important point, I guess, opened the way by removing legal blocks in very many places to the career open to talents. The bourgeoisie did anything but that. Work was part of how they believed to get ahead, and getting ahead is what they wanted to do. Of course, it was always in the nineteenth century sort of classic to poke fun at bourgeois culture, and in some cases the lack of it. But there's been an awful lot of good work done on the middle classes. class lived without passion, and were philistines, and that sort of thing. The middle class formed voluntary associations, and many of these were for extremely charitable purposes, particularly in Britain. The Society for the Protection of Cruelty to Animals, these sorts of organizations really are one of the classic examples of bourgeois voluntary associations doing good things. They also get together to hang out with each other and sort of try to gauge who has more money than the other, and they get together for social reasons in the coffeehouses of England.  religion was a fundamental part of the British middle class's view of itself. The percentage of people who went to church could be exaggerated. Religion for the middle classes has a greater role in their lives than in working class cities. How do we know who is middle-class? There was a whole lot of work done in the 1970s on what they used to call the new urban history, which is counting people up. The first real censuses do not come until the nineteenth century almost everywhere. Middle-class people had enough money to leave wills, therefore, their inventories after death. That's one of the reasons we know about the explosion of print culture, because they inventoried the books that people read. The further east you get, the smaller the middle class gets. In Russia, the estimates are about two percent of the population were middle class. And, of course, they are clustered in Moscow and in St. Petersburg, and in Kiev, now Ukraine, always Ukraine but then part of Russia. At the very top there are the great bourgeoisie, the big bourgeoisie. These are people who are big financiers. Then you've got other layers of bourgeoisie. Here we have smaller bankers, not in size but in money, industrialists, merchants, these kinds of people. Lawyers rise up rapidly in popular esteem. They have access to political power. Even if they're in Prussia, a place that's dominated by the nobles who are called the Junkers, they will still have access by virtue of their wealth toPolitical power. and usefulness. The middle class likes to see themselves as useful. You find lawyers reaching in there and, slowly, doctors. Doctors increase a self-identity and become more important in the nineteenth century. Notaries have a much bigger role in Europe than they do here. Notary know where all the goodies are. When you buy property in France, by the way, if you have a mortgage you pay twelve percent right off the top goes to the notary just for holding in his office your deed. times, as you know, in the French Revolution--;the French revolutions, and in the revolutions of 1848. These folks are here, too. People are always dumping all over them needlessly. I will give you some example. If you've ever read the great French novelist--;he was paid by the word, but Balzac is really the novelist of the bourgeoisie. When he describes Paris and the seventeen to nineteen percent of the population who are increasingly living in the western part of Paris, he describes it as a jungle. This is how the people on the bottom part of this ladder viewed the demands of the working class. They want to vote, too. What is the man doing? He's counting his money. The guy at the left here is a clerk. That's a very nineteenth-century profession, as it is for every subject. The chances are that in these bad years you're going to fall down. But yet lots of people get up and the ranks of the middle class increases everywhere in the nineteenth century, in Russia, too, everywhere. son-in-law or the would-be son- in-law. The bourgeoisie didn't kiss and hug a lot. But he's got his hand draped rather daintily on the old guy's arm. He's not about to embrace him and give him a big kiss on each cheek. One day all of this stuff will be his, if he plays his cards right. They still had arranged marriages. Love could count for something, but marriages were still essentially, less so for the middle classes than for ordinary people. This is your classic Hamburg financier's apartment. You've got a domestic servant. Domestic servants cost almost nothing. It was considered to be a way of moving up the ladder to say that you had four domestic servants instead of three. There's more than one room. You'll see in a minute there's even more than two rooms. There are lots of rooms. What the middle class wants, all those people in that triangle, they want privacy. They want their own rooms. Along with that comes the piano. The notion of childhood, childhood didn't exist for ordinary people. Nobles did not send their children to public schools or even to private schools. The idea of a children's room, of having your own room or a room shared with a sibling, was something that was just inconceivable for the majority of Europeans. The middle class wants to be seen rather like the Dutch in the seventeenth century. They wait in line to go to theatres. This is all Daumauau, the piece that you're obliged to swallow after dinner. In the last one minute thirty-five seconds that remains to me, the bourgeoisie, the middle classes, want the right to bear arms. They want to be in the national guard. The national guard might hypothetically be there in case there was an invasion of France or Germany by, I don't know, some distant place, the Fins or something most unlikely. But the main reason they wanted to join the national Guard was to be able to vote. You had to be defined as a property-owning citizen to have the rightto vote. these bourgeois panicked and start going into a house full of very ordinary people and simply shooting them all. The light lines disappear with Daumier. He did another one of these after a massacre in 1848 in Rouen and it's been lost. We don't have it. The rue Transnonain, where this happened in the center of Paris, simply disappeared. It didn't quite disappear from the collective memory of people thinking about Parisian things. In conclusion, the middle classes extremely vary. They share much. They have a common material culture. They want to vote.