In automotive design Dynamics plays a very important part because it's not rigid body Dynamics it's a bunch of rigid bodies with springs the Springs are called starts with an S suspens suspensions right and there's a trade-off between how comfortable the ride is and how tightly the car handles. In Dynamics there two sides to it one is here's the system what is its trajectory going to be in other words how will its various degrees of freedom behave over time if you you know stretch it and let it go and it goes twang. a system that is not where you don't close the loop you just have a rocket you have you know boosters you fire it it goes where it wants to go that's an open loop system a closed loop system is you might have a GPS system some sort of you know gyroscope in it. Once you launch the missile it's ballistics ballistics is trajectory as in passive once you launch it it's on its own you know so the missile only the the uh the thrust is only for the first few minutes of its um journey and then it's ballistic ballistic means trajectory.  angular momentum concept is our stepping stone into Dynamics of rigid bodies because then you can start looking at two and three particles more easily. I won't have officers today only because you don't want to hear me Babel I'm really sick um but I'm also going to change my officers um several people suggest so the timing isn't right um so we'll talk about the end of class but I I might go to like a Monday off M um like later on a Monday or maybe Wednesday later or something like that. I'm referring to something with no Dimensions but with a finite Mass you know that someone asked me the other day and I just want to be sure to say this. Let's say that you have a particle Point Mass heading that way some direction and let's define its velocity we'll call it a v p okay so I have um two questions both of which you probably know the answers to the first is what is the angular momentum of that particle just from your memory go ahead say it aha. The MIT way is to do it exactly right using all the mechanisms we've used and guess what you're going to find a stray correction term which you can only ignore in some cases. torque is not always equal to rate of change of angular momentum there's a correction term there are conditions under which it's a rate of angular rate of changed momentum. I'm going to write torque on a particle with a tow because Little T looks like time so I write as a tow torque on an system write to the capital T. be clear this whole thing is this term and this is thisterm now let's let's write this The Next Step what is this what this m a acceleration of P or acceleration of p with respect to a hm H it's the force on particle P right cross product rqp yes now so I'm just going to put a dotted line so you know that that's what this is is this I don't think you'll disagree let me just write some draw some lines I'm trying to save space as I said there's a really badly designed classroom. This is a silly term but these are the two conditions yeah Q is fixed right now it just so happens that we often take angular momenta momenta about things like this point of this door about this point so AQ is z everything's good right or you know we're parallel so it vanishes but you know often it's not parallel so you need to be careful that's the point I want to make okay this term will crop up later uh and we'll we we'll it's a pesky term so way account for it or we get rid of it yep. she helps Congressional uh you know Congress analyze things from a physics point of view so you know when Katrina occurred someone asked if it would be possible to change the temperature in the when when a hurricane approaches to for example dissipate the temperature. She did some analysis and showed that you need something like a nuclear weapon but like you know the most the largest nuclear weapon ever conceived to even you know impact it by like 2% because the energy in a in a hurricane all right I told you I'd Babble all right let's do a problem here's a problem. that stuff let's let's examine it from a uh from a basic you know intuition point of view from what we studied so far first of all when is linear momentum conserved forget this in general linear momentum is conserved when what condition occurs no external Force right so let's study this guy this particle as it moves around does it feel an external Force let's do a free body diagram on this particle um o Point p as the particle moves around kind of intuitively which direction is it accelerating in kind of cental right.  linear momentum conservation is a vector equation which is the vector linear momentum is conserved right but if if it's not conserved in One Direction but there's no force in the other it's still conserve in the the other direction. So there is no torque on this particle at any point in time it's just a very long way to say listen things going in circles and the only force is radial if we take a cross product it's going to vanish which is why this is such a convenient formalism. would have to do one of two things I would have had to either calculate this term or calculate or make you know make my frame attach it to the truck. I've just done it in a very precise way okay so in the end there's no surprise the whole point is to show you they could be surprises but be careful any questions about this all right snap quiz in the next 3 minutes I want you to calculate for me the final velocity literally 3 minutes because I have toDo the dumbbell problem.  angular velocity increases with a square which is why it's so spectacular you know that I just want to write that okay so that's uh angular momentum conserved. Could have done the same thing with v it would just be proportional okay what that means is if I have the length of the cord the angular speed is going to double and the reason it's more interesting it could because when you watch a skater you know do the uh what's what's it called the twirl you know when figure skaters kind of rotate. momentum formulation actually came precisely from FAL to ma let's look at this guy what we did was I just defined terms the conservation yeah sure well this way this is the nice way to do it look angular momentum is simply f is equal to Ma you put an R cross product in front of the F and inFront of the ma that's kind of where it comes from right so effectively that's what I did but I just gave you a canned way toDo it instead of doing it. of the frame what I have now is two particle masses basically a dumbbell and they're attached rigidly by a massless bar massless and I scoot them across and it's rotating it's hurling through through you know across this rink. I'm going to try and identify understand the behavior in fact I'll make it even more complicated by attaching two rockets get it Rockets right to this thing. The Rockets are designed such that they always Point North all right so they always point in in the horizontal Direction in the on the Whiteboard. have to pick the center of mass but I pick thecenter of mass a lot of terms cancel out the rest from here on. A lot of everything we do is about get getting terms to cancel out. We'll do that but we'll do it without using any moment of inertia Concepts okay so let's write it out so we know that uh let's calculate so the what's the first thing we need to do we're going to write f is equal ma for both particles so first we will do some free body diagrams then we'll figure out accelerations of both particles. from a free body diagram point of view I'm not going to do it right now but very simply there are each bar applies a force on the part on the particle I'll do it later on because I want to the kinematics first so I'm breaking my own rule I'll doing the free body diagrams later on. I can actually just use the ultra super cool magic formula here directly I need you need have done that but we can do it brute force and just figure it out so um actually let's use the um the uh super cool formula and what we will get is the acceleration of particle p is equal to. Next week we'll pick up on this and then we'll generalize it and Define angular acceleration and moment of inertia and a more General sense okay so let's stop here because we are over time. We'll end up with essentially what what what we'll show is that the acceleration of the center of mass is uh related to the total force and the angular acceleration of  rigid body is related to torque and we will show it okay. We will then generalize the equations to a more general sense.