Professor Amy Hungerford: Today it is my great privilege and pleasure to introduce Andrew Goldstone, a TF in this course. Andrew is a fourth-year student in the Ph.D. program in English, and he is writing a dissertation on the autonomy of the work of art in modernism. On the syllabus it says that I would be presenting a lecture on censorship in this slot, but that's been suppressed. Next week I'd like you to finish the novel and then read his essay, "On a Novel Entitled Lolita" Nabokov's poem Gerontion is a spoof of a poem by T.S. Eliot's "Gerontion" Nabokov calls the poem a burlesque of Eliot's modernism. Eliot says poems should be autotelic, that means they should be an end unto themselves, Nabokovsky says. Nabokova: "The novel has as its only purpose to afford aesthetic bliss" "Modernism" doesn't mean the art, it just means the art itself, he says. and literature of the early twentieth century, especially the "high art," although its roots are definitely in the nineteenth century. In English it begins with the late novels of Henry James around 1900, in poetry with Eliot and with Ezra Pound. In prose its main exemplars in English would be James Joyce, Virginia Woolf. And you should know about this movement that it had very rapid success. So, now, here's just a list for you: eight features of literary modernism that are all important to Nabokov. For Nabokov, the highest value is originality. He says this in his last Russian novel, The Gift. "Any genuinely new trend in art is a knight's move, a change of shadows, a shift that displaces the mirror," he says. "In chess the knight doesn't move in a straight line. Unlike any other piece, it skips over pieces in the way" The strategy of the Knight's move is to frustrate your expectations, to leap over the apparently important events. Is pedophilia in itself a kind of knight's move from homosexuality? Is there another form of perverted desire hiding behind the one that's in front of us? Nabokov's relationship to this modernist past is not just the burlesque that he visits on Eliot, but also this complicated attraction and dis-identification that he works on with Proust. An element of admiration is also present, and that's really part of his relationship to Joyce. Remember that he names Joyce as the greatest master of twentieth-century prose. imitate any style; at the same time, a scrupulous attention to the banality of everyday life and all its detail; yet, the constant use of a superimposed structure. Fourthly, Joyce loves puns. So does Nabokov. This is incredibly important, and there's a direct glance at that just ahead of where you read, so don't turn here. I don't want to spoil what's coming up, but on page 221 there is a reference to--don't look, don't look--to a writer named Vivian Darkbloom plagiarizing from Joyce. in the collected poems of Lord Byron. When he had written this title and drawn an ornamental line underneath, he fell into a daydream and began to draw diagrams on the cover of the book. He saw himself sitting at his table in Bray the morning after the discussion at the Christmas dinner table, trying to write a poem about Parnell. The version of this that comes up in the novel is in the midst of Humbert's diary, and the diary itself, I should say, owes a lot to Joyce. McFate is the icon of the difference between the realistic world of Joyce and the already artificial, already aestheticized world of this novel. No one was ever really named McFate. McFate is a kind of parody of real randomness. The thing that stands for randomness in this book, the thing that looks like ordinary detail, has already been arranged to give you artistic pleasure. The artificial has taken the place of the real here, and this novel really reminds you of that all the time. LZ Granderson: The novel is a response in particular to exile. He says Nabokov's exile is a denaturalized world, where everything has to be decoded. LZ: Because Humbert is a foreigner, the suburban life of mowing the lawn is transformed into something you can laugh at, something that you can apply the knight's move on the real: fate. Lz: In that afterword to this book, Nabokovsky says he had to invent America. Nabokov's novel, Lolita, was written on road trips with his wife, Vera, who drove him around the U.S. while he was writing this novel and hunting butterflies. Nabokov will say that his private tragedy is that he had to abandon his natural idiom, his untrammeled, rich, and infinitely docile Russian tongue for a second-rate brand of English. A kind of economy, a balance between the loss of one language and a particular set of techniques that comes in its place, is the source of the most appealing writing in this book. Nabokov says the American landscape is already a work of art, already part of a European memory. "Inutile loveliness" is kind of the key word of Nabokov's technique, and he says the novel has as its only purpose to provide aesthetic bliss. So, a European artist actually appears again there, with Claude Lorrain, but kind of made strange: given that knight's move, given a new twist. So--instead of familiar, incorporated into this profoundly strange, vast landscape that gets Humbert's most appealing rhetoric. violent knight's moves, like skipping past the mother's death. Somehow this is skipped past, that--the sobs in the night. There's a kind of lost paradise of European culture which he can't get back, even with this spectacular effort in English. So, that suggests that it's not all to the good; it hasn't been saved by taking up these knight's move techniques; there's still a record of damage. And you should be skeptical of it, but then you should also ask yourself whether you can really do completely without it.