This is part 2 of a guide to clinical reasoning or how to create an accurate differential diagnosis from a patient's presentation. The patient is a 75 year old woman presenting with epigastric pain for four hours. She had moderate nausea it has refused to attempt to eat or drink anything since the pains onset because she is concerned that it will concert a vomit which she has not yet done. She denies changes in her bowel habits shortness of breath chest pain changes her skin or eye color. Her past medical history is notable for hypertension and diabetes she has had no surgeries. The patient is an elderly woman a piercer stated aged in moderate discomfort secondary to abdominal pain. Her husband is concerned about contamination from a new well that was drilled on their property for drinking water one week ago. The patient is a 75 year old woman with abdominal pain for four hours it is epigastric well localized progressed over 45 minutes is constant with no exacerbating or alleviating factors and associated with nausea from the rest of her history. She has hypertension diabetes moderate alcohol use smoking and is drinking water from a newly drilled well. well on exam she is MA in moderate distress she has a borderline temperature tachycardia and tachypnea. She has a non distended abdomen that was soft with no rebound severe epigastric tenderness and guaiac negative. The key test results are a white blood cell count to 15 normal basic metabolic panel mildly increased indirect bilirubin modestly elevated lipase normal troponin and CK and an EKG with only sinus tachycardsia. The epigastrium would obviously be the most critical anatomic region to include organs that physically lie directly underneath it. Pancreas and small bowel diseases of the stomach which caused acute abdominal pain are many but most commonly are gastritis and peptic ulcer disease in the pancreas. The major structures are of course the liver and gallbladder along with other components of the extra hepatic biliary system. The spleen can cause pain with either a splenic infarct or asplenic abscess. pain from a pulmonary embolism can be referred to the abdomen although it more typically is to the right or left upper quadrants and not the epigastric now that we have a framework we move on to the final and hardest step applying the key features to that framework so here is our framework once again and here are our key features how does one start this process the brute force method would simply be to take each diagnosis listed one at a time and review each individual key feature to decide if it impacted the probability of the diagnosis and what that impact was. weight on the lack of positional component to the symptom how about food poisoning and gastroenteritis and so we are on the same page most American doctors use the term food poisoning to refer to consumption of food terminated with preformed bacterial toxins such as that from staph aureus or bacillus cereus we use gastroEnteritis to refer. to a condition when the patient has actually contracted an active infectious disease of the gut. in developed countries is usually viral occasionally bacterial and only rarely protozoan keep in mind that this distinction between the two diagnoses may be different in your geographic region. particularly right upper quadrant tenderness along with elevated alkaline phosphatase although it's not enough to make the diagnosis likely enough to seriously consider at this point acute cholecystitis has been described as a cause of elevated lipase. The patient has no elevation of direct or conjugated bilirubin that is no evidence of jaundice the patient is simply too sick appearing for this to be biliary colic plus as it's very name implies the pain from this usually waxes and wanes instead of being constant. step four and are subsequently using now so even though we did not use the guaiac negative stool here in step five it was still an important element of the presentation and definitely worth mentioning. The last unused key feature is the most interesting it's the history of the newly drilled well depending on where you are in your training this probably did not occur to you but the combination of acute abdominal pain nausea and a possible contamination of well water is all consistent with heavy-metal poisoning specifically arsenic and lead. The most likely diagnosis for this patient is acute pancreatitis. that will increase the likelihood of. establishing the correct diagnosis sooner in outpatient hospital course you. That will. increase the chance of establishing the right diagnosis sooner. that will increase. the likelihood that you will be seen by a doctor sooner in hospital. that you. will be more likely to be admitted to hospital for treatment. that. will increase your likelihood of being seen by doctors sooner in the hospital. and that. you will have a better chance of being treated. of being diagnosed with a condition that is more serious.