Professor: Can you explain the physical significance of the crystal momentum? Professor: It's the thing that commutes with p or with x by i h bar. Professor: All the intuition you have about momentum, you can translate into intuition about the spatial variation of the phase of the wave function. The momentum is shifted by each h bar k, p naught plus h bar p l. The information about the momentum can be encoded in these spatial variations of thePhase of the Wave Function. Crystal momentum is defined from beginning, from the following property. If we have a potential v of x, which is invariant under shifting, by one lattice spacing, by some l, v of X, then this tells us that the energy operator is. invariant if we shift by l. And from this fact, we deduced via block or a la block, that the wave functions are really the energy eigenfunctions, can be written in the form e cubed is equal to e to the i q x, u of x. In describing a particle, we should use Cartesian coordinates, or should we use Spherical coordinates? Well it can't possibly matter. And so you'd better make sure in any description of your system that changing your coordinates doesn't change your results. And here, that's exactly what's going on. And that's the difference. The difference is that when you fold them up, you're imposing this periodicity and you're labeling the eigenfunctions by q and the overall number of k phases that you're subtracting off. the imaginary part, h bar over 2 m i. Well, hbar over m times the imaginary part of SI complex conjugate derivative, with respect to x, which is the current, in the x direction of SI. And we need this to be imaginary, or we will get no current. You show this in a problem set, if you have a pure, real wave function, for example. A single real exponential, that's decaying, as on the wrong side of a barrier. There isn't a single energy for a given value of q. In fact, the set of energy eigenvalue is as many as there are integers. So to specify a state, I don't just have to specify q NAUGHT, I also have to. specify N. And when you unfold this into the parabola picture, remember where these came from. These came from these curves. Came from shifting over. And the higher up you go, the more you had to shift over. E as a function of k is always going to look like that, but k is not a well-- so what is k? K is just defined as h bar squared, k squared upon 2 m is equal to e. So this doesn't tell you anything about which states you're at. It just that given an e, there's some quantity that could define k. This is a definition of k, in terms of e. What this diagram is telling you is which e's are allowed. The question is could you like re-explain how imperfections and a lattice leads to actual conduction? we just give up on quantum mechanics and say it totally failed? And so this is a totally reasonable question, and I want to emphasize something important to you. That model led to a prediction, which is that if you put a capacitor plate across a perfect crystal, then you would get no current flowing across. And that is manifestly what happens with copper. But the experimentalist comes back to you and says look dude. That is a ridiculous model because the copper isn't in fact perfect, it's messy. Professor: We know that it's true, but we want to see it. We want to feel it, so various people around the world are working on making a truly beautiful demonstration of this bit of physics. The question is really a question about quantum computation, which we'll come to next week. But, the basic question is how robust is this. And the answer is it's not robust at all. But which you can tell because everything in the real world has enough impurity that it conducts. situation, it depends on the system. And exactly how it depends is something that is an active area of research. So we know that these block oscillations are true. We see them in all sorts of different systems that are analogous. But it's one that turns out to be surprisingly difficult to tease apart. So don't throw away the model. Observe that you've modeled the wrong system. If you find a system that fits your-- that is-- that shares the assumptions of your model, that's when you ask did it work. down here in the ground state, and looking back at that band, we know that the band for that ground state looks like this. So, here it is. There's our electron. It's sitting in the lowest energy eigenstate. Is it moving? Well, it's in a stationary state. Is the expectation value of the position changing in time? No. It has some meaningful, well defined time variation of its position expectation value. In order to induce the current, I must put the electron into a higher energy state and in a particular superposition of higher energy states. In order for the light to scatter off the crystal, you must have electrons in superposition states so that they can have a dipole and absorb and radiate that energy. In order for that to happen, the light has to excite an electron across the gap. It has to give it this macroscopic amount of energy. So we have these two materials which one has the larger band gap? Diamond, because it's transparent. At in the visible. The band gap, delta e of diamond is much larger than the band gap for copper. Diamonds have to have a band gap. It must be such that when you fill up all the electrons you need for it to be neutral, there is a gap to the next energy states. You can't have a partially filled band if each band comes from a bouncy, in a single well, and each well comes with an integer number of electrons. You just-- you're stuck. In 3D, this isn't such a big deal, because those splittings are tiny. But in 1D they can't. In three dimensions, the gaps are not the same. That they do not remain constant. There's one that changes, one that doesn't. And then this guy has five. One, two, three, four, five. The story changes in a dramatic way. The deformation is where you have a sphere and you stick out your arm. So it's no longer symmetric top. So here we can have states crossing. And there's no nodes here in three dimensions. Because there's nothing preventing states from different-- in different multiplates from having the same energy. When we filled those first two bands, well, there is the first-- so the first band is now filled. And back here , we had an insulator because we had filled bands separated by gap. The gap between the filled band and the next available band. This is actually called a band insulator. Because there are other ways of being an insulators. And this is why Matt wasfing at me. So the answer is that there isn't one answer to that. But what we need is the non-zero band. It's just not a generic thing from what we've done. And it's really not for spin-less systems. On the other hand, accidental small gaps. Easy. That happens. That certainly happens. So that brings me to the last thing I wanted to talk about before getting to entanglement. So what happens to a system which is neither conductors nor insulators? They are reasonably good conductors and reasonably bad insulators. But they're not perfect. And these materials are called semiconductors. small number. And e to the minus of a small number is close to 1. So at high temperature, you're very likely to excite electrons up here. This is called a semiconductor. And there are notes on the Stellar. web page that discuss in a little more detail what I just went through and show. you how you build a transistor out of a semiconducting. OK. So that's it for band gaps. And I want to move on to the remainder, the last topic of our course. Which is going to be entanglement and quantum computation. The probability of finding the particle at point A is given by chi a squared. And similarly, the probability that we find the second particle at b is this thing norm squared. But we also studied the symmetric configuration, which was equal to 1 over root phi, root 2. This should be a correct description of many experiments, this should be totally awesome. But it's deeply disconcerting, because I could've taken these particles, put them in this entangled state, and sent one particle off to a distant planet. And my sister measures this second particle and determines what state it's in. yet another moment of serious discomfort. How can something here dramatically change the state, the configuration, the initial configuration, of a particle arbitrarily far away? Isn't that deeply concerning? And if you think about relativity, this should be all the more deeply disconcerting. So there was a person that roughly this time, a little earlier, who was troubled by this problem. And his name was Einstein. And so one of the things that's kind of amazing is that he created a thought experiment which we're going to study in detail next week. The physicist Bell had a lovely way to describe entanglement. Bell used to say, if you saw Bartelstein and you could only see one leg and that sock was pink, you knew to a certainty that the other sock was not pink. If you have a coin and you cut it in half down the-- so you've got two coin shape disks. You cut the disk in half, not-- and you have one side that's the head. And they're separated. And one gambler tries to cheat the gambling establishment by tossing in his half coin. Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen argued that the EPR paradox suggested that quantum mechanics was incomplete. They said that if you can perform a measurement, you know that quantity absolutely. But you can't do the-- so on the one hand, quantum mechanics says you can’t know physical reality to this level of precision. And on the other hand, the fact that you can do that measurement violates the relativistic picture of reality. But the question is whether or not the framework of quantum mechanics is somehow unsatisfactory in any formal sense. In 1905, Einstein publishes The Quantum Theory Of Light. By 1935, 10 years later, he's still a relatively young man. He nominated Schrodinger and Heisenberg for Nobel Prizes twice. He was aesthetically incapable of pursuing this new physics in the ways that were possible under the time that I would leave Physics. But he wasn't stupid. He had the intellectual capacity to leave the time with the possibilities of the new physics. And that's what you would do if you were Albert Einstein.