Learn how the solar cell device converts sunlight, the input energy, to some usable output energy, which is in the form of electricity, typically, from a solar panel. Learn how to minimize the amount of light reflected or not absorbed into maximizing amount of life that's actually absorbed. Learn about the duality of light, or how to think about light as a particle, or alternatively, as a quantified particle. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on MIT OpenCourseWare. The peak of the solar spectrum at 550 nanometers, somewhere around 2.3 eV. When we start looking at the wavelength dependence of absorption inside of a material, you can have, for example, in the visible range, a decreasing depth of penetration of the light with increasing energy. With x-rays, it's the exact opposite. It's because you're dealing with different types of electrons and the material. The real component of the refractive index is material-specific property. We don't have to dive too deeply into that for the purposes of the class. the interaction of light inside of a medium, inside ofa material. And we use that information to calculate engineering relevant parameters such as reflectance of light off of a surface. So I have an equation here that describes the reflectance. Let me dive a little deeper into it and try to understand what exactly that equation is telling me. So this is a method for you to gain a foothold in this new area of understanding the refractive index of a material based on something you've already seen before. If I add a coating, for instance, to a window that increases the reflectivity, then the amount of light that is able to escape from the inside to my eyes decreases. With normal incident light, there is a beautiful symmetry involved. So just the same way that I'm losing the ability to see inside, the folks inside are also losing the able to see out. So it's important to think about these processes, both in terms of their reflectance as a percentage and the magnitudes of the light involved. very simple yet very powerful formulation that describes not only the interaction of light with the solar cell material but also light through the atmosphere, light the water, many other forms of optical absorption. And for that, I'd like to call Joe up for a quick demo that will allow us to actually plot out Beer-Lambert's Law. What we're going to be doing is taking many sheets of material. This is just some polyethylene material, a little bit discolored. And we'll be inserting these panes of plastic in the middle. And as we increase the thickness of the plastic, applying good pressure in between to minimize the reflectance. another factor of 2. Why not? There's kind of this sense that it should be exponential. What don't we add some more filter in front, and we'll see what exactly this comes out to be. OK, so we notice that we have some exponential character to be decay of the intensity of the transmitted light through a medium. And the amount that's absorbed is following another trend, which is just 1 minus that. So it's the amount of light that'sabsorbed is following a curve looks something like that. by some sort of scattering intensity within the medium. The sigma here can refer to a variety of processes. That can refer. to absorption events that result in the generation of free charge. The alpha, on the other hand, is not a geometric parameter. It's an intrinsic material parameter. So if we increase the total thickness, we're going to decrease the total amount of light coming through via that exponential function. That general equation is the same one that drives the reduction of light intensity as it travels through the atmosphere. It doesn't really matter what sort of absorption process is happening inside of a material for us to calculate the amount of transmitted light. for our atmosphere than it was for these little polyethylene sheets. Because the nature of the scattering and absorption processes are very different for the atmosphere. Oftentimes we're operating in a wavelength regime of light wherein free charge is excited. But we can also keep increasing that the wavelength of light, say, out to 10 microns. And that can excite free carriers within the material-- carriers that are already excited, essentially excited them further, without generating any new free carriers inside of our material. We're going to calculate the thickness necessary to absorb 90% of the incoming light at 550 nanometers. Did anybody manage to walk all the way through that calculation? Did anybody get any other numbers for gallium arsenide? Is the thickness needed to absorb the same amount of light going to be greater or smaller? For silicon, crystalline silicon that is, with an optical absorption coefficient and order of magnitude less than galliam arsenide, is the thickness required to absorb that much light? At 800 nanometers wavelength light, the optical absorption coefficient is dropped by about an order of magnitude relative to the peak of the solar spectrum. Most of these solar cells that you see of crystalline silicon are on the order of 100 microns. The record efficiency of gallium arsenide solar cell is a few hundred nanometers thick. What could you do to your solar cell device to increase the total amount of light absorbed inside of it? Let's do something much more simple. Put reflective coating on the back. 10% of the light that didn't make it, that's going to get reflected back. So the very simplest thing we can do on the front surface is to texturize our front surface. Texturization increases the total amount of light that gets reflected, 1 minus 0.9 squared as opposed to 1 minus 1.9 to the 1. In one bounce, rather, and two trips, two optical path links through the material. And so the term optical path length is a very important term here, because the Optical path length does not have to be the thickness of the material itself. A texturized front surface increases the.probability that light will enter the device. And what it also does-- this is a secondary benefit-- is it increases the path length of the incoming light. Snell's Law is the product of the refractive index and sine of that angle, the angle relative to the surface normal. So a simple way to think about this is when the light goes from a low index of refraction medium to a high index ofrefraction medium, light bends toward or away from the normal. most often, depending on the angle. You have what is called total internal reflection, which is this case right over here. So that's one of the reasons why you see this white spacing, the white colored material, in between the cells, is that the light gets reflected off of there. Even if the panel looks black, there are some really aesthetically pleasing solar panels out there that look completely black. They may still have white back skin, but the glass is just very good at absorbing that light and preventing it from escaping. of these two do you think is which? Why don't you turn to your neighbor quickly and chat about it without peeking at your lecture notes. Think about what would happen to the reflectivity of that front surface of the water. So if we go to a refractive index material of minus 1.3, will we change thereflectivity at all? It depends, but the answers here are shown, for this particular system. It would require sitting down and walking through the equations, but in essence right here, you're really affecting the angle at which light is coming out of the pool. Lambertian scatter is a very loosely used term in the solar industry. It is wrong by the book, but nevertheless, it's one of these things that live on in our industry. The back skins of our solar modules can quite often be Lambertian scatters. And we have a certain amount of light that comes off at some angle that will get trapped by a total internal reflection inside of a modules. And so these scattering centers off the backs of the rear sides of cells would operate more or less in the following manner. You'd have incoming light. Let's ignore front surface texturing for now. You can also texture the bus bars. The bus bars are these little metal wires right here that are collecting the charge from each of the solar cells. The light bounced here on a textured bus bar, bounced off of the glass more or less around here halfway, and then got a second chance to enter the cell over here. Obviously some of it is reflecting off so we can see it. But a lot of it's going in. optical path length by a factor 50, relative to the thickness of your material. If you have an organic material, which has a refractive index typically of around maximum 2, then that would be squared, 16. You can increase probably in the order of 20 the optical path length inside of the material through texturization. So that's a useful parameter to keep in your mind. Let me touch upon a few other forms of trapping light. We've so far just assumed that light behaves like a continuous wave, doesn't interfere with anything. Now we're going to discuss some anti-reflection effects. The absorber is the material, our photovoltaic material, the ones absorbing the sunlight and ultimately going to be generating the charge. So we want to ensure good light trapping inside it. There are fancier ways of light management as well that don't involve light trapping necessarily but light manipulation or even semiconductor manipulation. If we can eliminate the longer wavelength stuff out here, which is heat, performance of most solar cell suffers when they get hot. And so if we manage to do spectral up converting or reflect that long wavelength light away from our device, we can improve performance. surface of a material, let's say right here, then you can cause each node, each point within your material, to lag by an increasing amount, so that your wave front now bends. And that will cause the light, essentially, if you trace through the points of maximum intensity, say the pink, you'll see that the light is bent. And so it's really exciting. There's stuff coming up every day on light trapping and light management. Mostly it's for photonic devices. But they can be transferred over into solar cells as well.