The size of the ribosome is similar to the size of a rhinovirus. The structure of the mature messenger RNA is known as the 5 prime cap. There are many features in this part of the sequence that are very important for translation. They contribute to the efficiency of translation. It's part of what's known as a ribosomesome binding site. It is a large entity in the cell. And, when you do look at electron micrographs of cells, you can see these dark dots. They're big enough to see. The mature transcript, you don't translate the whole thing. A lot of this stuff is structural, functional for other reasons that contribute to the success of translation. Exonucleases might chew up enough. And they may end up chewing up your transcript, but that probably suggests that the messenger has been around too long, and it's time for it to retire to a better life, OK? So remember the poly-A tail. And this, once again, plays other functional roles with respect to being recognized as a transcript and being helped to get out of the nucleus. ones that are common to everybody, all right? So, obviously, when you look at the language of bases, one base-- if the language translated directly one base to one amino acid, we could only encode for amino acids. So it's finally deduced that three bases encoded each amino acid. That would give us 64 possible words in the language that needs to be translated. That's a lot more than we need. We only need 20 for the encoded amino acids, so 64 possibilities. We need a few more things anyway. have the ideas, but, really, the definition by doing a process known as cell-free translation where they could very carefully add components to understand how the code, the genetic code, was formulated. So that's the work that Khorana and others did. And then, later on, things started to get-- you know, these are decades of work I want to point out to you. The ribosomes were discovered. That was a decade later, the sort of details of the structure, but not the structure itself. And it was really exciting in the 2000s when Ramakrishnan, Steitz, and Yonath solved the structure of the prokaryotic ribosome. A lot goes on with the rest of the structure. It's a very important structure in the mechanisms of protein translation and synthesis. You might see it in this globular form. And I pointed out the anticodon loop. The place where the amino acid gets linked is also called the acceptor stem. And, up here, I show you that linkage. And you should-- yes? AUDIENCE: I was just going to ask, I see how the anticodons are specialized. How does the 3 prime end of the tRNA know which protein is bound? The genetic code gives you the identities of what are known as the codons, which is how we designate the triplet of nucleotides. The code is the absolute-- the sort of Rosetta Stone for translating messenger RNA to amino acid sequence using codons. The genetic code has variable bulges and shapes associated with the synthetase enzymes that I'll introduce in a minute that it recognizes, all great questions. That stuff in between has variables. That's what the genetic code is all about. The genetic code is the code that's going to be embedded within the messenger RNA. In some organisms, you start with different amino acids, but the most common start is the codon for methionine. Methionine is fairly rare. There may only be one or two more in the protein. There are several stop codons. Some are more predominant in some organisms than other. Some organisms might prefer two or three of the degenerate codons, and others may prefer a couple of the others. Cartoon form. To attach an amino acid to the 3 prime end of the transfer RNA, you have an amino Acid residue-- we're just going to go R here-- carboxylic acid, amine. And what we do is we need adenosine triphosphate to activate this chemistry. So you attach through an ester to the amino acid from the 3prime end of these transfer RNA. That's what's done. The ATP makes this chemistry feasible, but there's one more player here. And that's the enzyme that brings them all together, which is an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase. The small and large subunit is the messenger. In orange-- well, that's kind of a burnt orange-- is a sneaky little bit of the messenger, and in yellow are the transfer RNAs. And there's one more unit on here that I won't describe too much. It's a protein factor that helps all the processes occur. Generally, it's thought to help the loaded tRNA come to the ribosome, get it in place, and then go away. So it's some of these extra helper proteins that are involved. OK, so let's build a protein. The structure of the ribosome shows that nucleic acids are catalyzing a reaction. The energy is actually not provided by ATP, it's provided by GTP. ATP is important is in loading the amino acids onto the transfer RNAs. This occurs at about a rate of 20 amino acids per second, meaning you're reading about 60 bases per second. That's far faster than the rate of replication, which is far faster. It's a fascinating field, but it's a bit beyond the scope of this article. have the genetic code. Just be familiar with reading it and making sure you could pick out which amino acid might be incorporated in response to which particular codon. When proteins are made on the ribosome, they have a bit of a choice. They can get made and fold beautifully into active proteins. Occasionally, proteins misfold. Maybe the rate of synthesis is too fast, or the environment isn't right. So there will need to be mechanisms whereby proteins get degraded if they're not folded properly, but that's the story for another day. an error in the DNA that then causes anerror in the messenger RNA. Nonsense mutations are not so bad because you probably just truncate the protein. Missense mutations are where you put in the wrong amino acids. And those are the ones where you end up, in a lot of cases, with inherited diseases. And I just want to remind you of the situation in hemoglobin when we had a missense mutation, and we incorporated a valine instead of a glutamic acid, which put a drastic change in the protein that caused sickle cell anemia. would be degraded. The missense mutations are the more serious ones because you end up with a full length protein that might have a mistake in it. Am I being clear enough to everyone? Yeah? Good. OK, I am going to tell you that I'm handing over the baton to my colleague, Professor Martin. He'll take over on Monday. And these will be the lectures that will occur. I think this field is fascinating. Once you get used to the mechanics of it, it's really cool to think of how you go from DNA to RNA to folded proteins.