MIT OpenCourseWare is a free, online education platform. MIT OpenCourse Ware courses are free to download and use. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com. The weekly News Quiz pits students against each other to test their knowledge of events in the news. The winner will receive a free copy of MIT Open CourseWare for their next class. Back to the page you came from. Click here to return to the newsquiz page. The Rolex Center is such an iconic building that it also serve a kind of a prestige function, to put the institution on the map in terms of it's a statement. We have a student center here at MIT. People go there to do their banking, their eating, their meeting, and so forth. So we could spend a lot of time on these, but really crisply refining and thinking about the concept is very, very important. So let me very quickly go through the refrigerator case study to show how do we transition from concept to design. deliver that value you need to design the product, the product system and the product object, and understand the operand, the thing that is being operated on or transformed by the primary value delivery process. So for food, I think we briefly talked about this before. Usually people will say, when you think about a refrigerator, keep the food cold. But if you step back and think about it in a more abstract way, it's really about preserving food or reducing the spoilage rate of the food. In order to chill, we need a chiller, and there are different types of chillers, like a cooler or refrigerator. The combination of this specific way you're going to operate the system is what we call concept. Once we have that, we can start managing complexity, decomposing function and form. Design, then, selects the actual values for those design variables, and then optimize the cooler and then the refrigerator for those values, if we look at the example of a cooler. Swiss refrigerators are much smaller than those in the U.S. The form function mapping in the refrigerator is actually much simpler than the cooler. The real complexity comes in when you look at the form form mapping. That's the decomposition of the refrigerator in terms of all the elements of form and then how they relate to each other. Next week, we'll talk about concept selection: finding systems that do the right thing and do it well, deliver value and comply with regulations, standards, and so forth. The NASA approach is basically described in the system engineering handbook in the SE engine as step 3 called logical decomposition. So the idea that we need to partition the system and then derive lower-level technical requirements. And then do functional and performance analysis to see whether you have enough detail. And if yes, then you can select that as a baseline, if not, you might have to go back to the red box, which means that architecture didn't work. We have to look for a different decomposition or different architecture. which I'm going to mention, but we're not going to do as part of the class, which is stimulants. So this is the idea that somehow people are more creative when their brain, when you put yourself into some other state. bio-inspired design would be you go in nature, or you read books about seashells and animals and you really try to understand from nature. Random inputs, provocations, challenges, and then things like alcohol, and even drugs. So I'm just telling you that there is this idea that you can stimulate creativity in these different ways. There are some rules for how to properly do brainstorming, and some of them are listed here. There's an ideal group size, and it says 5 to 10 here, but I should probably revise this to be-- what do you think? 7 plus minus 2. Participants take turns expressing thoughts, suggestions, ideas. And then there's this killer sentences you should never say during a brainstorming session, some of which are pretty funny. The idea there is produce a large amount and diversity of ideas. of thinking, these seven principles have been extracted. And then you can say, well, which of these do I feel really resonate with me? All right. Let's move to some of the structured processes for creativity. So the first one is probably the simplest and the one that's used the most. This is known as a morphological matrix. The idea there is that you try to define what are the key features, factors, or decisions that you have to make when you define a concept or an architecture. set. So now be unchained, and within the constraints that are set by the competition, come up with different concepts. And in the homework, what I ask you to do in A3 is try out at least two different techniques, a structured one and an unstructured one and then compare the results. And this will be due in two weeks, and you will have to do it in two hours. And so, in the next two weeks you will be doing your homework.