HONG LIU: So if you want to compute, say, some scattering amplitude from alpha to beta-- so alpha's some initial state and beta's some final state. Say alpha consists of momentum p1 and PN-- or pm, and beta, say momentum p m plus 1 and pn. And then you can get this scattering amplitude just by taking your momentum-space correlation function, OK, for the n points. So this is obtained by doing a Fourier transform. So any questions on this? Yes? AUDIENCE: So can you explain again why this diagram, like, you have one branch and then there's a loop? that sign in the initial state come from. And the same thing with the final state, so for the final. state, then you need to look at the phi x acting on the left to this, and then you do the. Fourier transform. So this explains the sign. It's just from whether you act on the initial. state or act on final state. Good? So-- yes? AUDIENCE: Right, so time-ordering of x1 to xn right here? HONG LIU: Yeah. It-- of course, when you derive that, it matters, but here, for this argument, it doesn't matter. we truncate the external propagator, and then they don't matter at all, OK, and it's all included in this diagram. So this Z essentially just captures all these different corrections. And now you have truncated them, and so you don't need to worry about them. So Z also has an expansion, just 1 plus order lambda, et cetera, so the leading order, so Z does not contribute. OK, you can just set it to 1, and when you go to the higher order, then the Z can make a contribution. HONG LIU: This is the self-interact-- yeah, just when the-- when you have an interacting theory, so the particle can interact with itself. When the particle propagates, it actually can interacts with the virtual particle. And so that, this kind of interaction, will affect the property of the propagation but can have the most effect by prefactor, but actually can change the mass, too. In principle, now in principle you can treat any interacting theory. So now let's discuss how to describe fermions. Klein-Gordon equation, if you interpret it as a wave equation, suffers some-- suffers from some difficulties. So Dirac proceeded trying to correct those difficulties, to overcome those difficulties. It turns out that the Dirac equation solved the first problem, OK, but didn't really solve the second problem. So nowadays, we interpret this this is the-- gives the field theory for-- OK, so of course, Dirac didn't know this, so essentially, he discovered this beautiful theory for the wrong motivation. Go to a different frame. OK, yeah, that's what we mean by-- just when you go to adifferent Lorentz frame, the equation, the form of the equation looks the same. Just different observers in different laboratory, they see the same equation, OK? OK, so but for this to be Lorent Z Covariant, remember, LorentZ transformation transform t to x, so immediately, you conclude that H must be first-order in spatial derivatives. OK. So the only-- then the most general way you can write it is alpha minus i. some people, you come up with this idea, you will not imagine this will work. OK, so we will see how to make this work. And so now if you want H to be Hermitian, and then you can immediately conclude-- so that's why I put the minus i thing here, is the alpha and the beta. So m will just be some constant, OK, and here is a matrix. And then, so then he reasoned that for this equation, if we want this equation to be Lorentz covariant, then at least it should have the relativistic plane wave as its solution. The Klein-Gordon equation has the following form. So now we want it to be given by minus partial x square psi plus m square psi. OK, and m partial psi partial xi. Then you have beta square msquare psi, and then you have cross term. So cross term now has the form beta alpha i plus alpha i beta. But now remember, beta and alpha, they are not constant. They are matrices, OK, so they don't necessarily commute. So you have to be careful about the orders. HONG LIU: To satisfy them needs at least a 4-by-4 matrix, so n has to be 4. And so for example, beta can be 0, 1, 1,. OK, this one here is a two- by-two matrix, OK, and alpha i equal to 0, 0, minus sigma i. So you can check both of them satisfy those conditions. Yes? AUDIENCE: Sorry, so when you have alpha times grad psi, is it-- do you act the grad on each element of psi and then multiply by alpha? Or do you-- like, what's the order of operations? HONG LIU: I say this was really genius, because just nobody could have thought of this. OK, so this is a new object, so we call it spinor. Later we will see that this describes spin-half particles, so that's why we call them spinors. OK. So we will take-- so we will denote it as psi alpha. So alpha equal to 1, 2, 3, 4, and we-- for the moment, let's just take the most general situation. HONG LIU: If you know how to do the two halves, then you can generalize. So one half, essentially, you can-- yeah, based on onehalf, you could generalize it. So I divided these 4-by-4 matrices into four 2-by.2 blocks, and then I specify each block. And then this becomes the following equation, then the equation has the following form, gamma mu partial mu minus m psi equal to 0. And so I know this is annoying, but yeah, but this is just a fact of life. most simplest in terms of notation anyway, so that's the convention we use. So now, again, this is a matrix equation. Now let me just write it in the component form, OK, so this is in the components form. So from these two solutions of alpha and beta, we can easily work out what is the gamma and the gamma 0. And then we can write down for those two gammas, so we can generate a certain transformation. Do you know how to generate these representations? Yes? HONG LIU: I mentioned there are infinite number of such solutions, and this is just two of them. Yeah, so this is a new space, and so that's called-- this is called spinor space, yeah. Yes? AUDIENCE: How do we know that-- are these the only two representations? HONG LIu: Oh, no, no,. no. We will talk about that. OK? Good? So now let me make some remarks. OK, so in this case, the original equation just becomes partial t equal to minus i alpha i partial partial xi psi. positive definite classically. You will-- later, you will see why, OK? And this is very similar to the derivation of such occurrence in the case of the just non-relativistic Schrodinger equation because this has the same structure. And then the third point is related to the question many of you may have. So we said, what's the meaning of all these different solutions for alpha and beta or for gammas? So as I mentioned, you can have infinite number of solutions. because one is going to change the basis. So you can show any matrices which satisfy that equation, they're all related by similarity transformation. They're just corresponding to a change of basis. Different forms of the gamma, they may be useful for different purposes. OK, so it depends on which regime, sometimes you use different gamma matrices. So now having introduced the Dirac equation and then the structure of theDirac equation, but still we haven't showed that the DirAC equation is covariant. frame, partial prime square-- OK, so this means in the prime coordinates-- minus m square and phi prime evaluated at the x prime, there must be a Lorentz frame. OK, trivially, you could do that just by definitions. So now we want to show that the Dirac equation has the same property, OK, and that is much more nontrivial. Again, it's really ingenious, ingenious, yeah, but we see, actually, it works.