The Peloponnesian War was fought in 431 BC. After the war, Spartan power had grown to an unprecedented degree. For the first time there were lots of Spartans, who had lots of money. The Spartans had choices that they could take. They could either stay in the Pelop onnesus, or they could contest it in their power to control the entire Greek world in the east. Or they could have some control of the Aegean and the Hellespont. fear that the same fate they had visited upon some states that had defied them. In both places, the Athenians killed all the adult males on the island when they had finally put an end to the siege and sold the women and children into slavery. The Athenians had every reason to fear that that might be what happened to them. Instead, with Lysander very much in charge, they placed in power a small group of oligarchic Athenians just as he had the same kind of people in the rest of the empire. should be no democracy in Athens. It was an easy point of view to arrive at in 404. People who were not friendly to the democracy could simply point to the fact that the democracy had just lost this great war. And it was exactly the kind of idiotic idea that a democracy would come up with so that democracy itself was seen to be inherently wicked. The Greeks thought a division into two kinds was the right kind, the most important kind, a division between the high and the low, between the good and the bad. Critias, in any case, was determined that Athens in the future would not be a democracy. In fact, it looks like he was very much taken--again, this is typical, with the virtues of Sparta, because Sparta had won the war. Lysander agreed to the idea of making the Thirty compose of twenty men who were Critias' men, very extreme oligarchs, but allowing Theramenes, an Athenian general, who was very clearly not an old fashioned democrat. Spanish Armada was heading for England trying to gain control of the island for the Pope and Catholicism and one thing and another. A great wind came up and it blew the ships out of their path and wrecked many of them. So, from that day forward there sprang up the legend in England of the Protestant Wind, which had come along to save the new English faith against the forces of the Pope. Well, if they can invent a Protestant Wind I think it's okay for me to speak about the democratic snow that fell on Phyle. Lysander wanted to send a big army to restore the oligarchs to put his own people back in power. Sparta wanted to deprive Lysander of his power and influence and restore a more normal situation in Sparta. The Spartans did vote to send an army in there to deal with Thrasybulus, but they did not put Lysander at the head of the army or even one of his people. Instead King Pausanias was sent out to do the job. They worked out an agreement whereby a moderate group of ten would be chosen in Athens. A Roman historian of the first century B.C. wrote the following about Thrasybulus: "If excellence were to be weighed by itself, apart from luck, I believe I would rank this man first of all" A few years before 180 A.D., Pausanias the great travel writer of antiquity, wrote his guide to the famous and historic places of ancient Greece. "His is the first grave and after it comes that of Pericles," he says, "in every way the greatest of all famous Athenians"