David Kaiser: particle cosmology is a new subfield within physics. He says it studies the smallest units of matter, the fundamental forces and elementary constituents of matter. Kaiser: The field is doing pretty well these days by other measures. Its annual budget just within the U.S. is on the order of $1 billion a year, roughly, he says. It is really a booming, booming subject of study, Kaiser says. The field literally didn't even exist 45 years ago, he adds. In the '60s and '70s, scientists began to ask questions about the origin and impact of mass. The question was often framed in terms of what was called Mach's principle. Mach was a 19th century polymath whose work helped directly inspire Albert Einstein. In a moment, we'll take a look at some of the broader institutional shifts that were also coming to be very dramatic, and some of them quite unexpected, that also helped propel this new merger of fields. And then we'll zoom back in to see what were some examples of the kinds of research questions that now seemed obvious or natural to ask for members of this new hybrid area. and '60s. There was quite a different set of conversations happening around the same time. This had nothing to do, at least on the surface, with Mach's principle or even with Einstein's general theory of relativity. The challenge became very clear very quickly. These nuclear forces are self-evidently of short range, unlike gravitation or electromagnetism, which, in principle, can extend arbitrarily long distances. The idea was could have finite range nuclear forces if these force-carrying particles had a very large mass. The question of mass turns out to have been on many specialists minds in the 1950s and '60s, but as embedded in quite different-sounding conversations. The Brans-Dicke theory of gravity was put forward in 1961 by, at the time, a very young Carl Brans. Their idea was to try to go back to this notion of Mach's principle and more thoroughly account for that within a quantitative theory ofgravity. They wanted to modify Einstein's general theory of relativity in a very specific way. In Einstein's theory, the unit strength of gravity is set by some universal constant, the same constant G. Brans and Dicke were wondering was, what if that unit strength is actually not a constant? What if the strength ofgravity could vary across time and space? So one way to represent that variation was to say that this unitstrength of gravity, Newton's so-called constant, actually could vary because it was actually a dynamical field. And they put in very cleverly this extra dimensionless constant, a fudge factor, that they labeled by the Greek letter omega. Their version would depart from the ordinary behavior from general relativity. The idea is that this new form of matter, this new field phi, is extended throughout all of the universe through every nook and cranny of space. All of matter interacts with phi. It's almost like a new ether, you might say. And then the fact that phi is extended everywhere and is interacting universally is what they thought would take into account Mach's idea that the local inertial effects, the effects of this strength of local strength of gravity. At the time, a young Carl Brans and his advisor Robert Dicke was a new form of matter. They'll label it by the Greek letter phi. It extends to all of space, and everything else interacts with it. Could you have nuclear forces mediated by the exchange of particles? Could those particles themselves be very massive? So they don't go very far-- so a short-range force-- and yet, still be respecting the very symmetries for which people had invented those particles in the first place. terms by hand. You'd leave those particles massless. However, you'd add in a new additional form of matter even beyond those force-carrying particles. It's what's now called the Higgs field. That separate field isn't responsible for the nuclear forces. But it's responsible for giving everything else the masses that we measure, including force- carrying particles. When the scalar field gets anchored to some energy-minimizing value, that changes the interactions of all the fields that coupled to it. An induced mass coming from this spontaneous symmetry breaking. So now, again, you can have your symmetries and your short range. You can have his cake and eat it too. That was a lovely idea being introduced right around the same time as Brans-Dicke also as one way to try to get to this question of why do objects have mass. So these two communities saw very different things even though they use the same Greek letter phi. They were embedded in different kinds of conversations. A paper is considered technically renowned if it accumulates at least 500 citations in the scientific literature. Each of these papers-- the Brans-Dicke paper and the Higgs papers-- became technically renowned within fewer than 20 years. These papers were setting their own fields on fire. And yet, there's almost no overlap. These two communities were quite separated during this 20-year span. So you can see more than 500 each. In fact, it's 1,083 distinct papers doing the citing if you add up all the ones between these two plots. over 2% of the author pool-- cited both Brans-Dicke and Higgs usually in separate papers, but actually cited them in any of their work, again, over that first 20-year period. These are just ways to say that these two subfields really were not strongly interacting. In 1979, two separate theorists working independently of each other actually suggested that the two fields might be literally the same, not just comparable or worth considering side by side. How people assess them or what they thought they were good for was changing over time. more than just the letter that they chose. There was a lot of what we might have considered similarities. And yet, the two sets of ideas really were treated so separately. By the end of the '70s, things did not look very good for Brans-Dicke gravity experimentally. In fact, Einstein's theory was not highly favored, and that's why everyone else started paying attention on the gravity side of the field. So we might wonder, well, was it changes in data? Did experiments force a new evaluation? asymptotic freedom. And actually, it's the reason why our friend and colleague here at MIT, Frank Wilczek, received the Nobel Prize. So this was work introduced by Frank and his then advisor David Gross, and independently by a different very young grad student at the time, David Politzer. And what they found was that the strength of the strong nuclear force, that QCD force that we talked about quite a bit at the end of last class session, that the force actually decreases with the energy scale. the 16 GeV, rather than 10 to the 3 GeV. So this became a natural reason-- this is the main argument-- for particle theorists to ask about things like a very high-energy cosmology. And the phrase that was often used at the time, a gendered term, was a cosmology would provide the so-called poor man's accelerator, the poor person's accelerator. And so this becomes the main reason that's usually given, the main kind of cause for why these two previously quite separated fields of study were somehow merged. In the '60s and '70s, physicists saw a dramatic change in the kind of infrastructure for the discipline. High-energy particle physics was the field that had the most to lose or that lost the most during this reversal of fortune. The US budget for that subfield fell in half in just four years. It's not coincidental that these young theoretical physicists in particle theory had the hardest time when the trouble came, says David Frum, professor of physics at the University of California, Los Angeles. start showing up regularly on the general exams for physicists across all fields, all specialties. So now you have more and more students in their PhDs responsible to have learned something in neighboring subfields. And you see a market response as well. You see a flood of new graduate-level textbooks on general relativity on gravitation and cosmology-- twice as many published in the 1970s versus the 1960s. And in fact, even of those 1970s books, the vast majority came really in the later '70s, in the wake of these pedagogical reforms. a continuous unitary symmetry, which is like saying you could rotate the electron field by any continuum amount, and the equations remain unchanged. The photon only has to mop up a relatively simple symmetry, the U1 gauge symmetry. Whereas SU2 was what I was pointing to when I was referring to the weak nuclear force. That's a more complicated symmetry structure. And that's the symmetry group that these force-carrying particles-- the W and the Z particles-- are invented to enforce. In 1979, Anthony Zee and Lee Smolin introduced a whole new model where they didn't only cite Brans-Dicke and Higgs, they literally united them. They wanted to ask why gravity appears to be so weak compared to all the other forces. So the idea was that this local strength of gravity, Newton's constant, which goes 1 over this phi squared, would get anchored to a very small value when phi gets stuck at a relatively large value. And so when this dynamical field, this field phi, skitters around the universe, it eventually reaches some kind of lowest equilibrium state. setting the inverse gravitational field strength. So why is gravity so weak? They suggested maybe it's because it's arising from some broken symmetry. Much like the Higgs-Goldstone mechanism, the field is dynamical, but it's getting stuck. Only in the broken-symmetry phase do we experience a phenomena that we are used to. So gravity gets stuck being weak because its local strength is arising through the Brans-Dicke field getting accurate in a symmetry-breaking potential. '75. So he entered roughly 10 years after Zee had. He was roughly ten years younger. Both at Harvard, as it turns out, both at the same school, but 10 years apart. So unlike Zee, who focused pretty exclusively on particle theory as a graduate student, Smolin was actually, from the start, combining the two fields, both in the courses he took and eventually with his advising team for his thesis and for his dissertation itself. It was actually that second version that becomes more and more common. Few physicists today think Brans-Dicke theory of gravity best describes our Universe. Interest in the field grew even as it was getting experimentally less and less favored. One of the leading contenders for our understanding of the very early universe does exactly the kinds of things that Smolin and Zee had been doing, trying to unify the Brans and Higgs field. The idea that we're picking single theories and that they replace each other, I think, just misses this fine structure. Lee Smolin and his generation just was importantly different from the very excellent training that people like Tony Zee had had even just a mere 10 years earlier. And in turn, these new folks, especially people like Mike Turner and Rocky Kolb, went on to become real institution builders in their own right. So in fact, they were accelerates. Not only had they been trained to think carefully at this new interface, they helped really accelerate the trend. So it's gone from really, really just never done for nearly 20 years to now remarkable if people even question it. the hall from Alan's. And by a quirk of the old building 6, we had the same key. A single key would open the whole hallway. Couldn't get rid of it now. And one time, my parents were visiting. And I basically broke into Alan's office. They couldn't believe me when I described what it was like to try to work with this person. So I actually broke into his office to show them the safety violation, fire code violation, horror show that was the den of entropy. So that's a true story.