As more and more network addresses come into use, there is concern about the growth in the number of routing tables entries. Historically, IP addresses were organized into three commonly used classes—Classes A, B, and C. For Class A, there are 126 possible network addresses, each with nearly 17 million hosts. Slightly more than 16,000 networks may have a Class B address. Finally, there can be approximately 2 million networks with a Class C address. Each with a maximum of 254 host addresses. C address, each with a maximum of 254 host addresses. CIDR treats multiple contiguous Class C addresses as a single block that requires only one entry in a routing table. This method of IP address allocation was adopted for technical efficiency reasons. The number of IP addresses that must be maintained in each router for traffic routing purposes is substantially reduced. However, this reduces the number of addresses that can be used in a single routing table by a large enough number of routers to handle all Internet traffic. An Internet Protocol (IP) address is a number that is typically written as four numbers separated by periods. When information is sent from one network or node to another, the packet of information includes the destination IP address. Because the IP deals with inter-networking, the IP address is based on the concept of a network address and a host address. The network address indicates the network to which a computer is connected, and the host address identifies the specific computer on that network. The IP address uniquely identifies a computer connected to the Internet. host address identifies the specific computer on that network. In its memory, the router contains a “routing table’ which contains information specifying all of the IP addresses of other networks. The router compares a packet’s destination IP address with the information contained in the routing table to determine the network to which the packet should be sent. In order to ensure that packets from one network can reach any other network, the Router must include an entry for each network it is connected to. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full-text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. The list contains links to the full- texts of the documents.. GAO posts this list, known as “Today’S Reports,” on its Web site daily. E-mail us at fraudnet@gao.gov or call 1-800-424-5454. The list contains links to the full-text document files. To have GAO E-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to our home page and complete the easy-to-use electronic order form found under “To Order GAO Products” Web site: www.gao,.gov/fraudnet/f fraudnet.site daily. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO reports is to go to: www.gao.gov/news/press-releases/news-reporters-and-public-officials-get-a-look-at-what-the-general-accounting-office-is-examining. FCC believes the appropriate means to collect information on Internet backbone networks at the present time is through informal and experimental efforts, which are currently under way. Because of the trend towards convergence in the communications marketplace and the nation’s increasing reliance on the Internet, FCC may need to periodically reassess its data collection efforts. If a more formal data collection program is deemed appropriate, FCC should exercise its authority to establish such a program. We provided a draft of this report to the FCC, NTIA of the Department of Commerce, and DOJ for their review and comment. FCC and NTIA officials stated that they were in general agreement with the facts presented in the report. A trial program for voluntary reporting of outages by providers not currently required to make such reports to FCC, such as Internet backbone providers. A focus group of the Council will evaluate the effectiveness of the program upon its completion and analysis of trial data. We were told that, due to concerns by some Internet providers about reporting network outages to the FCC, some providers may not report outages. A recommendation on outage reporting of these networks will be made by the Council after it has completed its study. agreement with the facts presented in the report. Technical comments provided by FCC, NTIA and DOJ officials were incorporated in this report as appropriate. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report for 14 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to interested congressional committees, the Chairman, FCC; the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Communications and Information, Department of Commerce. We will also make copies available to others upon request. Internet backbone market appears to be competitive, but another market that is essential to the functioning of the Internet may be less so. Most ISPs and other end users connect to a backbone provider’s point of presence through the local telecommunications infrastructure. These systems are typically owned and operated by incumbent telephone companies. Many of the market participants with of the 1996 act noted that local telephone markets are, in their view, close to monopolistic; and some noted that several companies attempting to compete against incumbent local telephone carriers have recently gone out of business. Market participants described increasing choice of providers and lower prices as evidence of the competitiveness of the market. Officials also described to us factors that may reduce competition in this market or cause other problems, such as the limited number of Tier 1 providers. The manner in which Internet addresses are assigned, and the lack of control or knowledge about the movement of traffic across backbone networks. We were also told that the choice of local telephone companies providing access to Internet would be limited in rural areas. The market is expected to be more competitive in the coming years. development of new technologies and capabilities for future deployment within the Internet. According to many of the company officials we interviewed, there appears to be ample deployment of fiber optic cable in Internet backbone networks to support high bandwidth services. Concerns were expressed to us that shortcomings in the local telephone market were likely to intensify in the future due, in part, to the increase in demand for high-speed Internet services. We were told that capacity continues to be built by backbone providers and others and that backbone networks’ capacity will not be a bottleneck for the deployment of broadband applications. future due, in part, to the increase in demand for broadband applications and content. We found that some companies are offering services to address this problem by attempting to bypass incumbent telephone companies’ facilities. However, the majority of these efforts are focused on business customers in urban areas. Metropolitan fiber rings are being constructed as an alternative to using incumbent carrier services. Business customers purchase a direct connection to the fiber ring, which is connected directly to the backbone point of presence. For example, we found: limited broadband capabilities in local telephone markets could stall certain new applications. Incumbent local telephone companies have stated that the rollout of DSL service is hampered by the cost of reengineering parts of the network and existing regulations that require them to sell piece parts of their networks to competitors at cost-based rates. Legislation is pending in the 107th Congress that would address these concerns, and proponents of this legislation have said that this would help DSL roll-out in the U.S. and around the world. other high speed access lines—which are often used to link businesses (such as an ISP) to an Internet backbone point of presence. Some companies we spoke with expressed concern about slow or limited deployment of high-speed Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) service in residential areas. Incumbent local carriers, on the other hand, have stated that there is considerable competition in the provision of special access service. Wireless direct access is also becoming available that will enable a company’s data traffic to bypass local telecommunications infrastructures. for new services, such as Internet- based voice and video services, foretell a trend commonly identified as “convergence” in the broader communications sector. This expectation of greater convergence was widely shared by the market participants we interviewed for this study and for other studies we have conducted at your request over the past 3 years. There is a strong expectation that traditionally regulated services are already migrating to the Internet and will soon become common applications used by residential and business Internet users. Also, the increasing importance of the Internet to the U.S. economy. common applications used by residential and business Internet users. The implications of convergence and greater future reliance on the Internet are at present largely unknown. No evidence came to light in the course of this study to suggest that the long-standing hands-off regulatory approach for the Internet has not worked or should be modified. Further, no evidence that the hands-on regulatory approach has worked or that it should be changed in any way in the future. The Internet has evolved from a nascent but promising information tool to a 21st century medium for commerce and communications. wide geographic scope, having a network with many IP addresses, having extensive information for traffic routing determinations, and handling a large percentage of transmissions. Unlike telecommunications services, the provision of Internet backbone service is not regulated by governmental communications agencies. FCC determined that “basic services’ would be regulated, but “enhanced services” was a vibrant and competitive market that should remain free of regulation. Congress maintained this distinction when it enacted the Telecommunications Act of 1996. The FCC is expected to make a decision by the end of the year. Congress maintained this distinction when it enacted the Telecommunications Act of 1996. No provisions were contained in the 1996 act pertaining to Internet backbone services. However, the treatment of these more established communications services and infrastructures under the Communications Act of 1934 has indirectly affected the Internet medium. Also, the act provided FCC and states the authority to take actions to encourage the deployment of advanced telecommunications capability. The act sought to increase competition in other communications sectors, primarily the local telephone market. It was amended to include the Internet in the telecommunications act of 1998. concerns, and proponents of this legislation have stated that this will advance the deployment of broadband in residential and rural areas. Opponents of the legislation believe the bill will not foster increased deployment ofbroadband services and may stifle competition in the local telephone market. In the 6 years since the federal government ended its sponsorship of a key backbone network, the Internet has changed the way people of the world live, work, and play. Other bills have been introduced in Congress proposing various other approaches and strategies to accelerate the Deployment of high-speed data services. and from residential users through ISPs and directly from large business users. Once on an Internet backbone network, digital data signals that were split into separate pieces or “packets” at the transmission point are separately routed over the most efficient available pathway and reassembled at their destination point. The standards that specify most data transmissions are known as the Internet Protocol (IP) Suite. Under part of this protocol, streams of packets are routed to their destination over themost efficient pathway. Other aspects of the protocol facilitate the routing of packets to their appropriate destination by examining the 32-bit numeric.  latency and the loss of data packets due to traffic congestion is a consequence of the current protocols for transmitting Internet traffic. As transmissions of time-sensitive applications over the Internet become increasingly common in the future, these problems may become particularly acute. Before such broadband content can be provided, both the backbone and the local communications infrastructure must have sufficient bandwidth. Of adequate quality. Also, more broadband content is expected to be transmitted over theInternet.of adequatequality. A few of those we interviewed noted that these applications can run well across the Internet. control and encryption. Companies reduce reliance on backbone service by caching frequently used content on their servers. “Internet2’ is a partnership of universities, industry, and government formed to support research and the development of new technologies and capabilities for future deployment within the Internet. The Internet is not viewed as conducive to supporting research capabilities of high-speed technologies and other advanced functions, so alternative methods for such research have emerged. In addition, companies have emerged that specialize in caching frequently accessed content and storing it in varied geographic locations. New Internet services, such as video streaming and voice telephone calls over the Internet, are expected to become increasingly common in the coming years. Both Internet backbone networks and local communications infrastructure must have sufficient bandwidth and technical capabilities to support such services. In the absence of adequate information, it is difficult to fully ascertain the quality of service, the reasons for problems when they occur, and the extent of market concentration and competition in the Internet backbone market, the authors say. They say most of those with whom we spoke were optimistic that backbone about the adaptability of the Internet to new services. Companies have emerged to build and provide services over networks that do not rely as much on traffic exchange across networks. For example, a few providers are building and relying on private data networks—rather than the Internet—for the transmission of voice services. Some companies are building “virtual private networks’— networks configured within a public network for data transmissions that are secured via access control and encryption. Companies reduce reliance on backbone service—and thus, thus the sufficiency of the best efforts standard for Internet transmissions. Many companies are developing technologies to enable voice services to be provided over IP networks. At present, however, many backbone networks are not well designed to provision such “time-sensitive” services. Real-time services such as IP telephony and interactive video require “bounded delays” These services require very low and uniform delays between sender and receiver in order for the service to be of adequate quality. Also, more broadband content is expected to be available over the Internet in the coming years. telephone networks—and the quality of Internet services can be compromised when high levels of traffic flow lead to congestion. Several of the market participants we interviewed were particularly concerned about their ability to understand where and why problems have occurred. Because the Internet is a network of interconnected networks with little data available or reported on service disruptions or outages, finding the source, cause, or reason for a problem may be the source and cause of a problem. Several ISPs noted that they receive service level guarantees from their backbone provider but that collecting remuneration for “downtime” is difficult. was the difficulty of guaranteeing customers a given level of quality for Internet services. We were told that this difficulty is related to the way that the Internet is engineered. Internet traffic is exchanged among providers on a “best efforts” basis. However, the Internet was not engineered to enable extremely high quality service at all times, as are telephone networks. The quality of Internet services can be compromised at any time, according to experts who spoke to CNN and other news outlets on the condition of anonymity. NRIC V is in the process of evaluating and will report on the reliability of “packet- switched’ networks. The council is also examining issues related to interconnection and peering of Internet backbone providers. We found that participants in Internet markets have begun to address latency and reliability problems in Internet backbone networks. For example, NRIC V will be evaluating the sufficiency of the best efforts of the Internet backbone provider’s “backbone-to-backbone” network. Most companies we interviewed in rural areas purchased “transport” services to connect to an Internet backbone network. Eighteen of the 24 ISPs and 3 of the 8 end users we interviewed used transport from across such distances. The one disadvantage of distant transport noted by several providers was cost. Some company officials noted that it generally costs more to purchase transport to a distant location than it does to connected to a backbone at a local point of presence. Part, by governmental subsidy) that may actually discourage private backbone companies from entering and thriving in such markets. of the 8 end users we interviewed used transport from their location to another location for at least some of their Internet traffic. Sometimes transport was used to move data traffic to a nearby city that was not very far away. But in some cases—particularly for ISPs in rural areas—traffic was transported a few hundred miles to a point of presence of a backbone provider. The majority of officials from these companies told us that the quality of Internet service is not diminished by transporting traffic across such distances. Members of Congress are often concerned about whether telecommunications services reach rural areas. Several representatives of companies we interviewed noted that there are less Internet backbone facilities running through rural areas and fewer points of presence in those areas. As such, purchasers of backbone connectivity in rural areas may have fewer choices among providers than their counterparts in more urban locations. One point made by two rural providers is that rural areas sometimes have subsidized networks (e.g., state networks or networks funded, in part, by governmental subsidy) trade associations and three academics with expertise in this area. To obtain information from a wide variety of participants within the Internet backbone market, we visited locations in 12 states with varying characteristics. We included large and small cities and rural areas from various regions of the country. Other criteria used for selection of areas were proximity to Internet points of presence, which are access points to the Internet, and proximity to network access points (NAP), which are points where Internet backbones interconnect. Also considered were the presence of other features, including regional backbone networks, statewide educational or government networks. it generally receives a block of IP addresses from among the addresses that are assigned by ARIN to that backbone provider. This method of IP address allocation was adopted for technical efficiency reasons. It presents unique problems for smaller ISPs and other entities. If an entity seeking IP addresses cannot utilize a large block of address issued by. ARIN, the entity must obtain their addresses from. among the allocations made by ARin to their Internet backbone. provider. The method of allocating IP addresses in large blocks enables backbone routers to operate efficiently. It makes it difficult for router for traffic routing purposes is substantially reduced. Spoke also told us that it makes it difficult for smaller entities to switch backbone providers. If an ISP were to change its backbone provider, it would generally have to relinquish its block of IP addresses and get a new block of addresses from the new backbone provider. Several ISPs and end users with whom we spoke said that changing address space can be time consuming and costly. Two respondents expressed concern about the loss of their backbone provider's IP address block. We found that the degree of difficulty in changingaddress space depends on how an individual company’s computer network is configured. Two respondents expressed concern about the loss of customers due to a change of IP addresses. A few also told us that it is not uncommon for an ISP to retain a relationship with its original backbone provider. It appears, therefore, that customers’ feelings of being tied to a provider may lessen the effective level of competitiveness in this market. A concern among several market participants we interviewed was the difficulty of guaranteeing customers a given level of connectivity. Is it possible to guarantee a customer a given amount of connectivity? An ISP’s traffic connects to a backbone Internet backbone networks. Backbone providers have points of presence in varied locations. If an ISP or end user is far from a point of presence, it is able to reach distant points of Presence over telecommunications lines. Figure 1 depicts two hypothetical Internet backbone Networks that link at interconnection points and take traffic to and from residential users through ISPs and directly from large businesses. The hypothetical networks are shown in Figure 1, the hypothetical backbone networks that take traffic from and to residential users. Several ISPs and end users expressed concern about the manner in which Internet addresses are allocated. Two companies specifically mentioned that they had or were planning to move their facilities to more urban locations because of the cost of distant transport. Most ISPs and other end users do not directly obtain their own IP addresses, but they instead receive a block of IP addresses from a backbone provider. In particular, when an ISP obtains an Internet connection from the backbone provider, it also generally receives aBlock of IP Address from the Backbone. IP addresses for North America are allocated by the American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN) There are many Internet backbone providers offering service in the United States. Boardwatch reports 41 backbone providers with a national network and many other regional backbones. Approximately five to eight of these national providers are considered to be “Tier 1” backbone providers. A Tier 1 provider is defined by Boardwatch as having a network of wide geographic scope, having anetwork with many IP addresses, and many regional networks. Some Internet backbone providers value several features of NAPs. When a company interconnects at a NAP, it saves on equipment costs and administrative overhead. Representatives of two companies with whom we spoke noted that the NAP's play an important role in helping to keep the market for backbone service open for entry, and thus more competitive. NAP’s provide new backbone firms an efficient, low-cost method for exchanging traffic with numerous other providers. The term NAP refers to approximately 10 major traffic exchange points that host backbone providers. Two types of facilities are used for the exchange of data traffic by interconnected Internet backbone providers. The first type of facility, known as a “network access point” (NAP), enables numerous backbone providers to interconnect with each other at a common facility. Internet data traffic is also exchanged by backbone providers at “private” interconnections. In a ‘peering’ relationship, backbone providers exchange data destined for other providers. Two different types of financial arrangements exist among backbone providers for traffic exchanges. A NAP facilitates the interconnection of multiple backbone providers. In a “peering” relationship, backbone providers exchange data destined only for each other’s network. In the early to mid-1990s, the National Science Foundation designed and partially funded four NAPs, each of which was managed by a different company. Since that time, other interconnection points have been constructed, and for purposes such as transit payments. For more information, visit the NAP website.  congestion and poor quality of connections at the NAPs led backbone providers to engage in “private interconnection.” Private interconnection refers to the exchange of traffic at a place other than a NAP. Of 17 backbone providers with whom we spoke, 15 used both N APs and private interconnections; the remaining 2 used only private interconnection, avoiding the Naps entirely. Because of the private nature of these agreements, the number of private interConnections that currently exist across the U.S. is not known. of the 15 providers using both NAPs and private interconnection said they exchanged more than 80 percent of their traffic at private exchange points. Of the 17 companies that we met with, 10 provided estimates of how their mix of private inter connection and NAP use would likely change in the future. Nine of the 10 stated that they either plan less use of NAPS in the next few years or do not see their mix. of Naps andprivate interconnection changing. Only one company said that it was likely to make greater use ofNAPs in thefuture. Spoke said that some NAPs were not well managed. Some NAP technology was not “scalable’ — that is, beyond some level, it was very costly to increase the amount of traffic that could be exchanged. If traffic exchange at a NAP became congested, service quality could be compromised. Two typical problems that congestion causes include latency (delay in the transmission of traffic) and packet loss (when transmitted data are actually lost and never reach their destination). For example, one backbone provider told us that the loss of packets had sometimes reached 50 percent. We found that it is generally not viewed as economical for a backbone provider to peer with a less geographically dispersed backbone provider. Even if there were equal traffic flows, the larger provider will tend to carry traffic a further distance. When backbones C and D exchange traffic, C must carry the traffic much farther on the return path before it can hand off the data packets to D. The “tiering” of Internet backbone providers and the dual system of peering and transit agreements have caused controversies. In a peering arrangement, two backbone providers agree to exchange traffic destined only for each others’ networks. By the mid to late-1990s, another financial arrangement known as “transit’ emerged. While peering generally entails traffic exchange between two providers without payment, transit entails payment by one provider to another for carrying traffic. Currently, there is a segregation of backbone providers into “tiers.” The top tier or “Tier 1” providers generally peer with each other and sell transit to smaller backbone providers. We found no official data source that could provide information to allow an empirical investigation of the nature of competition in the Internet backbone market. Neither FCC nor NTIA collect data on the provision of Internet backbone services. DOJ often collects data for merger-specific analyses, but such data are not publicly available. Neither the Bureau of Labor Statistics nor the U.S. Census Bureau currently collects data directly on Internet backbone providers. The choice of local telephone companies providing access to Internet backbone networks may be limited. features, including regional backbone networks, statewide educational or government networks, state Internet Service Provider (ISP) associations, or Native American reservations. In the selected localities, we conducted 55 semistructured interviews with participants in the Internet backbone market between January and June 2001. We interviewed eighteen Internet backbone providers of varying size; two miscellaneous Internet companies that provide backbone-like twenty-four Internet size; eight end users of backbone services, including a college, a state government, corporations, and providers of content and Web hosting. for purposes of conducting interviews to support this study. In some cases, our request for an interview was declined, our telephone contacts were not returned, or we were unable to schedule an interview after repeated discussions with company officials. In addition to the information collected through interviews, we also conducted technical, legal, and regulatory research on the characteristics and competitiveness of the Internet backbone market. Each individual network or node that is connected to the Internet is identified by an Internet Protocol (IP) address—a number that is typically written. No official data sources were identified that would provide information on the structure and competitiveness of the Internet backbone market. Some backbone providers are filling market niches by offering customers additional or unique services to complement their backbone services. Some stated that it is difficult to guarantee their own clients a certain level of service if they receive few guarantees themselves. Transit customers, however, do contract for a specifiedlevel of service for such items as “uptime” — the functioning of a network without impairment or failure. telecommunications providers is collected. To investigate the degree of competition, we spoke with an array of buyers and sellers of backbone connectivity and asked questions that were designed to provide information about the competitiveness of the market. We asked questions about the availability of choice among providers in the market, the viability of purchasing transport to a distant location to connect to a backbone provider, the length of contracts for backbone connectivity, the types of service guarantees buyers receive from sellers, the ability of buyers to negotiate favorable contract terms, and the factors that were important to buyers. Senate Committee on the Judiciary asked us to report on the physical structure and financial arrangements among Internet backbone providers. We interviewed officials and obtained documents from the Federal Communications Commission, the Department of Justice, the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We also interviewed two national Internet industry trade associations and three academics with expertise in this area. If you have any questions about this report, please call me at 202- 512-2834.will also make copies available to others upon request. the world live, work, and play. Its rapid growth is seen in the substantial investments made by private sector firms in backbone networks and interconnection facilities. Internet backbone providers not only compete with each other for customers but also cooperate for the exchange of traffic. The success of the Internet, as evidenced by its growth, evolution, diversity, and cooperative structure, has occurred with minimal government involvement. It is the result of a dynamic marketplace where providers compete for customers and cooperate for traffic. It's also a result of the proliferation of interactive applications and content, and the increase in the connectivity of end users. Despite the Internet’s success and the competitiveness of the Internet backbone market, several issues of concern regarding this market were raised to us during the course of our study. Market participants noted the importance of Tier 1 backbone providers and the potential for reduced competition if consolidation were to occur at the Tier 1-provider level. The inability of backbone customers to ascertain the causes of service degradation or traffic disruptions was also expressed to us, along with concerns about the adaptability of the internet to new services. Contract terms, and the factors that were important to buyers when choosing a backbone provider. Most non-Tier 1 backbone providers stated that they can purchase transit from a backbone providers. A few ISPs and other purchasers of backbone services also noted that the extensive choice of backbone providers enables them to engage in “multihoming” The existence of approximately 40 national backbone providers may not fully reveal the competitiveness of this market. It appears that even if the “relevant” market for primary backbone connectivity is the Tier 1 providers, that market segment may be viewed as competitive. noted that, coincident with increased choice of backbone providers throughout the country, the price of backbone connectivity had declined significantly in recent years. Representatives of several companies told us that although they were presented with standard contracts by backbone providers, they were able to negotiate terms and conditions in their contracts that were important to them. A few ISP representatives with whom we met said they receive frequent sales calls from multiple backbone providers. An ISP representative noted that many backbone providers are working to increase the speed and decrease the latency of transmissions of their networks to improve their networks. Whom we spoke expressed concerns about their inability to peer with the largest providers. We were also told that peering policies should be made public. Some backbone providers with whom we spoke stated that the market is competitive, and transit rates have been decreasing. We found that some non-Tier 1 backbone providers do not want to peer With the largest backbone providers.. Some providers said they already had posted or soon would be posting their peering. policies on their Web sites or otherwise making them publicly available. The recent economic downturn in the communications sector may portend a further shakeout of backbone providers. Without quality interconnection, customers may have an incentive to buy service from the largest provider with the best-connected network. This would give the larger provider a competitive advantage, which in turn could cause the market to ‘tip’ More and more users would choose connectivity from the larger network, risking a monopolization of the industry. The FCC Working Paper and the Antitrust Division of DOJ have noted that in industries like the Internet backbone market, interconnection among carriers is critical to the quality of service consumers receive.