The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. The U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700. The GAO's Office of Inspector General is based in Washington, D.C. and has offices across the country. GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. Orders may also be placed by using fax number (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006.Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) federal agencies ineligible to receive AmeriCorps grants. The law also requires that to the maximum extent possible, the Corporation (1) increase the amount of matching contributions provided by the private sector and (2) reduce the total federal cost per participant. In response to congressional concerns over the cost of mandating the purchase and use of uniforms, the uniform package (t-shirt, sweatshirt, button, and so on) is no longer a program requirement. The Corporation has revised its grant application guidelines for programs receiving funding in the upcoming 1996-97 program year. the public and private sectors. Since we completed our review, the Congress and the Corporation have undertaken a number of measures that are intended to reduce the costs of AmeriCorps. Because many of these initiatives will not take effect until the upcoming 1996-97 program year, it is too early to determine their impact. Madam Chairman, that concludes my statement for the record. For more information about this testimony, please call Wayne B. Upshaw at (202) 512-7006 or Carol L. Patey at (617) 565-7575. hours toward an associate’s degree in the natural sciences through their service, which can lead to state certification as an environmental restoration technician. The Congress mandated new funding restrictions for the Corporation. The Corporation, after consulting with Members of Congress, has revised its grant guidelines. These new measures will only affect programs receiving grants for the upcoming 1996-97 program year. The law also makes federal agencies ineligible to receive AmeriCorps grants, making the program more cost-effective for the federal government. well as to supervise and train participants; office facilities and supplies; and materials and equipment needed in the course of conducting national service projects. Most of the Corporation’s funding for AmeriCorps*USA projects went to providing the 1,700 hours of total service was nondirect service time. The Corporation for National and Community Service. the smallest share of resources, amounting to about 12 percent (or about $41 million). Nonfederal Ameri corps* USA grantees received resources of less than $800 per participant from non-Corporation federal sources. Local government agencies to operate AmeriCorps*USA programs. Grants are based in part on the number of participants the program estimates it will enroll. If participants leave the program during the year, the Corporation may either allow the program to redirect participant the Corporation could redirect participant stipend and benefit funds to other program expenses or take back any unused portion of the grant. To ensure that federal Corporation dollars are used to leverage other resources for program support, grantees must also obtain support from non-Corporation sources. of the Corporation’s funding for AmeriCorps*USA projects went to providing operating grants and education awards. About 69 percent of all matching resources came from either a federal or a state or local government source. Non-Corporation federal funds accounted for about 50 percent of total resources available to federal grantees. The remaining in-kind contributions from sources other than the Corporation were reported to us in May 1995 as resources already received or those that program directors were certain of receiving. million) and 26 percent (about $34 million), respectively. The remaining 31 percent of matching resources were from private sources, with cash and in-kind contributions accounting for 17 percent and 14 percent. In calculating resources available on a per-participant and per-service-hour basis (see table 1), we found that the average from all sources per AmeriCorps*USA participant was about $26,654. This amounted to about $16 per service hour or about $20 per direct service hour. their first 5 months of operation and identified diverse achievements related to each service area. Participants renovating inner-city housing, assisting teachers in elementary schools, maintaining and reestablishing native vegetation in a flood control area. AmeriCorps’s legislation identified renewing the spirit of community as an objective, and the program”s mission includes “strengthening the ties that bind us together as a people” We observed several projects focused on rebuilding communities. For example, a multifamily house being renovated was AmeriCorps*USA participants showed diversity in educational, economic, and ethnic backgrounds. Participants said that a valuable aspect of the program was working with others with different backgrounds and benefiting from their strengths. Another of AmeriCorp*USA’s program objectives was to foster civic responsibility. We saw evidence of this at programs such as one where participants devoted half of each Friday to working on community service projects they devised and carried out independently. Participants at another program, in which they organized meetings to establish relationships between at-risk youth and elderly people, commented that this work had taught them how to organize programs. rebuilding communities. For example, a multifamily house being renovated was formerly a congregating spot for drug dealers. Participants of several programs we visited spanned a wide age range, from teenagers to retirees. Teams also showed diversity in educational, economic, and ethnic backgrounds. Another team built a community farm market and renovated a municipal stadium, both of which a town official said will continue to provide economic and social benefits to the community. For more information on these programs and others, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/city-building-programs-rebuilding-communities. to earn one or the other before using the education award. In one program, a general equivalency diploma (GED) candidate was receiving classroom instruction and individual tutoring. A larger program that recruited at-risk youth, most of whom do not have high school diplomas, provided classroom instruction related to the service that participants performed, such as a construction-based math curriculum. Program officials said most of the participants are enrolled in the program and will be able to earn their GEDs. Programs offer participants the chance to get postsecondary academic credit. One program offered participants the option of pursuing an environmental studies curriculum. Another program allowed participants to earn 36 credit hours toward an associate’s degree in the natural sciences through a natural sciences curriculum. Program officials said most of the participants are enrolled in high school equivalency courses and that at least five have already passed the GED test. The program is affiliated with a private college and costs $10,000 a year. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The Corporation has also increased the grantee’s share of total program operating costs from 25 to 33 percent for grants awarded for the 1996-97 program year. The guidelines also encourage programs to seek additional funding only for education awards. Total resources available means many things. It means cash and in-kind contributions that pay participants’ living allowances, social security taxes, health insurance, child care, and the education awards they earn. The Corporation’S words—“get things done.” health insurance, child care, and the education awards they earn in exchange for their service. It means resources available to pay local program staff who manage operations and supervise staff; to pay rent for office space and purchase supplies; and to pay for travel and transportation for program staff and participants. And it means resources for planning grants used to design and formalize future national service programs. The Corporation for National and Community Service is a non-profit organization based in Washington, D.C. It is funded by donations from individuals, corporations, foundations and individuals. AmeriCorps*USA is the largest national and community service program since the Civilian Conservation Corps of the 1930s. Participants earn an education award of $4,725 for full-time service or half of that amount for part- time service. Selection of participants is not based on financial need. A national service program before, during, or after postsecondary education is available. The Corporation used about $149 million of its fiscal year 1994 appropriations to make about 300 grants to nonprofit organizations and federal, state, and local government agencies. To earn a part-time award, a participant must perform 900 hours of community service within 2 years. Individuals can serve more than two terms; however, they can only receive two education awards. The awards, which are held in trust by the U.S. Treasury, are paid directly to qualified postsecondary students. The Corporation requires that programs devote some portion, but no more than 20 percent, of participants’ service hours to nondirect service activities such as training or studying for the equivalent of a high school diploma. work had taught them how to organize programs, experience they believed would be helpful as they took on roles in their communities. Training periods included conflict resolution techniques and team-building skills. Programs also supported participants in obtaining high school diplomas or the equivalent. According to Corporation regulations, a full-time participant who does not have a high school diploma or its equivalent generally must agree to earn one or the other before using the education. education or job training. For more information, visit AmeriCorps*USA.