OIOS began implementing a risk management framework in 2001 for prioritizing resources. Out of 25 entities that comprise major elements of its “oversight universe,’ only three risk assessments had been completed. As a result, OIOS officials cannot currently provide reasonable assurance that the entities they choose to examine are those that pose the highest risk. The office says it plan to assign risk areas more consistently to audits proposed and carried out by OI OS officials. The company says it plans to more closely adhere to international auditing standards. OIOS’s annual reports contain references to risks facing OIOS and the UN organization. The reports do not provide an overall assessment of the status of these risks or the consequence to the organization if the risks are not addressed. For instance, in February 2005, the Independent Inquiry Committee reported that many of the Oil for Food program's deficiencies were not described in the annual reports submitted to the General Assembly. A senior OI OS official told us that the office does not have a report to assess risks and controls. the voluntarily financed UN funds and programs. OIOS audited some aspects of the Oil for Food program and identified hundreds of weaknesses and irregularities. It lacked the resources and independence needed to provide full and effective oversight of this large, costly, and complex UN effort. The program was further weakened by inadequate attention to internal controls, including establishing clear responsibility and authority and identifying and addressing program risks. In addition to oversight, an external audit of the program would have been necessary to identify and address program risks, the authors say. services with the manager of the program it intends to examine, and heads of these entities have the right to deny funding for oversight work. By denying OIOS funding, UN entities could avoid audits or investigations, and high-risk areas could potentially be excluded from timely examination. For example, the practice of allowing the heads of programs the right of deny funding to internal audit activities prevented OIos from examining high- risk areas in the UN Oil for Food program. billions of dollars were subsequently found to have been misused. OIOS formally adopted the Institute for Internal Auditors’ (IIA) international standards for the professional practice of internal auditing in 2002. UN financial regulations and rules are very restrictive, severely limiting OIOS’s ability to respond to changing circumstances and to reallocate funds to emerging or high priority areas when they arise. State fully agreed with GAO's findings that UN member states need to ensure that OIos has budgetary independence. However, State does not believe that multiple funding sources have impeded OI OS’S budgetary flexibility. OIOS is now at a critical point, particularly given the initiatives to strengthen UN oversight launched as a result of the World Summit in the fall of 2005. Effective oversight demands reasonable budgetary independence, sufficient resources, and adherence to professional auditing standards. In moving forward, the UN and OIOS will demonstrate their commitment to addressing the monumental management issues facing the United Nations. The U.S. has begun to develop and implement the key components of effective oversight. However, the office has yet to fully implement them. The Department of State stated that it welcomed our report and endorsed its recommendations. We reviewed relevant UN and OIOS reports, manuals, and program documents. We assessed the UN’s control environment for procurement, as well as the reliability of funding and staffing data. To assess internal controls in the UN procurement process, we used an internal control framework that is widely accepted in the international audit community and has been adopted by leading accountability organizations. We determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this testimony. The General Assembly mandate creating OIOS calls for it to be operationally independent. In practice, however, OIos’s independence is impaired by constraints that UN funding arrangements impose. GAO recommended that the Secretary of State and the Permanent Representative of the United States to the UN work with member states to support budgetary independence for OI OS. Both the Department of State (State) and OiOS generally agreed with our findings and recommendation.. State fully agreed with GAO’S findings that UN member. OIOS does not have a mechanism in place to determine appropriate staffing levels to help justify budget requests, except for peacekeeping oversight services. For peacekeeping audit services, OIOS has a metric—endorsed by the General Assembly—that provides one professional auditor for every $100 million in the annual peacekeeping budget. The General Assembly would have to determine the appropriate vehicle for such a new reporting requirement, according to OIos officials. OI OS assigned an additional auditor exclusively to the CMP, using funds from its regular budget. OIOS’s authority spans all UN activities under the Secretary-General. OIOS derives its funding from (1) regular budget resources and (2) extrabudgetary resources. While the UN has yet to finalize its CMP procurement strategy, to the extent that it relies on current UN processes, implementation of the planned renovation could be delayed. The U.S. State Department recommends that the Secretary of State and the Permanent Representative of the United States to the UN work with member states to more closely adhere to international auditing standards. OIOS assigned one staff member to begin researching the CMP on a part-time basis. OIOS officials requested funding to hire contractors to help evaluate the C MP, project management plan, and security upgrades. In July 2005, OI OS reported that it had two staff members researching CMP. The General Assembly has not yet decided whether to approve implementation of the Cmp. The U.S. House of Representatives is considering a resolution to require oversight of CMP implementation. The House is expected to vote on the resolution in the coming weeks. UN personnel records show that OIOS staff took a total of more than 400 training courses offered by the Office of Human Resources Management in 2005. Since 2004, OIos has subscribed to IIA’s online training service that offers more than 100 courses applicable to auditors. Although OI OS provides these professional development opportunities, it does not formally require staff training, nor does it systematically track training to provide reasonable assurance that all staff are maintaining and acquiring professional skills. OiOS policy manuals list no minimum training requirement. OIOS is dependent on UN funds and programs and other UN entities for resources, access, and reimbursement for the services it provides. OIOS negotiates the terms of work and payment for services with the manager of the program it intends to work with. 69 percent) is funded with extrabudgetary resources, which increased due to audits and investigations of peacekeeping operations, including issues related to sexual exploitation and abuse. For example, one section in the Internal Audit Division may have exhausted its regular budget travel funds, while another section may have travel funds available that are financed by peacekeeping resources. OIOS would breach UN financial regulations and rules if it moved resources between the two budgets. Since 1996, an increasing share of OIOSís total budget is comprised of extrabudgetary resources. The majority of staff (about 69 percent) is funded with extrab budgetary resources, which increased due to the rise of the U.N. peacekeeping force. OI OS would breach U.S. financial regulations if it moves resources between U.K. and UN budgets. have been misused. Some fund and program managers have disputed fees charged by OIOS for investigative services rendered. Since 2001, less than half of the entities have paid OIos in full for investigative service it has provided. According to OI OS officials, the office has no authority to enforce payment for services rendered, and there is no appeal process, no supporting administrative structure, and no adverse impact on an agency that does not pay or pays only OI SOS. For example, 40 percent of the $2 million billed by OiOS after it completed its work is currently in dispute. The United States financed construction of the original complex by providing the UN with a no-interest loan. The rest of the complex was built between 1960 and 1982 and funded through the UN’s regular budget or private donations. In December 2002, the General Assembly endorsed the CMP to renovate the UN headquarters complex. The General Assembly approved funds for the renovation in December 2002 and the project was approved by the UN General Assembly in December 2003. The renovation is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. CMP to renovate the UN headquarters complex and approved funds to further develop the conceptual designs and cost estimate. In May 2003, we reported that the resulting renovation planning was reasonable, but that additional management controls and oversight were needed. In April 2006, the UN appropriated $23.5 million to finance the renovation’s preconstruction phase. The General Assembly has not yet decided whether to approve implementation of the renovation. However, it has committed $77 million to the construction of temporary conference space and supplementary office space rental. The UN headquarters buildings in New York City are in need of renovation. Over the last 50 years there have been no major renovations or upgrades to the buildings or their systems. In September 2005, the headquarters complex was shut down and the staff sent home because a fire broke out in one of the buildings. The UN headquarters complex lacks fire sprinklers, has a deteriorating window structure, and is vulnerable to catastrophic electrical failures. The buildings do not meet current safety, fire and building codes and does not meet UN technology or security requirements. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. Maria Edelstein, Assistant Directors; Joy Labez, Pierre Toureille, Valérie L. Nowak, Jeffrey Baldwin-Bott, Michaela Brown, Joseph Carney, Debbie J. Chung. At present, the UN Procurement Service directs its vendors to file protests to the chief and then to his or her immediate supervisor. If handled through an independent process, vendor complaints could alert senior UN officials and UN auditors to the failure of UN procurement staff to comply with stated procedures. While UN procurement has increased sharply in recent years, the size of the UN‘s Headquarters Committee on Contracts and its support staff has remained relatively stable. The committee’s chairman and members told us that the committee does not have the resources to keep up with its expanding workload. relies on current UN processes, implementation of the planned renovation is vulnerable to the procurement weaknesses that we have identified. We have identified problems affecting the UN’s bid protest process, headquarters contract review committee, vender rosters, procurement workforce, ethics guidance for procurement personnel, and procurement manual. In our April 2006 report on UN procurement, we recommended that the Secretary of State and the Permanent Representative of the United States to the UN work with member states to encourage the UN to establish an independent bid protest mechanism. The UN has not established an independent process to consider vendor protests. Such a process would provide reasonable assurance that vendors are treated fairly when bidding. It would also help alert senior UN management to situations involving questions about UN compliance. The General Assembly endorsed the principle of independent bid protests in 1994 when it recommended for adoption by member states a model procurement law drafted by the UN Commission on International Trade Law. The UN’s lack of an independent bid protest process limits the transparency of its procurement process by not providing a means for a vendor to protest. The number of contracts reviewed by the committee has increased by almost 60 percent since 2003. The committee is charged with evaluating proposed contracts worth more than $200,000 and advising the Department of Management as to whether the contracts are in accordance with UN Financial Regulations and Rules and other UN policies. However, concerns regarding the committee’s structure have been raised by some members of the UN Security Council, who say the committee does not have the resources to keep up with its expanding workload. It is unclear whether the committee will be able to meet its goals by the end of the year. UN auditors conclude that the committee cannot properly review contract proposals. It may thus recommend contracts for approval that are inappropriate. Earlier this year, OIOS reiterated its 2001 recommendation that the UN reduce the committee’s caseload and restructure the committee “to allow competent review of the cases” The UN does not consistently implement its process for helping to ensure that it is conducting business with qualified vendors. As a result, the UN may be vulnerable to favoring certain vendors. An effective procurement process is one of the keys to success for any large scale construction project. The UN procurement process has been under increasing stress in recent years as procurement spending has more than tripled to keep pace with a rapidly growing peacekeeping program. Long-standing weaknesses in the UN’s procurement office have left UN procurement funds highly vulnerable to fraud, waste, and abuse. If implemented, the CMP will be a large and unique endeavor for the UN. Effective internal oversight practices will demonstrate their commitment to addressing the monumental management and oversight tasks that lie ahead. developing UN procurement policies. Because the UN is a multilateral institution, our oversight authority does not directly extend to the UN. In recognition of this factor, we conduct UN-related work only in response to specific requests from committees with jurisdiction over UN matters. Many of our ongoing or recently completed requests are both bicameral and bipartisan in nature. The UN is vulnerable to fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement due to a range of weaknesses in existing oversight, the report says. large and unique endeavor for the UN. Effective internal oversight and management of the procurement process will be necessary for the successful completion of the project. Recent UN scandals, particularly in the Oil for Food program, demonstrate the need for significant reforms in these areas. OIOS has a mandate establishing it as an independent oversight entity and to conduct oversight of the CMP. But the office does not have the budgetary independence it requires to carry out its responsibilities effectively. In addition, OI OS’s shortcomings in meeting key objectives could impact implementation of the program. to fraud, waste, and abuse. Many of these weaknesses have been identified and documented by outside experts and the UN’s own auditors for more than a decade. Sustained leadership at the UN will be needed to correct these weaknesses and establish a procurement system capable of fully supporting the UN's expanding needs. This concludes my testimony. I would be pleased to take your questions. Should you have any questions about this testimony, please contact me at (202) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov. The UN may be vulnerable to favoring certain vendors or dealing with unqualified vendors. The UN has not demonstrated a commitment to improving its professional procurement staff. Due to significant control weaknesses in the UN’s procurement process, the UN has relied disproportionately on the actions of a small number of vendors. It is not clear if the UN will ever be able to recruit and retain a qualified professional workforce. It has not shown acommitment to improving the training of its procurement staff through training, establishment of a career development path, and other key human capital practices. procurement process, the UN has relied disproportionately on the actions of its staff to safeguard its resources. Recent studies indicate that Procurement Service staff lack knowledge of UN procurement policies. Most procurement staff lack professional certifications attesting to their procurement education, training, and experience. The UN has not established requirements for procurement staff to obtain continuous training, resulting in inconsistent levels of training across the procurement workforce. UN officials acknowledged that theUN has not committed sufficient resources to a comprehensive training and certification program for its procurement staff. The UN has been considering the development of specific ethics guidance for procurement officers for almost a decade. Such guidance would include a declaration of ethics responsibilities for procurement staff and a code of conduct for vendors. In addition, the UN has not established a career path for professional advancement forprocurement staff. Doing so could encourage staff to undertake progressive training and work experiences. The UN has yet to include such guidance in its Procurement Service guidelines for procurement. Staff are currently being trained to be procurement officers. The UN has not updated its procurement manual since January 2004 to reflect current UN procurement policy. As a result, procurement staff may not be aware of changes to procurement procedures that the UN has adopted over the past 2 years. In June 2005, a UN consultant recommended that theUN develop separate guidelines in the manual for the planning and execution of construction projects. These guidelines could be useful in planning and executing CMP procurement. The UN has yet to include guidance for construction procurement into its procurement Manual.