of the programs reviewed accepted legacy software without fully identifying the sources of development. Software is also developed as part of the hardware components it is tasked with managing. This embedded software is used to control other electronic hardware products, either onboard or offboard the weapon system, and is often purchased from lower tier subcontractors. While we did not specifically ask for information on foreign suppliers responsible for embedded software, officials for two of the programs stated that this software tends to include more reused and COTS software. These officials indicated that this could limit the visibility of the software. officials indicated that this could limit the visibility of the software suppliers. acceptance testing was usually only performed to prove functionality and the software was not further evaluated to determine the actual source that developed the software code. Further, DOD and prime contractor officials told us that it is sometimes difficult to determine whether the actual hardware subcontractor developed embedded software, or if it was done by a software developer hired by that subcontractor. Most of the program offices we reviewed did not specifically track foreign software suppliers for security purposes. Foreign nationals employed by contractors or subcontractors to develop, modify, or remediate software code specifically for DOD shall each have a security clearance commensurate with the level of the program in which the software is being used. Primary vendors on DOD contracts may have subcontractors who employ cleared foreign nationals that work only in a certified or accredited environment. Software quality assurance personnel shall check software sent to locations not directly controlled by DOD or its contractors for malicious code when returned to the DOD contractors’ facilities. Vendors of COTS software that demonstrate efforts to minimize the security risks associated with foreign nationals. Programs have very little knowledge of the developers for their offboard software. Officials for 13 of the programs reviewed had almost no insight into the use of foreign developers. Even when procured directly from a known supplier, program systems could not guarantee whether additional subcontractors were used for software development. According to DOD and program officials, visibility into COTS software is limited by the willingness of the producers of that software to share information on how the code was developed. The cost of identifying and managing foreign software suppliers, especially for COTSSoftware could be substantial. Software from other applications and embedded software is often accepted without full knowledge of the source of development. Legacy, or reused code, is most prevalent when software programs are updated into newer versions or when software just requires editing and enhancing the older code rather than developing new code. When asked to produce software similar to what they have developed previously, manufacturers can use all or part of the legacy code as a basis for developing or modifying the new software. Ten of the programs reviewed accepted legacy software without fully identifying the source. program offices obtained information on software suppliers through requirements in their prime contracts. In at least two cases, program software managers became aware of foreign software suppliers while collecting information requested for this review. Program officials also said that some knowledge of foreignSoftware development was available as a result of procedures in place because their programs contained classified or technical program information. While limited information on the supplier and location of foreign entities performing software work was available from export licenses, contractors request approval directly from the State Department, which may not refer the application to DOD. Officials from one program office said they were effective in determining software suppliers at the prime and subcontractor levels. Only five of the prime contractors reported that they were required to notify the program office concerning their decisions on software subcontracting. Once a winning bidder is selected, more information is often available to the program manager. For example, contracts for 12 programs contained a requirement that the software was intended to use in the development and manufacturing phases, including potential foreign suppliers and components they were expected to provide. Aerial Vehicle, Joint Helmet Mounted Cueing System, Joint Strike Fighter, Patriot Missile System, Tactical Tomahawk Missile, and Wideband Gapfiller Satellites. To learn more about program practices for managing and mitigating the use of foreign-developed software, we solicited information and documentation from the prime contractor for each system using contacts provided by program office officials. We received information from 15 of the prime contractors through written responses, on-site interviews, and other means such as telephone conversations. obtained several security and software related documents such as the Program Protection Plan, the Software Development Plan, and other program specific documents. John Neumann, Brian Mullins, Delores Cohen, Shelby S. Oakley, Christopher Miller, Gary Middleton, and Marie Ahearn made key contributions to this report. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Homeland Security's official website at: http://www.dhs.gov/cybersecurity. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. a greater reliance on software to provide more weapon capability when hardware limitations are reached. As such, DOD weapon systems are subject to many risks that arise from exploitable software vulnerabilities. Software code that is poorly developed or purposely injected with malicious code could be used to disrupt these and other DOD information systems. DSS specifically noted a concern with exploitation or insertion of malicious code with the use of foreign research facilities and software development companies located outside the United States working on commercial projects related to classified or sensitive programs. There was a significant increase in suspicious attempts by foreign entities to access U.S. technology and information. Information systems technology was the most sought after militarily critical technology by these entities. Forty-four countries were associated with attempts at accessing U.s. information technology, with 33 percent of the activity coming from foreign government-sponsored or affiliated entities. Access to these technologies by potential adversaries could be detrimental to the United States' defense industry and national security, according to the report by the National Security Agency. classified and export-controlled information and technology by establishing procedures to manage such access. For example, the National Industrial Security Program Operation Manual establishes mandatory procedures for the safeguarding of classified information. It generally limits access to U.S. citizens with appropriate security clearances and establishes eligibility policies for contractors determined to have foreign ownership, control, or influence. Further, an additional DOD directive requires programs containing classified military information to have controls to prevent the unauthorized release of this information to foreign recipients. In addition, the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) controls foreign U.S. entities, including defense contractors, may apply to the Department of State for authorization to export controlled information and technology to qualified foreign recipients. DOD estimates that it spends about 40 percent of its Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation budget on software. DOD and industry experience indicates that about $8 billion of that amount may be spent on software in fiscal year 2003. The International Traffic in Arms Regulations controls foreign access to defense articles and services through the establishment of the export license and authorization process. Assessment/Control Plan and the Program Protection Plan address the risks associated with the potential release of information to foreign governments. Documents do not provide information on specific suppliers who will be performing work, such as software developers. It evaluates the risk of releasing critical military capability or sensitive information and technology against the benefit of the sale to the United States. The plan also outlines the planning requirements for the possible release of sensitive information to the foreign entities involved in cooperative programs or purchasing military equipment. The documents also outline the risk assessment procedures for releasing sensitive information. Onboard software is that which actually runs the weapon system. Program offices were most knowledgeable about the foreign-developed software for the onboard portions of their programs. Because onboard software is the most critical for meeting mission requirements and other program goals, program managers placed greater importance on onboard software. None of these programs could fully identify all foreign- developed software for their systems. Six program offices had significant knowledge of foreign software developers. The knowledge program managers had was based on the function of the software being developed, the manner in which it was acquired, and the specific handling requirements. and contractors reported very little knowledge about the level of foreign involvement for offboard software. This software, sometimes referred to as ground based, interacts with the onboard system to provide updated information in support of operational activity. Offboard software is often used to check for errors or malicious code and to produce, maintain, or verify onboard software. Program officials from 10 of the programs we reviewed indicated they had verylittle knowledge of the offboard component of their programs. For example, one program uses standard mission planning software that interacts with onboard flight software. To protect the United States, DOD relies on a complex array of computer-dependent and mutually supportive organizational components. These systems are, in turn, connected with other systems operated by contractors, other government agencies, and international organizations. In addition, performance requirements for weapon systems have become increasingly demanding, and breakthroughs in software capability have led to a greater reliance on software to provide more weapon capability, the agency says. The U.S. Department of Defense is responsible for protecting the nation's national security. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. weapon systems based on recommendations from DOD officials and on our internal knowledge of the systems. While our selection of programs cannot be generalized to the population of all DOD systems, the systems selected varied by product type, represented each of the military services, and represented a range of DOD contractors. The systems reviewed were the Abrams System Enhancement Package, AH-64D Apache, Bradley Upgrade, C-130 Avionics Modernization Program, C/17 Globe Master, Comanche Reconnaissance Attack Helicopter (RAH-66) and F/A-18 Super Hornet. development and include practices such as pilot programs for providing information on software metrics. The Tri-Service Assessment Initiative began in 1999 to strengthen software acquisition and development as well as address repeated performance shortfalls attributed to software. Task forces conducted detailed assessments of software-intensive programs to identity potential improvements. DOD has also begun policy-level initiatives focused on better software management and on identifying and specifying software security processes and technologies to protect systems and network capabilities from various internal and external threats. Specific initiatives include the following: conducted detailed assessments of software-intensive programs to identity potential improvements in overall software acquisition processes. A source selection criteria working group is tasked with clarifying the policy onSource selection criteria for software intensive systems and the application of software product maturity measures. Another working group has been tasked with developing a proposal for a centralized clearinghouse of software best practices, but DOD has not approved any proposals. In October 2003, the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Networks and Information Integration) established the position of Deputy Director for Software Assurance. Contractors expected to ensure quality and security on their systems because their software development processes are more mature than those required by DOD. Such practices could indirectly address foreign software risks. Through dedicated software testing, teams assess the quality of the software to uncover gaps and make it as defect-free as possible. However, on eight of the programs we reviewed, decisions on the amount of software code to test were made based upon the risks and benefits to the functionality of the system to be tested, not on the benefits to security. DOD and SEI officials said that the. amount of effort needed to comprehensively test every line of code to.  contractors for the weapon systems we reviewed had not received specific direction from program managers to address risks from foreign suppliers in software development. Officials from one contractor we interviewed that employs practices consistent with SEI’s highest level indicated that unless software security is a specific contract requirement, they would not modify their practices to address associated risks. SEI experts confirmed that the models they have developed do not include a security element and are not intended to certify that improved processes will be effective. The SEI representatives told us that rigorous software development could help improve the quality and functionality of software. Carnegie Mellon University’s Software Engineering Institute (SEI) has developed models and methods that define and determine organizations’ software process maturity. About $8 billion of that amount may be spent on reworking software because of quality-related issues. Better software development practices are seen as a way to reduce the number of software defects and therefore improve overall software quality. But alone the practices cannot be expected to address malicious software development activities intended to breach security. To underscore the importance of securing software-related products, the Office of the Assistant software development are measured and mitigated, we reviewed relevant DOD guidance, policies, regulations, and procedures. We met with software experts at the Software Engineering Institute of Carnegie Mellon University to obtain information on software development practices. In addition, we spoke with DOD officials from the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition Technology & Logistics), the National Security Agency, the Defense Information Systems Agency, and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. We also spoke with the Department of the Army, the Departmentof the Air Force and the Navy. may be tailored and, in some cases, integrated with other acquisition activities and documentation. If the program manager has not identified risks from foreign suppliers, the process cannot be expected to mitigate them. DOD also requires weapon programs to protect certain types of information during transfer of technology to foreign entities. For example, certification and accreditation processes such as DITSCAP should include verification that software development practices contain adequate security measures to address identified risks, according to the DOD Software Assurance Program officials. For. example, the Technology Assessment/Control Plan and the Program Protection Plan address the risks suppliers and adjustments to program security requirements. The Defense Information Technology Security Certification and Accreditation Process (DITSCAP) is a standardized evaluation process. This process includes a review by a designated approving official who certifies that the security features and information technology system safeguards will maintain information assurance through the life cycle of a system. The process results in an agreement between the program manager, the intended program, and the intended software supplier. The standards do not include criteria to specifically identify and manage the use of foreign software suppliers. However, DOD has developed the DITSCAP. vary across programs. DITSCAP requirements do not govern contractors in cases where the requirements were not included as part of the original contract. Program officials responsible for software development on one other program indicated that they had no knowledge of this process. In cases where DitSCAP is being implemented, the certification and accreditation process requirements are determined based on the program manager’s. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/technology/ditscap-guidance-for-contractors. Laws, requirements, and policies that are intended to provide information assurance for operational security do not fully address risks during software development. Under the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002, all executive agencies, including DOD, are required to ensure that information security policies, procedures, and practices are adequate. DOD is required to carry out an information assurance program that includes the development of essential information assurances technologies and programs. Generally, this includes a review of security features and information technology system safeguards. It sets out a process for all DOD information systems to achieve an appropriate level of confidentiality, integrity, knowledge of threats and vulnerabilities. threats, such as external hacking and unauthorized access to information systems. But they do not apply to internal threats that could affect the integrity of the software. In implementing its information assurance policy, DOD also relies on other governmentwide policies and standards. For example, DOD requires the evaluation and validation of information assurance software products such as firewalls and intrusion detection systems. This policy requires the use of one of three nationally recognized evaluation andvalidation standards. It is based on National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security Policy No. 11. information would require resources and assets beyond those of individual program managers. DOD indicated its intent to develop a database to identify, track, and maintain information on security risks from specific software suppliers. DOD agreed that it should ensure that program risk assessments include specific attention to software development risks, including those from foreign suppliers. However, DOD suggested that this might be best accomplished through collaboration between the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration and the Office for Acquisition Technology and Logistics. This seemed reasonable, and we agreed.  Require program managers, working with software assurance experts, acquisition personnel, and other organizations as necessary, to specifically define software security requirements. These requirements should then be communicated as part of the prime development contract. Require DOD to collect and maintain information on software suppliers, including software from foreign suppliers. This information should be evaluated periodically to assess changes in the status of suppliers and adjustments to program security requirements, according to the report. DOD indicated that centralized information onSoftware suppliers is necessary because the cost of collecting and maintaining this information would require resources and assets beyond those of individual DOD resources. have to be addressed later in the acquisition process. DOD agreed that software security risks should be defined for DOD weapon programs. DOD concurred with our three recommendations based on the concern that they place too much responsibility for risk mitigation on program managers. DOD stated that program managers should be able to rely on external resources to gain threat information on suppliers and that formulation and oversight of security practices should be a collaborative function among several offices within DOD. We do see the value of software assurance experts playing a critical role in defining software security requirements. Since its inception, the office has initiated working groups intended to focus on mitigating software risks and improving software security. To date, while these initiatives have presented top level findings and recommendations within DOD and in public forums, they have not externally published reports or obtained funding for implementing the recommendations. While these plans and initiatives may help to increase DOD’s focus on software security and may lead to the development and identification of software security risks, they are not ready to be externally published or funded yet. Undersecretary of Defense for Intelligence. This seemed reasonable, and we adjusted our recommendation to reflect the inclusion of other organizations. DOD agreed certification activities such as DITSCAP can assist in addressing insider threats in software development. Additional guidance is necessary to ensure that software security risks are addressed during system design and development or when selecting software sources. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees; the Secretary of Defense; the Secretaries of the Air Force, Army, and Navy; the Commandant of the Marine Corps. for security reasons. For example, prime contractors for two programs did not use foreign subcontractors for economic reasons; namely the company wanted to maintain the software expertise within the company. While restricting foreign access solely foreconomic reasons could result in a decrease in software development security risks, it might also preclude foreign suppliers that could offer new capability or lower costs to the government. In yet another case, the contractor did not want to create dedicated partitions, such as firewalls, required to prevent employees from a foreign subcontractor from accessing unauthorized information. not function as needed to allow related system components to meet mission requirements, rather than potential vulnerabilities from foreign suppliers. For these programs, security risks have generally been implemented to prevent unauthorized access to classified or technical program information. In addition, these programs employed various measures to address software security consistent with information assurance requirements. These measures included the use of password protection, firewalls, or encrypted software, but they did not always focus on risks from foreign involvement in software development. However, interpretation and implementation of this requirement can vary across programs. Software generally only becomes a concern for program managers as it begins to affect the cost or schedule of the program. It is possible that using software development practices to increase efficiency could lead to an increase in security vulnerability by encouraging the use of legacy and COTS software. For several programs we reviewed, contractors made risk identification and mitigation decisions for business reasons and to avoid additional resource burdens (i.e., cost and access) associated with incorporating foreign suppliers necessary for software development. For example, prime contractors for two programs listed “software executibility” as a program level risk. mission requirements and other program goals, program managers placed greater emphasis on the quality, functionality, and usually, the security of this software. In 9 of the systems we reviewed, either prime contractors or major subcontractors conducted software development for the onboard systems. In meeting with prime contractors, we found that while this increased their knowledge about foreign software suppliers, the information was not always shared with government program managers. If the program manager has not identified foreign software development as a program risk or threat, it will not be addressed by the process. results in an agreement between the program manager, the intended user of the system being certified, and approval authorities. The process includes a requirement for a threat assessment, but does not articulate how this information should be developed or reported. As such, it does not direct program managers to consider foreign involvement in software development as a risk or threat that needs to be addressed for information system security. In addition, while the process is mandatory, the implementation details may be tailored and, in some cases, integrated with other systems. DOD acquisition policy requires major weapon programs sale to the U.S. The plan also outlines the security requirements to prevent compromise. Each of the military services is developing plans for improving software acquisition. The improvement plans are each at varying stages of development and include practices such as pilot programs for providing software for pilot programs. The purpose of the Program Protection Plan is to identify measures to protect Critical Program Information from hostile collection efforts and unauthorized disclosure during the acquisition process. While DOD has taken steps to strengthen software acquisition practices, it has yet to implement practices to better manage software development security risks. Despite the risks associated with foreign access to defense systems, DOD acquisition policy does not require program managers to identify and manage the amount of foreign involvement for software development in weapon systems. DOD information system security requirements focus on operational software threats, rather than potential threats posed by software developers. While program managers should be allowed discretion in managing their acquisitions, they are responsible for knowing more about who is developing software and where. Unless this is done early in the software acquisition process, it cannot be included as part of software source selection and risk mitigation decisions. As the amount of software on weapon systems increases, it becomes more difficult and costly to test every line of code. DOD cannot afford to monitor all worldwide software development facilities or provide clearances for all potential software developers, especially for COTS software. Given the global nature of the software industry, which offers benefits to software cost and functionality needed by weapon systems, DOD can't exclude all foreign suppliers from its programs. In similar cases, contracting decisions might sometimes be made in favor of U.S. suppliers to avoid costs and delays. DOD initiatives have begun to recognize potential risks from foreign software suppliers. Program officials for most of the systems we reviewed did not make foreign involvement in software development a specific element of their risk identification and mitigation efforts. Risk mitigation efforts emphasized program level risks, such as meeting program cost and schedule goals, instead of software security risks. For 11 of the 16 systems, program managers have not identified foreign supplier involvement inSoftware development as a significant risk to the security of their weapon systems. The relative importance ofSoftware security in risk mitigation efforts also varied greatly across the system we reviewed. This report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. We will also make copies available to others upon request. To determine how the Department of Defense (DOD) measures the extent of foreign involvement in software development in weapon systems, we reviewed relevant DOD documents. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512- 4841. Staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix III. Carnegie Mellon University to obtain information on software development practices and risk identification and mitigation techniques used by the software industry. The Association of Old Crows (The Electronic Warfare and Information Operations Association) whose membership includes individuals and companies involved in the design and development of software used in DOD weapon programs. To document and analyze how programs specifically measure and manage their use of foreign-developed software, we identified 16 DOD weapon systems and solicited information from each program office and prime contractor. We selected these weapon systems based on recommendations from DOD officials and on