EA-6Bs are included in all aircraft carrier deployments and support the Air Force’s Aerospace Expeditionary Forces. Because of its limited numbers and high rate of use, DOD designated the EA-6B as a “low density, high demand” asset. The Navy is currently taking action to remedy EA- 6B wing fatigue and engine failures. However, because wing fatigue has continued to grow, the Navy has been unable to meet some of its training and exercise requirements. The Navy grounded over 50 engines until they could be overhauled. Premature failure of certain engine bearings caused some engines to fail. The constant deployment of this “low density” EA-6B fleet for contingency operations has contributed to its deterioration and to other maintenance- related problems. Even if problems are remedied, the Navy says it will be unable to meet force structure requirements in 2009, and 2009 and 2010. The Navy took spare parts and personnel from nondeployed squadrons to maintain readiness of squadrons deployed to Kosovo. The Navy plans to replace a total of 67 wing center sections to remedy the problem. The Navy will spend $4.4 million each for such replacements for 17 aircraft in the fiscal year 2002 budget. In 2001, the Navy also began experiencing problems with the EA-6B’s engines. Premature failure of certain parts of the aircraft could lead to groundings, a Navy official says. The U.S. Navy is programming funds for 10 more wing replacements for each year in the Future Years Defense Plan. for closing the gap in capabilities. Specific locations we visited are listed in appendix I. We performed our review from October 2001 through August 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. As you know, the head of a federal agency is required under 31 U.S.C. 720 to submit a written statement of actions taken on our recommendations to the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs and the House Committees on Government Reform not later than 60 days after the date of the report. The agency’s first request for appropriations should be made within 60 days of the release of our report. Committees on Appropriations with the agency’s first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of the report. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of the Army, Air Force, and Navy; the Commandant of the Marine Corps; and interested congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others on request. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions, please contact me on (202)512-4841. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Air Force, Army, Marine Corps, and Navy meet in Washington, D.C. Defense Intelligence Agency also meets in Washington. Defense Secretary Leon Panetta is expected to attend the meeting. The meeting will be followed by a joint statement from the White House and the Joint Chiefs. The Joint Chiefs will also hold a joint meeting with the Defense Department next week to discuss how to improve the intelligence community's ability to detect and thwart threats to U.S. national security. The Navy has been upgrading its EA-6B electronic warfare equipment. The modification program, known as the Improved Capability Program (ICAP) III, provides improved radar locating and jamming capabilities. The Navy expects ICAP III to reach initial operational capability in 2005 and to be installed on allEA-6Bs by 2010. As of January 2002, according to DOD, air defense threats. were about 94 percent complete, and the modification began testing on the first aircraft in November 2001. Congress asked DOD to conduct Airborne Electronic Attack Analysis of Alternatives for replacing the EA-6B. DOD indicated in its response to our January 2001 report that the analysis would lead to a DOD-wide strategy and balanced set of acquisition programs to address the overall gaps between suppression needs and capabilities. However, it was found that DOD has had little success in closing the gap. The Navy and the Air Force proposed options for replacing EA- 6B capabilities, and DOD is currently evaluating these proposals for consideration in 2004 budget submission. recommend any particular option. These options ranged in estimated 20-year life cycle costs from $20 billion to $80 billion. In conjunction with the analysis, the services formed a Joint Requirements Coordination and Oversight Group to coordinate operational requirements. A key activity of the group is to coordinate Navy and Air Force proposals for replacing the EA-6B. According to group members, this mechanism will help address airborne electronic attack needs through the coordination of complementary systems agreed to by the services. It will also review ongoing and planned production programs for the mission. attack needs through the coordination of complementary systems agreed to by the services. The Navy proposed to replace the EA-6B with an electronic attack version of its new F/A-18E/F fighter and attack aircraft. The Air Force proposed adapting the B-52H bomber for standoff suppression by adding jamming pods to it, plus a stand-in suppression capability. The services see these proposals as a coordinated, effective solution to the near- and far-term needs for airborne electronic attack. system or a combination of systems to operate at a distance from enemy targets. A stand-in system that would provide close-in suppression protection for attacking aircraft where the threat is too great for the standoff systems. The analysis established the capabilities of the EA-6B upgraded with ICAP III as the foundation for any future system. It presented the Navy and the Air Force with detailed models of estimated costs and capabilities of 27 mixes of new and/or upgraded aircraft to consider for follow-on electronic attack capabilities. The F-16C/Ds will be modified to carry the HARM Targeting System. The Advanced Target Pod will enable them to deliver precision-guided munitions. Once 31 additional systems are delivered in 2002, the F- 16CJs will have a total inventory of 202 systems, short of the Air Force’s original goal of 1.1 systems per aircraft, or about 240 systems. The Air Force completed the R-6 upgrade on fielded systems in December 2001 and systems subsequently produced will have it. The upgrade provides better and faster targeting information to the missile. The Air Force is procuring 30 additional F-16CJ suppression aircraft to meet force structure requirements for the Air Force’s Aerospace Expeditionary Forces. In all, 219 F- 16CJ aircraft will be available. The Air Force also plans to increase the capability of the latest model F/16C/Ds (block 40) to be used for both attack and suppression missions. To accomplish this, they will be modified to carry the EA-6B jammer pods. in 2003, and plans to fully fund the upgrade in the 2004 budget cycle. The Air Force is also upgrading the capabilities of the EC-130 Compass Call Aircraft, which perform primarily communications jamming missions. The upgrades are intended to improve the aircraft’s jamming capabilities, reliability, and maintainability. TheEC-130 is another “low density, high demand” asset with a total of only 13 operational aircraft, of which 11 are being upgraded. It is a ‘low density’ asset, with only a small number of operational aircraft. The Navy projects that the declining EA-6B inventory will be insufficient to meet DOD’s needs beyond 2009. The Air Force and the Navy have improvements underway for other systems such as the EC-130 and antiradiation missiles but face funding challenges. To the extent there are gaps in suppression capabilities, U.S. fighter aircraft and helicopters must rely on self-protection equipment to suppress enemy air defenses, but some of this equipment is not available to the Air Force or Navy. The Navy does not have enough EA-6Bs to meet DOD’s suppression needs due to wing fatigue and engine problems that have grounded aircraft. The services have some programs underway to improve this self-protection equipment, such as developing new towed decoys, but, as discussed below, these programs have been hampered by technical and funding issues. Because of its limited numbers and high rate of failure, the Navy has been forced to rely on the U.S. Air Force to suppress enemy air defenses. of only 13 operational aircraft, of which 11 are being funded for upgrade. Gaps in the services’ air defense suppression aircraft make it essential that other aircraft have the ability to protect themselves. The services have already identified serious reliability problems with current self-protection systems on U.S. combat aircraft. Most of the current systems use older technology and have logistics support problems due to obsolescence. Also, as we reported last year, the self- protection systems on strike aircraft may have more problems than the services estimate. The Miniature Air Launched Decoy (MALD) is supposed to mimic an aircraft and draw enemy air defenses away from the real aircraft. MALD had been funded by the Air Force for an initial small procurement of 300 decoys, with potential for further procurement. After experiencing technical problems, MALD did not meet user needs, and its procurement cost estimates increased. The Air Force canceled the MALD program after it was found to not meet its needs and cost estimates were increased. For more information on MALD, visit: www.mald.org. overall gaps between suppression needs and capabilities. The Navy took the lead on the joint analysis with participation by all the services. The analysis, completed in December 2001, concluded that the services needed a standoff system or a combination of systems to operate at a stand-off. It was only intended to address the airborne electronic attack aspect of the suppression mission. It did not address the acknowledged problems with aircraft self-protection systems or the technical and funding challenges of other service programs such as the Navy’s ITALD program. F-18C aircraft previously believed to be fully mission capable were subsequently found to have one or more faults in their self-protection systems. Coupled with the problems in the suppression aircraft, these shortcomings could create survivability problems for the aircraft should they encounter significant enemy air defense capabilities in some future conflict. The services have some programs underway to improve self- protection capabilities such as the joint Navy and Air Force Integrated Defensive Electronic Countermeasures (IDECM) system. The IDECM system will provide the F-15, F/A-18E/F, and B-1B. The IDECM system will provide the F-15, F/A-18E/F, and B-1B aircraft with improved self-protection through jammers and towed decoys. The PLAID system will provides aircrews with accurate location and identification of enemy air defense systems. The services expect to field both systems in 2004. They face technology challenges and/or a lack of funding priority for many of these programs. They have initiated additional research and development efforts to improve their ability to suppress enemy air defenses. have more problems than the services estimate. For example, 41 of 44 F-15C aircraft and 10 of 10 F-18C aircraft previously believed to be fully mission capable were not. The faults ranged from the identification of parts needing to be replaced inside the electronic combat systems, to the wiring, antennas, and control units that connect the systems to the aircraft. The Joint Service Electronic Combat System Tester was developed by the U.S. Air Force and the European Air Force in the 1990s. its procurement cost estimates increased. The Air Force canceled the procurement and restructured MALD to address deficiencies highlighted in the demonstration. The Navy has been developing its own decoy, the Improved Tactical Air Launched Decoy (ITALD), but it has procured only part of its inventory objective. Despite recurring congressional increases for the past several fiscal years, the Navy has not submitted budget requests for ITALDs or procured units to complete the inventory objective because of competing priorities. Also the Navy is upgrading the HARM missile used to attack shipborne and ground-based radars. The first phase of the upgrade improves missile accuracy by incorporating global positioning and inertial navigation systems into the missile. A second upgrade, the Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile, will add millimeter wave capability to allow the missile to target radars that have stopped emitting.and ground-based radars. DOD has acknowledged the gap in U.S. air defense suppression capabilities for some time and has conducted several studies to identify solutions, but it has had little success in closing the gap.  suppression aircraft such as EA-6B and the now-retired EF-111 and F-4G played a vital role in protecting other U.S. aircraft from radar-guided missile systems. Strike aircraft were normally not permitted to conduct air operations unless protected by these suppression aircraft. According to DOD, countries have sought to make their air defenses more resistant to suppression. These efforts include increasing the mobility of their surface-to-air missiles and radar equipment, connecting radars together into integrated air defense systems. EA-6Bs and EC-130s saw combat in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. Air defenses there were relatively weak compared to those faced by U.S. aircraft in Yugoslavia. This gave the EA-6B an opportunity to exploit new techniques to jam ground communications. Since our January 2001 report, the services have had some success in jamming infrared missile threats, says CNN's John Defterios. To see the rest of the report, go to CNN.com/soulmatters. When the Air Force retired the EF-111 without a replacement, the Navy's EA-6B became DOD’s primary airborne radar jammer. High demand for the aircraft has exacerbated current wing and engine problems, and the Navy has been unable to meet its overall requirements. Efforts are underway to address the EA- 6B’'s problems and improve its suppression equipment, but the Navy projects that the declining EA-5B inventory will be replaced by the EA/6B. The Institute for Defense Analyses studied problems in acquiring electronic warfare systems. The Institute found several causes for the problems, including uncertainties in characterizing rapidly changing threats and systems requirements. Other assessments have also pointed to the lack of a coordinated approach to addressing the gap in air suppression capabilities. While DOD has not established a coordinating entity to provide leadership for the suppression mission, it has not been directed to develop a comprehensive strategy and monitor its implementation.to the overall suppression needs. In addition, the Joint Requirements Coordination and Oversight Group provides a mechanism to coordinate the services’ efforts. to address the gaps that need to be filled in the enemy air defense suppression mission. The strategy should provide the means to identify and prioritize promising technologies, determine the funding, time frames, and responsibilities needed to develop and acquire systems, and establish evaluation mechanisms to track progress in achieving objectives. In written comments to a draft of this report, DOD concurred with our recommendations and supported the need for a mechanism to coordinate electronic warfare strategy and systems acquisition. DOD stated that the Office of the Secretary of Defense (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics) is currently restructuring its staff to focus on electronic warfare. The quantity and quality of the services’ suppression equipment have declined while enemy air defense tactics and equipment have improved. DOD relies on individual service programs to fill the void, but these programs have not historically received a high priority, resulting in the now existing capability gap. We reviewed pertinent DOD, service, and contractor documents addressing the status of suppression capabilities, plans for maintaining them, and potential solutions for closing the gap in capabilities. We interviewed Defense Intelligence Agency officials and reviewed related intelligence documents to ascertain the capabilities of current and future air defense systems. gap. DOD provided technical comments that we incorporated into the report where appropriate. We interviewed service program managers for the EA-6B, EC-130, F-16CJ, HARM, aircraft self-protection systems, and programs under development. We also met with officials for the Air Force, Army, Navy, and Marine Corps. DOD’s comments are reprinted in appendix II. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. a high priority, resulting in the now existing capability gap. We continue to believe that a formal coordinating entity needs to be established to bring the services together to develop an integrated, cost-effective strategy. A strategy is needed to identify mission objectives and guide efforts to develop effective and integrated solutions for improving suppression capabilities. We believe that creation of a comprehensive strategy and effective coordinating entity would strengthen DOD’s ability to compete for funding and address the gap. In addition, Congress intervened with guidance and increases to services’ budget requests for defense suppression to ensure that DOD addresses the capabilities gap. entity to provide leadership for the suppression mission, it has recognized the need for such entities in other cross-service initiatives. In October 2001, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics established a joint unmanned aerial vehicles planning task force. The task force will develop and coordinate road maps, recommend priorities for development and procurement efforts, and prepare implementing guidance to the services on common programs and functions. The air defense suppression mission continues to be essential for maintaining air superiority. Over the past several years, however, the quantity of UAVs has declined.  suppression aircraft focus on trying to neutralize, degrade, or destroy the enemy’s air defense radar equipment. Radar is the primary means used by enemy forces to detect, track, and target U.S. aircraft with missiles and guns. Aircraft launch antiradiation missiles that can search for and destroy enemy radars if they are turned on. At some risk to the aircraft and aircrews, suppression aircraft must be in the vicinity of the enemy air defenses to complete their mission.  Integrated networks provide air defense operators with the ability to track and target aircraft even if individual radar elements of the network are jammed or destroyed. Since the end of Desert Storm in 1991, U.S. suppression aircraft have been continuously deployed to protect fighter aircraft maintaining the no-fly zones over Iraq. More recently, these planes have been used to protect U.N. peacekeepers in the Mideast from attacks by al-Qaeda and the Taliban. These aircraft have also been used for air defense operations in Afghanistan and Iraq. In 1999, during Operation Allied Force in Yugoslavia and Kosovo, these aircraft were extremely important for protecting strike aircraft from enemy radar-guided missiles. These aircraft were unable to destroy their integrated air defense system because Yugoslav forces often engaged in elaborate efforts to protect their air defense assets. These efforts reduced Yugoslav opportunities to engage U.S. and coalition aircraft because their airdefense assets could not be used and protected simultaneously. Nevertheless, in two separate incidents, Yugoslav forces were able to destroy the aircraft. More recently,these aircraft have been deployed to Yugoslavia and Afghanistan. In two separate incidents, Yugoslav forces managed to shoot down an F-117 stealth fighter and a F-16CG. The inability of the United States to counter Yugoslav air defenses made it necessary for U.S. forces to (1) fly thousands of dedicated suppression missions, pushing suppression forces in Europe to their limits, and (2) raise their strike missions to higher altitudes or keep low-flying aircraft such as the Army’s Apache attack helicopters out of combat to reduce risk from infrared missile threats.