The court of appeals did not reach the merits of these allegations. Instead, the court held that U.S. courts lack jurisdiction over the claims against the Saudi defendants. The legal bases for this holding were lack of subject matter jurisdiction under the FSIA and lack of personal jurisdiction. The most significant aspects of the court of Appeals' opinion were interpretations of the FSia. The interpretation of "agency or instrumentality" under theFSIA is key to the court's decision. The opinion is published in the book, "The Court of Appeals: The Case of the Saudi Defendants," published by Simon & Schuster. Commission for Relief to Bosnia and Herzegovina (the SHC), a charitable organization operated in connection with the Saudi government; and (4) claims against a banker and Saudi princes in their personal capacities. Underlying all of the claims was the allegation that defendants had "played a critical role in the September 11 attacks by funding Muslim charities that, in turn, funded al Qaeda" The appeals court in 2008 affirmed dismissals of the first three sets of claims for lack of subject matter jurisdiction under the FSIA. regulation, and (2) the judgment or choice in question must be grounded in considerations of public policy or susceptible to policy analysis. He noted the 2005 district court decision in Terrorist Attacks I granting the defendants immunity for decisions involving which charities to fund. The previous judge had explained that "SHC's alleged misuse of funds and/or inadequate record-keeping—even if it resulted in the funds going to terrorists—was the result" of poor record- keeping, he said. He said the decision was "grounded in social, economic, and political policy" In r e Terrorist Attacks on September 11, 2001 , is a consolidated case that includes, among other claims, claims against the Kingdom of Saudi of only a subset of the claims at issue in the case. Plaintiffs in In r e terror attacks are individuals and businesses injured by the September 11 terrorist attacks. They brought claims based on state and federal tort law and various federal laws, including the Torture Victim Protection Act, for injuries suffered as a result of the attacks. The dismissed claims fall into four categories: (1) claims against Saudi Arabia; (2), claims against four Saudi princes in their official capacities; (3) claimsagainst the Saudi High Commission for Relief to Bosnia and Herzegovina. be committed by the defendant in the United States. In the case of the Saudi charities, the appellate court stated that all of the defendants' conduct had occurred abroad. The district court found that the same considerations that applied to the charities also commanded immunity for the Kingdom and the SHC. The plaintiffs, recognizing that their allegations about their alleged support for the terrorist attacks has some bearing on the application of the "entire tort" rule, appealed to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs sought to allege that the activities of certain "operational level agents and alter-egos" of Saudi Arabia within the United States in connection with the attacks are attributable to Saudi Arabia. The court found that there was an insufficient factual basis to conclude that any of these individuals were employees of Saudi Saudi Arabia acting within the scope of their employment when they carried out the allegedly tortious activities in the U.S. Neither the appellate court nor the district judge agreed with the plaintiffs' allegations. Plaintiffs argued that these Saudi defendants played a "critical role" in the September 11 attacks by giving money to Muslim groups, which in turn funded Al Qaeda. In August 2008, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed dismissals of the claims against the Saudi defendants. Part of the reasoning for the dismissals was later overturned, and the plaintiffs were permitted a second chance to bring their suit against Saudi government and government-owned charity. This a defendant to claims in a particular case, involves no "continuous and systematic" requirement; instead, it requires that a defendant's contacts with the forum "relate to" or "arise out of" the claim at issue in the case. In re Terrorist Attacks is a case consolidated for pre-trial purposes in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals' opinion reviewed dismissals of only a subset of the claims at issue in the case. The district court again dismissed the claims based on foreign sovereign immunity, and the case is on appeal at the United States Court of appeals for the Second Circuit.and its agencies or instrumentalities be reinstated in the interest of justice to determine whether the tort exception applies. likely return to the district court for a determination of whether the suit is precluded on grounds that the alleged tortious acts retain immunity as discretionary functions. In a separate decision in In re Terrorist Attacks on September 11, 2001 , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the dismissal of claims against five defendants. These defendants were (1) Al Rajhi Bank, (2) Saudi American Bank,. (3) Saleh Abdullah Kamel, (4) Dallah al Baraka Group LLC, immunity extended only to government actions distinct from the actions of officials as individuals. The Second Circuit's holding was consistent with the conclusions of five of the six other federal courts of appeals that had considered whether an individual may be protected as an agent or instrumentality. Only the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit (Seventh Circuit) had reached the opposite conclusion. In Terrorist Attacks III , the Second Circuit characterized the SeventhCircuit as an "outlier" on this issue. jurisdiction over the Saudi defendants sued in their personal capacities. Plaintiffs argued that the minimum contacts test was satisfied because the defendants had purposefully directed activity at the judicial forum by supporting the attacks. The court rejected this argument, acknowledging that it had been a successful argument in cases where defendants were "primary participants" in the terrorist acts. On remand to the district court, Judge Daniels of the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York dismissed the claims against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The Supreme Court granted review and established the minority position as the correct one. Because the officials dismissed from this case were not part of the motion to vacate, plaintiffs did not have an opportunity to pursue their lawsuit against them on remand. Claims against them in their official capacity would likely be deemed to be claims against the state or the government. The court could decide whether common law immunity applies to the Saudi officials in this case. The decision is expected to come within the next few weeks. the United States." Consequently, it is insufficient to overcome immunity to allege that an injury or damage occurred within the United States. In affirming the dismissal with respect to the Saudi Joint Relief Committee (SJRC) and the Saudi Red Crescent Society (SRC), the appellate court did not appear to foreclose a finding of jurisdiction unless all conduct associated with the injury occurs wholly within the U.S., but rather only that some tortious act must be committed by the defendant in the U States. rule against litigation in U.S. courts and a number of exceptions permitting suits. As a general rule, foreign states, together with their agencies and instrumentalities, are "immune from the jurisdiction of the courts of the United States and from the states" However, the FSIA authorizes jurisdiction over foreign nations in several exceptions. The federal law authorizes subject matter jurisdiction as long as the "amount in controversy" exceeds $75,000. The FSIA is a jurisdictional gatekeeper for claims against foreign states and their instrumentalities. Attacks litigation, the previous terrorism exception remained in force. Federal law FSIA if they are sued in their capacity as individuals, but may be immune from suit under the common law of foreign sovereign immunity. One such defendant, the former president of two of the Saudi-run charities sued for alleged involvement in funding the 9/11 terrorist attacks, prevailed in a motion to dismiss the lawsuit against him on the basis of common-law foreign sovereign Immunity. The analyses for subject matter and personal jurisdiction differ according to whether the FSIA applies. claims, personal jurisdiction governs courts' power over particular defendants. Even if a court establishes jurisdiction over the subject matter of a claim, it cannot exercise its authority over a defendant for whom it lacks personal jurisdiction. Personal jurisdiction requires both statutory authority and satisfaction of Fifth Amendment due process standards. As with subject matter jurisdiction, statutory authority for personal jurisdiction over foreign defendants follows one of two distinct routes according to the FSIA's application. For a defendant who is not a foreign state or its agency or instrumentality, the ordinary procedure for obtaining statutory authority applies. forum attempting to assert jurisdiction, and (2) asserting such jurisdiction "does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice" The type and quantity of contacts necessary to constitute "minimum contacts" differ according to the type of personal jurisdiction—general or specific—that applies. General jurisdiction does not require contacts related to the specific claim in the case. Conversely, specific jurisdiction, which limits a court's jurisdiction over a defendant to claims in a particular case, involves no contacts. "Continuous and systematic" contacts with a forum. S. 2040 would provide for exclusive federal court jurisdiction over foreign states. It would leave the foreign official exclusion under the ATA intact. The bill would also clarify that a tortious act or omission would not give rise to jurisdiction where it constitutes "mere negligence" It would clarify the relationship between the FSIA exception and the ATa's civil liability exception precluding suits against foreign officials.. Aliens as well as U.S. nationals would likely be able to bring lawsuits under causes of action other than the AT a if jurisdiction is available. The Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (the FSIA) applies to all foreign states and their "agencies and instrumentalities" Immunity for sovereign nations against suits in U.S. courts has a long history and is based on the principle that conflicts with foreign nations are more effectively addressed through diplomatic efforts than through judicial proceedings. Congress passed the FSIA to codify these long-standing principles and to clarify limitations on the scope of immunity that had emerged in international practice. The FSIA contains both a general, presumptive rule against litigation in the United States and a number of relevant legislative developments. Second Circuit: Individuals acting within their official capacities were indeed "agencies" of their states. The court noted that at the time the FSIA was enacted, Congress expressed a desire to codify common law principles, one of which was that immunity extends to a state's officials. It also emphasized the potential erosion of immunity for foreign states if immunity extended only to government actions distinct from the actions taken by individuals in the U.S., the court said. The case is the first of its kind in the Second Circuit. provide for exclusive federal court jurisdiction over foreign states under the new FSIA provision. The Attorney General can intervene in such cases to seek a stay of the civil action if the Secretary of State certifies that the United States is engaged in good faith discussions with the defendant state to resolve the claims. The court would be authorized to issue a stay for 180 days, which could be renewed for additional 180-day periods if such negotiations remain ongoing. All current versions of JASTA include a finding by Congress that expresses Whether the SHC was an agency or instrumentality turned on whether it was an "organ" of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The court applied a multi-factor test, derived from a previous Second Circuit decision and from decisions from other circuits, to determine whether the agency was such an 'organ' The test included whether the foreign state created the entity for a national purpose and whether it actively supervises the entity. It also considered whether the entity was not a U.S. citizen or created under the laws of a third country. supervises the entity, (3) whether the foreign state requires the hiring of public employees and pays their salaries, and (4) how the entity is treated under foreign state law. Emphasizing that the Saudi government had formed SHC and paid its employees, the court held that the SHC was an organ, and thus was an agency or instrumentality of the Kingdom. The plaintiffs sued four Saudi princes for actions taken within their official capacities. All four princes held positions of power in the SHc; three of the princes were Saudi princes. held positions of power in the SHC. Three of the princes were members of the country's "Supreme Council of Islamic Affairs" The fourth prince was the SHc's president, in addition to his roles as a provincial governor and crown prince. Although several other federal courts of appeals had ruled on the extension of foreign sovereign immunity to foreign officials, treatment of officials under the FSIA was a question of first impression for the Second Circuit. Raising a number of textual arguments and referencing. instrumentality" is entitled to the same immunity to which the state itself is entitled under the FSIA. The key threshold question was whether the SHC and the princes sued in their official capacities qualified as agencies or instrumentalities. The FSIA defines "agency or instrumentality" as any entity which is (1) a "separate legal person, corporate or otherwise"; (2) "an organ of a foreign state or political subdivision thereof"; and (3) not a U.S. citizen or created under. In r e Terrorist Attacks plaintiffs characterized defendants' charitable contributions to Muslim groups as a form of money laundering. The court rejected this characterization as incompatible with the Supreme Court's interpretation of the commercial activities exception. Under this definition, the appropriate focus in determining whether an action constitutes "commercial activity" is on an action's nature rather than its purpose. With this framework, the court upheld the district court's finding that defendants' "charitable contributions" fell outside the scope of thecommercial activities exception by reason of their non-commercial nature. The appeals court upheld the district court's determination that it lacked personal jurisdiction over the Saudi defendants sued in their personal capacities. York dismissed the claims against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the SHC, holding the FSIA tort exception does not apply because of the "entire tort" rule. The Supreme Court has described the tort exception as "cover[ing] only torts occurring within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States." Consequently, it is insufficient to overcome immunity United States.entitled to immunity based on the discretionary nature of their actions. The Second Circuit held that none of the FSIA exceptions applied. The fourth set of claims (those brought against princes in their personal capacities) fell outside of the scope of theFSIA. As discussed below, the court dismissed those claims for lack of personal jurisdiction. The court held that the terrorist state exception did not apply because the U.S. State Department has not designated the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia as a state sponsor of terrorism. But the court found two other exceptions—the commercial activity and tort exceptions potentially potential. FSIA, namely (1) its interpretation of "agency or instrumentality" under the FSIA as extending both to the Saudi charity and to individuals sued in their official capacities. The Supreme Court later abrogated the first of these holdings. The Second Circuit reversed its own position with respect to the tort exception to foreign sovereign immunity. In December 2013, the Second Circuit ordered these claims against Saudi Arabia and its agencies or instrumentalities be reinstated in the interest of the United States. The case was heard by the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York. Some courts have found the discretionary act exclusion inapplicable to tortious acts in the United States that amounted to illegal conduct. A district court in the D.C. Circuit found in Letelier v. Republic of Chile that an assassination occurring on U.S. soil under the direction of a foreign government was not a tortious act. It was the result of a discretionary function and cannot be the basis for overcoming SHC's immunity, the court said. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few months. under the direction of a foreign government was not a discretionary act within the meaning of the FSIA tort exception, the court said. The decision was "one most assuredly involving policy judgment and decision and thus exempt as a discretionaryAct under section 1605(a)(5)(A), that exception is not applicable to bar this suit," the judge said. "There is no discretion to commit, or to have one's officers or agents commit, an illegal act.... Whatever policy," he said. one's officers or agents commit, an illegal act.... Whatever policy options may exist for a foreign country, it has no "discretion" to perpetrate conduct designed to result in the assassination of an individual or individuals. action that is clearly contrary to the precepts of humanity as recognized in both national and international law. Accordingly there would be no " Discretion" within the meaning of section 1605(a)(5)(A) to order or to aid in an assassination. Were it to be demonstrated that a foreign state has undertaken any such act in this country, that foreign state could not be accorded sovereign immunity. country, that foreign state could not be accorded sovereign immunity … for any tort claims resulting from its conduct. Similarly, the Ninth Circuit has held that the discretionary act exclusion does not apply in the case of a foreign official who, while acting in his home country, orders a killing in the United States. Both of these cases applied the tort exception to injuries in the U.S orchestrated from abroad, suggesting that the "entire tort" rule either is not in use in these appellate circuits or that would include terrorism. The amendment would dispense with the "entire tort" rule and the statutory discretionary act exclusion for such cases only. Under the bill, a plaintiff could seek money damages from a foreign state for physical injury to person or property or death caused by both an act of international terrorism in the U.S. and a tortious act or acts on the part of that foreign state acting on its behalf. The bill would also keep the FSIA non-commercial tort exception intact in other cases. is not in use in these appellate circuits or that it is not to be taken literally. Courts may tend to view direct involvement on the part of a foreign official overseas in tortious activity that takes place on U.S. territory as included in the same tort. indirect contribution by means of lawful conduct could be viewed as at most a separate tort or as a discretionary act. If the appellate court reverses the district court's dismissal of the suit on "entire tort" grounds, the case will likely return to the districtCourt for a determination of the tort. The Supreme Court in 2004 held that the statute does not provide a cause of action for such lawsuits. It permitted courts to give effect to the statute for civil actions arising from the violation of a very narrow class of international norms "defined with a specificity comparable to the features of the 18 th century paradigms" The Second Circuit concluded that the ATS's drafting in 1789 was understood to govern at the time of the case's drafting. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in the case. In Terrorist Attacks III , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit adopted narrow interpretations of the commercial activities and tort exceptions under the FSIA. The court rejected the plaintiffs' complaints based on common law tort theories, holding that they did not demonstrate that the defendants breached any duty of care owed to the plaintiffs. The ruling appears to preclude efforts by September 11 victims and other plaintiffs seeking recovery in U.s. courts against foreign officials and government-controlled entities like the State Department. exception by reason of their non-commercial nature, regardless of the contributions' alleged money laundering purpose. This portion of the decision remains undisturbed. Finally, the court of appeals rejected the tort exception as inapplicable to claims against the Saudi defendants. It emphasized that if the exception were expanded to include all conduct conceivably, it would not apply to the Saudi case. The court was concerned about the effect that an expanded tort exception would have on the other FSIA exceptions. in U.S. courts against foreign officials and government-controlled entities like the Saudi charity. Plaintiffs' efforts to hold non-government financial institutions liable for providing material to terrorist organizations have also seemingly been stymied by the courts' interpretations of the ATA. Several bills have been introduced in Congress that would broaden the FSIA tort exception explicitly to cover terrorist acts that occur within the United States and make other changes that could boost plaintiffs' efforts against some of the world's worst terrorists. if the exception were expanded to include all conduct conceivably characterized as tortious, the tort exception would "vitiate" the terrorist state exception's limitation to designated terrorist states. In a separate case, a later panel of the appellate court disagreed with this aspect of the decision, however, effectively overturning it for the Second Circuit. It is possible that other courts could read the terrorism exception as foreclosing suits against states not designated as sponsors of terrorism. The bills would have expanded liability for foreign government officials in civil actions for terrorist acts no matter where they occur. The House did not vote on either version of the bill. The bills would have amended the tort exception to the FSIA expressly to include "any statutory or common law tort claim arising out of an act of extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking, terrorism, or the provision of material support or resources for such an act" The Senate passed the bill in December 2014, but the House didn't vote on it until this month. It's possible that other courts could overturn the Terrorist Attacks III decision. H.R. 3815 would amend the FSIA tort exception in 28 U.S.C. §1605(a)(5) by limiting the type of injury to "physical injury" rather than "personal injury" It would specifically exclude "any claim for emotional distress or derivative injury suffered as a result of an event or injury to another person that occurs outside of the United States" The amendment was introduced late in 2015 and referred to the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Constitution and Civil Justice. The bills would implement secondary liability in somewhat different ways. S. 2040 (as passed by the Senate) and S. 2101 (passed by the House) would create secondary liability for conspiracy. The bills would apply to criminal and civil cases, as well as to state and local governments. The legislation would also apply to the District of Columbia, which is home to the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, which has jurisdiction over criminal cases in the U.S. and many other states. under the Senate bill to any person who "aids and abets, by knowingly providing substantial assistance, or who conspires" with the perpetrator. The House bill would authorize secondary liability against anyone who aided, abetted, or conspired with the perpetrators. Neither bill would explicitly elucidate whether criminal liability under the material support provisions of the ATA would also establish civil liability, as some courts have some courts. The bill would not clarify what type of intent or knowledge would be necessary to establish liability. versions of JASTA include a finding by Congress that expresses approval in the context of civil liability under the ATA for the test established by the D.C. Circuit for aiding and abetting and conspiracy liability. The test includes the elements: the party whom the defendant aids must perform a wrongful act that causes an injury; the defendant must be generally aware of his role as part of an overall illegal or tortious activity at the time that he provides the assistance; and he must knowingly and substantially assist the principal. The Second Circuit concluded that international terrorism did not meet this standard as of September 11, 2001. Quoting its 2003 opinion in United States v. Yousef , the court stated the following: We regrettably are no closer now ... to an international consensus on the definition of terrorism or even its proscription. The mere existence of the phrase "state-sponsored terrorism" proves the absence of agreement on basic terms among a large number of States that terrorism violates [customary] international law. The court also rejected the plaintiffs' reliance on the Torture Victim Protection Act for a cause of action. The Supreme Court's interpretation of that law provides for a right of action only against natural persons who act under color of foreign law, the court said. "We thus conclude ... that terrorism—unlike piracy, war crimes, and crimes against humanity—does not provide a basis for universal jurisdiction [under customary international law," the court wrote in its ruling. The court said there is strenuous disagreement among States about what actions do or do not constitute terrorism. Plaintiffs brought claims against these defendants under a common-law tort theory as well as the Anti-Terrorism Act (ATA), the Alien Tort Statute (ATS), and the Torture Victims' Protection Act (TVPA) U.S. nationals injured in their person, property, or business "by reason of an act of international terrorism" can recover treble damages, plus costs, but does not describe who can be held liable. The plaintiffs in this case alleged that the defendants were liable for knowingly. The case alleged that the defendants were liable for knowingly providing financial support and services to charities that supported Al Qaeda. Citing its recent holding in Rothstein v. UBS AG, the appellate court held that the ATA does not encompass liability on an aiding-and-abetting theory. The Alien Tort Statute provides federal jurisdiction for tort claims brought by non-U.S. citizens seeking damages for injuries caused by the actions of the defendants in this case. The Supreme Court's interpretation of the phrase "by reason of," requires a showing of proximate cause. claim implicates property rights connected with the United States. The exception for designated state sponsors of terrorism provides jurisdiction over cases involving designated "state sponsor[s] of terrorism" in suits involving "personal injury or death that was caused by an act of torture, extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking, or the provision of material support or resources" The claim seeks money damages against a designated state sponsor of terrorism for injuries arising from a terrorist act. The claim is made pursuant to an arbitration agreement. hostage taking, or the provision of material support or resources for such an act if such act is engaged in by an official, employee, or agent of such foreign state while acting within the scope of his or her office, employment, or agency. The exception seems to apply only to countries designated by the U.S. Department of State as state sponsors of terrorism. This list currently includes Iran, Sudan, and Syria. At the time suit was brought in the In re Terrorist Attacks litigation, the previous terrorism exception remained in force. their suit against the Saudi government and government-owned charity. This effort also failed on sovereign immunity grounds at the district court. This report explains the legal bases for the dismissals and provides an update to the status of the case. To address some issues involving the interpretation of the FSIA, Congress is considering the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act ( S. 2040 , H.R. 3815 ) This report addresses relevant legislative developments in its final section. The Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 2002 is the most significant foreign sovereign immunity law in the U.S. The 111 th Congress held a hearing to consider S. 2930, the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act. The bill would have amended the tort exception to the FSIA specifically to cover terrorist attacks within the United States. In the 112 th Congress, new legislation was introduced to reduce some of the burdens faced by victims of state-sponsored terrorism in the U.S. who seek to bring lawsuits against foreign officials. S. 1894 was ordered to be replaced by S.2930. , the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act, was ordered to be reported favorably out of the Senate Judiciary Committee in September 2012. A companion bill, H.R. 5904, did not receive further action. S. 1535 was reported favorably with some amendments to the findings and provisions addressing aiding and abetting liability under the Anti-Terrorism Act, and was passed by the Senate in December 2014. The House did not vote on S.1535 or H. 3143. occur by amending 18 U.S.C. Section 2337, which currently exempts all government officials. H.R. 3143 would have included the provision of material support for terrorism in the jurisdiction provision. The Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act (JASTA) has returned to the 114 th Congress as S. 2040. The Senate passed by voice vote on May 17, 2016, after accepting an amendment in the nature of a substitute offered by the House. S. 2040 (as passed by the Senate) and H.R. 3815 would amend the ATA to provide for secondary liability in the case of an act of international terrorism. Secondary liability would attach under the Senate bill to any person who "aids and assists" a terrorist organization. The House bill would also apply liability to an entity designated as a foreign terrorist organization as a result of the attack that gives rise to the lawsuit. The Senate bill was passed by a vote of 52-36. ATA would also establish civil liability, as some courts have found. Language in the findings section suggest the intent that the knowing or reckless provision of material support or resources to a foreign terrorist organization, whether directly or indirectly, should give rise to liability. H.R. 3815 would remove the immunity of foreign officials from lawsuits as currently provided in 18 U.S.C. §2337(2) It would also add a provision to the ATA to address issues plaintiffs have confronted in establishing personal jurisdiction over foreign nationals. S. 2040 would create a new exception to the FSIA for acts of international terrorism that occur on U.S. territory. The discretionary function exclusion would remain unchanged. The bill would include among congressional findings that "no country has the discretion to engage knowingly in the financing or sponsorship of terrorism, whether directly or indirectly" "International terrorism" is defined with reference to the ATA, including the exclusion for "acts of war" The amendment would be codified as 28 U.N.C. §1605B. S. 2040 (as passed by the Senate) would leave the foreign official out of the case. The district courts shall have personal jurisdiction over any person who commits or aids and abets an act of international terrorism or otherwise sponsors such act or the person who committed such act. The law would apply to acts of internationalterrorism in which any national of the United States suffers injury in his or her person, property, or business by reason of such an act in violation of section 2333.