SOCOM programs have lower dollar thresholds, so they don't receive the same level of scrutiny brought to bear on the more expensive programs. Another factor that potentially enables SOCOM's culture of innovation and risk-taking in its acquisition programs is its general ability to execute programs below statutory and regulatory dollar figures that require more rigorous oversight. This point has been highlighted by James "Hondo" Geurts, current Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development, and Acquisition (and former SOCOM Acquisition Executive) limited scope of acquisition authorities. delegating more decisionmaking to lower levels and promoting a more risk-taking culture. A number of current senior acquisition officials in the military services recently served in SOCOM and appear to be promoting more delegation of authority and cultural risk- taking in the services. They include General Paul Ostrowksi, formerly a SOCOM PEO and currently the Principal Military Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of the Army (Acquisition, Logistics and Technology), and James Guerts, formerly the SOCOM Acquisition Executive. In some instances SOCOM has fewer acquisition authorities than the military departments. The definition of military departments, codified in 50 U.S.C. 3004, does not include SOCOM. SOCOM may not receive new acquisition authorities provided by Congress and must work through the Secretary of Defense to obtain these authorities or seek a legislative change. Potential associated issues for Congress may include the following: Based on the DOD report on acquisition authorities required in the 2018 NDAA, should additional acquisition authorities should be granted to SOCOM? SOCOM acquisition personnel are bound by and act with the same freedoms and restrictions as the military services and defense agencies. For example, all large DOD acquisition programs are given an Acquisition Category (ACAT) designation based on dollar figures and program scope. These designations determine the level of oversight required for the program. SOCOM and the military departments adhere to the same oversight standards and dollar threshold for categorizing programs. (For more information on program categories and dollar thresholds, see Table A-1 .) that can contribute to more effective acquisitions. The successful use of the Special Operations Command acquisition authority below the acquisition category (ACAT) 1 level illustrates the transformation benefits of having a joint buyer, close to the user, maintain a streamlined acquisition process. In discussing the SOCOM acquisition culture and the benefits of a flatter organization, a number of current and former SOCOM officials have stated that the lack of bureaucratic overhead allows the organization to identify emerging issues, modify programs that are underway, or, in some cases, terminate programs. turn generally further delegates the majority of Milestone Decision Authority (MDA) to the PEOs. SOCOM officials have asserted that this delegation enables more rapid decisionmaking and accelerates the acquisition process. The method SOCOM uses for acquisitions is similar to the acquisition processes used by the military services. However, there are also significant differences, many of which relate to the size and scope of SOCOM and its authorities. Table 1 summarizes select similarities and differences between SOCOM's acquisition process and that of the military. SOCOM's workforce operates professionally within the same DOD 5000 directives, the same Federal Acquisition Regulation and the same Financial Management Regulation. Give credit to our acquisition workforce for the results they achieve, and you might dismiss using USSOCOM as a benchmark for how to do acquisition under the assumption that we're somehow "different" In some instances, SOCOM may in fact have fewer acquisition authorities and flexibilities than the military departments. For example, 10 U.S.C. 2216 established a Defense.of DOD. Goldwater-Nichols: Special Operations Command has unique acquisition authorities. The report describes SOCOM's acquisition authorities for unclassified acquisition programs. It compares these authorities to those granted to the military departments. Report explores whether SOCOM has unique characteristics that influence how it conducts acquisition. It also compares the chains of command, and the scope of acquisition activity and program oversight for those organizations. It concludes with a recommendation that SOCOM be given more funding for its acquisition programs in the near-term. statutory authorities enable SOCOM to manage and oversee its acquisition programs. Special Operations Force Acquisition, Technology and Logistics (SOF AT&L) is the organization within SOCOM that leads internal major procurement efforts. The SOCOM Commander is directly responsible for all portions of the command and the Acquisition Executive (AE) reports directly to the Commander. Falling under the AE are the Program Executive Offices (PEOs) and Directorates. This direct chain of command allows for rapid communication on purpose, intent, and decisionmaking. SOCOM acquisition authority is restricted to Special Operations-specific items. The military services have the authority to acquire any necessary goods and services. When SOCOM does exercise its authority, it adheres to the same oversight and documentation requirements as the services. As James Smith, the current SOCOM Acquisition Executive, reportedly stated: We are absolutely subject to all of thesame oversight and policy as the rest of DOD. Our workforce operates professionally within the same DOD. The acquisition authority of SOCOM is more limited than those of the military departments. can get that solution into the fight sooner. SOCOM benefits from being a smaller organization with a more focused mission set and limited scope of acquisition authorities. The services, on the other hand, have a much broader acquisition mandate, including the acquisition of business systems, weapon procurement programs and extensive logistic contracts. This broader acquisition portfolio requires the services to manage acquisition programs across domains, using multiple acquisition processes, and to use different acquisition competencies. Other SOCOM attributes, such as being a small organization, can also help the services succeed. If SOCOM wants to acquire a weapon system that is not special operations specific, the acquisition must be executed through one of the military departments. The military services are responsible for funding certain types of SOCOM training, service-common equipment, and professional services. For example, the Air Force provides SOCOM with C-130s and the Army provides the ammunition for service- common weapons to include the M4. SOCOM, in turn, can modify these systems to special operations-specific requirements. The regulations governing acquisition are found in the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and the Defense Acquisition Regulations Supplement (DFARS) SOCOM is not referenced or discussed in the FAR; the DFARS includes a brief definitional reference to SOCOM, defining it as a defense agency. There are no unique authorities granting SOCOM exemptions or waivers from acquisition requirements. The Office of the Secretary of Defense's issuances establishing policy, defining authorities, and assigning responsibility for acquisitions across all military services and defense agencies. unique characteristics that influence how it conducts acquisition. The Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986 ( P.L. 99-433 ) reorganized DOD's command and control structure, in part by establishing the current construct and authorities of combatant commands. SOCOM was the first combatant command endowed with acquisition authority and its own budget line. The agency was established and granted its own acquisition responsibilities in the Fiscal Year (FY) 1987 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) The FY2016 NDAA ( P.L. 114-92 ) granted limited acquisition authority to the U.S. Cyber Command. CYBERCOM is the second command to have current independent acquisition authority. However, SOCOM's acquisition authority is more expansive. Title 10 U.s.C. Section 164(c) grants SOCOM authority to validate and establish priorities for requirements; ensure combat readiness; develop and acquire special operations-peculiar equipment and material, supplies, and services. These authorities are applicable only to "special operations- peculiar items" military departments. 10 U.S.C. 2216 established a Defense Modernization Account and granted authority for its use to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretaries of the military departments. The FY2017 NDAA ( P.L. 114-328 , §2447d) granted a new reprogramming authority, referred to as a special transfer authority. This authority is intended to expedite the selection of prototype projects for production and rapid fielding. In the FY2018 NDAA, the Department of Defense was required to submit a report on the acquisition authorities available to the military department. less than 1% of the total DOD acquisition workforce of 156,000. Many analysts argue that small businesses and organizations can be more nimble, more innovative, and more adaptable than large enterprises. A 2004 congressional report identified SOCOM's unique size, culture, and close proximity to the warfighter as factors that can contribute to more effective acquisitions. As Sir Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group, reportedly stated, "Small businesses are nimble and bold and can often teach much larger companies a thing or two about innovations" would still not require a Nunn-McCurdy notification to Congress. The cost growth associated with the procurement of the CVN-78 Gerald R. Ford aircraft carrier ($1.4 billion) was approximately 70% of SOCOM's entire procurement budget ($2.0 billion) Some analysts believe that these lower dollar thresholds allow SOCOM to operate below the radar, thus enabling a more nimble acquisition process and a culture that promotes "failing fast" Despite these perceived organizational advantages, SOCOM has experienced challenges in executing its acquisition programs. develop a covert submersible insertion vehicle, was documented by both the Government Accountability Office and RAND as experiencing considerable cost, schedule, and performance issues before finally being cancelled in 2009. This program illustrates observers' argument that it is not only the ability to succeed faster, but also to fail faster and adapt requirements or acquisition strategies faster, that gives SOCOM the able to execute acquisitions more efficiently and effectively. SOCOM's statutory restriction to procure strictly SOF-peculiar equipment, modifications, and services enables a more focused, operations-oriented acquisition culture. The Silent Knight Radar program is one of SOCOM's largest with a total estimated procurement cost through FY2023 of at $391.7 million. In comparison, the military services have numerous major programs with significantly higher procurement appropriations. The different size and scope of the acquisition efforts result in SOCOM having a substantially smaller acquisition workforce than the services. In FY2017, the SOCOM procurement appropriation was 1.5% of DOD's total procurement appropriation of $132.2 billion. The Navy's 2017 appropriation for the Virginia Class submarine program ($5.39 billion) is 250% larger than SOCom's entire FY2017 procurement appropriation ($2.08 billion) The Nunn-McCurdy Act requires DOD to report to Congress when an MDAP experiences cost overruns of 15% or more. There are currently more than 150 MDAPs in DOD; many of these programs have a larger budget in a single year than SOCOM's entire procurement budget for FY2017. If SOCom's current CAT II program (Silent Knight Radar) experienced 100% cost growth (from approximately $391 million to $782 million), it would still not require a Nunn/McCurdy notification to Congress. National Defense interview, James Smith reportedly stated the following: Our direct relationship to USSOCOM for the acquisition of only services and equipment that are unique to special operations gives us three primary advantages. First, USSOCom is a combatant command with an extremely relevant ongoing mission. We're fully co-located and integrated with the staff here. We have a firsthand understanding of priorities and urgency that gives us a different appreciation for schedule emphasis. It's not a cliché to say that our operators will often accept the "80 percent" solution if we can get that solution into the fight sooner.