Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I will be happy to answer any questions that you or Members of this Committee may have. For future contacts regarding this testimony, please call Janet Heinrich at (202) 512-7119. Katherine Iritani, Matt Byer, Ellen W. Chu, Lisa Lusk, and Behn Miller Kelly also made key contributions to this testimony. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material. permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army in the region of the country where you live on the continent of Africa. The task force recommends that all people age 65 or older receive an annual influenza vaccination. According to data from CMS’s Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey of 2000, about 30 percent of Medicare beneficiaries did not receive an influenza vaccination, and 37 percent had never had a pneumonia vaccination. Many Medicare beneficiaries may not know that they are at risk for health conditions that preventive care could detect, the task force says. The task force advises that at 65 or over, people should receive at least one influenza vaccination and at least at least two pneumonia vaccinations. Medicare now covers a number of preventive services, including immunizations and cancer screenings. Not all beneficiaries, however, avail themselves of covered preventive services. For some beneficiaries, certain services may not be warranted or may be of limited value. Care depends on an individual’s age and particular health risks, not simply on the results of a standard battery of tests, says Dr. David Gergen, president of the Gergen Family Practice at Aetna. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. Most Medicare beneficiaries reported receiving what they considered to be “routine checkups.” In CDC’s 2000 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System Survey, 93 percent of respondents age 65 or older reported that they had received a “ routine checkup” within the previous 2 years. Data from another survey indicated that Medicare beneficiaries do receive some preventive services during visits when they are ill or being treated for a health condition. Despite how often Medicare beneficiaries visit physicians, relatively few beneficiaries receive the full range of preventive care. various screening tests to identify cardiovascular disease (and related abnormalities) in “elevated risk” beneficiaries and diabetes in ‘at risk’ beneficiaries. The new coverage applies to services provided on or after January 1, 2005. Nationally representative survey data show that Medicare beneficiaries visit physicians often and that most report receiving “routine checkups” These data do not show, however, which specific services were delivered during those “checkups.” Despite the frequency of visits, many Medicare beneficiaries do not receive the full range of recommended preventive services. 32 percent of those found by the survey to have a high cholesterol level reported that no one had told them that they had high cholesterol. Projected nationally, this percentage translates into 2.1 million Medicare beneficiaries who may have high cholesterol without knowing it. A one-time initial preventive care examination covered by Medicare may offer opportunity to deliver some preventive services but alone is not enough to ensure better health among beneficiaries. Information from a CMS demonstration and from other related studies shows that ensuring receipt of follow-up care will be important to improving health. of beneficiaries participating in this nationally representative survey who, as part of the survey, had a physical examination and were found to have elevated blood pressure readings at that time, 32 percent reported that no physician or other health professional had told them about the condition before. On the basis of this survey, we estimate that, during the period when the survey was conducted, 21 million Medicare beneficiaries may have been at risk for high blood pressure. An estimated 6.6 million of them might have been unaware of this risk. CMS is exploring an alternative for Medicare preventive care that would provide systematic health risk assessments to fee-for-service beneficiaries through a means other than examination. The program will use a beneficiary-focused health risk assessment questionnaire to assess health risks. The study recommended that CMS conduct a demonstration to test cost- effectiveness and other aspects of the health risk Assessment approach for Medicare beneficiaries. The Medicare Senior Risk Reduction Program will identify health risks and follow up with preventive services provided by meansother than examinations by physicians. assessments to fee-for-service beneficiaries through a means other than examination by a physician. Such programs collect information from individuals; identify their risk factors; and refer the individuals to at least one intervention to promote health, sustain function, or prevent disease. The study concluded that health risk assessment programs have increased beneficial behavior (particularly exercise) and improved physiological variables (particularly diastolic blood pressure and weight) and general health. In addition, the study stated that to be effective, risk assessment questionnaires must be completed. will use a beneficiary-focused health risk assessment questionnaire to assess health risks. The program will test different approaches to administering health risk assessments, creating feedback reports, and providing follow-up services. According to project researchers, the program will tailor preventive interventions to individual risks; track patient risks and health over time; and provide beneficiaries with self-management tools and information, health behavior advice, and end-of-life counseling where appropriate. The design phase had not been finalized when this article was published. 1980s and early 1990s, the agency conducted a congressionally mandated demonstration to test varied health promotion and disease prevention services. The agency’s final report, published in 1998, concluded that the demonstration services were marginally effective in raising the use of some simple disease-prevention measures, such as immunizations and cancer screenings. The report did not consistently improve beneficiary health or reduce theUse of hospital or skilled nursing services. It was released in the wake of the 9/11 terrorist attacks. ensuring receipt of follow-up care will be important to improving beneficiaries’ health. A proposed CMS demonstration, currently in design, will explore another preventive care delivery option. A one-time preventive care examination will add a dedicated opportunity for delivering preventive care and could help reduce the gap in the preventive services that Medicare beneficiaries receive. At the same time, it is not a panacea, and Ensuring that beneficiaries receive needed services and follow- up care is likely to remain a challenge. counseling where appropriate. The design phase had not been finalized as of last week and, according to a CMS official, still required approval from HHS and the Office of Management and Budget. "Our work shows that more needs to be done to deliver preventive services to those beneficiaries who ... fail to receive the full range of recommended services," the report says. "Some beneficiaries may not choose to seek these services, others may not be aware that these services are available and covered by Medicare" In late 2003, MMA added coverage under Medicare for a one-time “initial preventive physician evaluation’ If performed within 6 months after an individual’s enrollment under Part B of the program. Covered services under the examination include measurement of height, weight, and blood pressure; an electrocardiogram; and education, counseling, and referral services for screenings and other preventive services covered by Medicare. MMA also added coverage for various screening tests to identify cardiovascular disease (and related abnormalities) Primary care physicians typically cannot provide services such as mammography screenings for breast cancer or colonoscopies for colon cancer. It also is uncertain whether a one-time or periodic examination would be an effective way to improve beneficiaries’ health. For example, one previous CMS initiative that included preventive health care visits ended with mixed results in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the agency says. and encourage them to make informed choices about providers and plans. Nevertheless, a one time examination does not ensure delivery of the full range of preventive services.