Analytical Chemistry (AC) analyzes plutonium samples taken from each pit at various stages in its manufacture. AC measures the isotopic composition of the plutonium and the amount of alloying materials and impurities a sample contains. At issue: How much AC should be done at LANL, what is needed to make the space and MAR sufficient to support that amount of AC, and how much, if any, AC should being done at other sites? This appendix explains the tasks included in the diagrams of PF-4 and, in so doing, explains whatPF-4 does. dose, and dose is the key factor in determining the amount of MAR permitted. Actual or possible steps include: Installing in production areas containers designed to remain intact in a building collapse. Removing tons of combustible material from PF-4. Anchoring gloveboxes more strongly to the floor to reduce the likelihood that an earthquake would knock them over, exposing plutonium to the air, in which case a fire could generate plutonium oxide particles and release them into the atmosphere. Unlike pit manufacturing, AC involves little MAR because it involves little plutonium. AC involves little MAR because it uses tiny samples, such as a few milligrams of plutonium dissolved in a small amount of acid. AC involves much more space per unit MAR than does pit fabrication because each laboratory instrument is housed in a glovebox or hood that might occupy a dozen square feet of space. Many analyses must be performed for each individual pit, and the number of instruments and their housing increase in tandem with manufacturing capacity. Producing 80 ppy would require increasing AC capacity. This requirement comes from Pit fabrication casts "hemishells" (half-pits) of plutonium, machines them to remove excess material, and welds two together to form a pit. The current pit fabrication line was intended as a pilot plant; its capacity is about 10 ppy. It is being upgraded to reach a capacity of 30 ppy; further upgrades would be needed to reach 80. Pit manufacturing also involves such supporting tasks as purifying plutonium for use in pits; certification to ensure that finished pits meet required standards. certification to ensure that finished pits meet required standards; material control and accountability; waste management; and analytical chemistry. Analytical chemistry (AC) is essential for pit manufacturing, but this report considers it separately because it has large space requirements. AC analyzes plutonium samples taken from each pit at various stages in its fabrication. AC determines the isotopic composition of the plutonium and the amount of alloying materials and impurities it contains. Pit fabrication requires extensive AC for every pit. AC supports other pit manufacturing tasks and non-pit tasks as well. All U.S. plutonium is "old," such as from retired pits. As plutonium decays, it produces other elements, such as uranium and americium. These must be removed by chemical processes to purify. Increasing the amount of plutonium would require adding electrorefining furnaces, increasing space requirements.within specifications would be recycled. Such AC is not time-sensitive. On the other hand, AC to analyze process problems requires fast turnaround to minimize the time the process is shut down. pit manufacturing tasks, and non-pit tasks as well, though historically pit fabrication has been the greatest user of AC. The building at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) that currently performs AC to support pit manufacture and many other plutonium tasks is in poor shape and not seismically robust. DOE wants to halt work there by 2019, so one or more other facilities will be needed. Laboratory floor space , or "space," is where AC, pit fabrication, and other work is done. Make more efficient use of PF-4's basement, which houses the nuclear materials vault and most utilities. It may be possible to move out some operations from the basement, such as drum storage, freeing space to house such laboratory-floor operations as nondestructive analysis. Move some equipment out ofPF-4, including a gas gun, which propels a metal slug into a plutonium target to study how plutonium behaves under impact. The gas gun uses space used for lower-priority programs, as discussed. study how plutonium behaves under impact. The gas gun uses 1,200 sf of laboratory space in PF-4, and some basement space. Moving it to RLUOB (if that building's MAR were to be increased substantially) or to another site would release space inPF-4. Use two or three shifts a day rather than one. So doing would make more intensive use of space by allowing fewer pieces of equipment to produce a given amount of product, thereby reducing space requirements. PF-4 uses 10,400 sf for plutonium recycle and purification. How much plutonium could that area purify per year? How many ppy would that capacity support? How much more space would be needed to provide plutonium for 80 ppy? Alternatively, could these processes be moved to another site, such as Savannah River Site? Pit fabrication generates some plutonium scraps. These must be removed by chemical processes to purify plutonium for use in new pits. (Chemical processes do not remove specific isotopes of plutonium.) from lathes, and pits scrapped because they did not meet specifications. Providing for recycle of this plutonium requires space, and producing 80 ppy would require more space than 30. Major construction could make more space available, but increasing efficient use of existing space could increase the space margin. Designing work flow to minimize space utilization. When DOE decided to move pit manufacture to PF-4, the process line was intended as a pilot plant to develop, quickly, techniques for resuming production. Plutonium Recycle and Purification (PRP) uses aqueous (plutonium dissolved in acid) processes and molten processes to recover pure plutonium from scrap or from retired pits by chemically removing impurities. This option would move about 198 kg of MAR out of PF-4. Module 1 would house PRP processes, and Module 2 would house molten plutonium from Pit Fabrication and from PRP. (This would eliminate PRP withinPF-4.) On a scale using total PF- 4 MAR (2,600 kg PE) as 100%, Module 1 is the preferred option. "Material At Risk" (MAR) is "the amount of radioactive materials … available to be acted on by a given physical stress" It is material that could be released by a disaster, such as an earthquake that collapses a building followed by a fire. Each building that works with plutonium has a building-specific MAR allowance. MAR is expressed in units of plutonium equivalent (Pu-239) which is the fissile isotope in pits, but pits contain other forms of plutonium. Pu-239 is the fissile isotope in pits. pits contain other plutonium isotopes in addition to Pu-239. That mixture is called weapons-grade plutonium (WGPu) Since some of the other isotopes are more radioactive than Pu- 239, WGPu is about 1.5 times as radioactive as Pu-238. It is relevant to pit manufacturing options because 40% of the MAR allowance in PF-4 is allocated to Pu.238. Moving some or all Pu- 238 work out ofPF-4, the main pit manufacturing tool. Before a pit type can be accepted into the stockpile, it must be certified as acceptable for war reserve use. Validation involves validating weapons codes, among other things. PF-4 supports some of these experiments, such as by preparing samples for analytical chemistry and materials characterization. It also prepares test items for experiments at the Nevada National Security Site that do not produce a nuclear yield. It typically uses samples on the order of milligrams, which is about one-tenth of a kilogram. MC measures bulk properties of plutonium, such as tensile strength, magnetic susceptibility, grain structure, and surface characteristics. Such properties must be determined in order to certify pit design, maintain process control, address process anomalies, and examine the condition of newly-manufactured pits and pits from the stockpile. MC typically uses samples on the order of a fraction of a gram to tens of grams. MR&R examines containers of plutonium in PF-4 that are to be sent to WIPP for permanent disposition. If the containers have deteriorated, MR & R repackages the plutonium in new containers. MR&R repackages the plutonium in new containers. ARIES converts excess pits to plutonium oxide (a powder) and places it in special containers for long-term storage. Pit Fabrication involves casting "hemishells" (half-pits) of plutonium, machining them to remove excess material, welding two together to form a pit, and inspecting the finished pit with x-ray imaging, physical measurements, etc., to ensure it meets specifications. Pit Surveillance: Ever since the beginning of the nuclear weapons program, NNSA and its predecessor organizations have monitored plutonium production. Pits are monitored at Pantex Plant (TX) and PF-4. Pu-238 is the heat source for radioisotope power systems (RPS) for space probes. Pits can be disassembled only atPF-4, Pantex can perform some of the tasks, but can't perform AC and MC on samples of the plutonium. Plutonium-238 (Pu-238) is used to power space probes, and has been used in the space shuttle program. Pu-238 undergoes radioactive decay much more rapidly than Pu-239, producing uranium and other impurities. As a result, old Pu-238 must be purified before it can be used. PF-4 receives Pu- 238, removes the impurities through chemical processes, and makes plutonium oxide, which it presses into capsules. It mates some capsules with other equipment to make RPSs for military applications, and sends other capsules to Idaho National Laboratory, which does the same to. capsules to Idaho National Laboratory, which does the same to make RPSs for space probes. Plutonium Recycle and Purification (PR&P): This area recovers plutonium from scrap plutonium (such as from lathe turnings, pits scrapped for not meeting standards, or retired pits) Plutonium is then precipitated out of solution as plutonium oxalate, and is then roasted to produce plutonium oxide. This area also recovers and purifies plutonium using high-temperature chemical processes. high-temperature chemical processes. Readiness in Technical Base and Facilities (RTBF): RTBF is NNSA's program for operating the nuclear weapons complex and maintaining its infrastructure. Within PF-4, RTBF space is used for functions that support multiple programs, such as shipping and receiving, waste management, and material control and accountability. For more information on RTBF, go to: http://www.nasa.gov/nuclear/nuclear-weapons-complex/RTBF. Plutonium Facility 4 (PF-4) is the last U.S. plutonium processing building to come online. It took until 2007 for LANL to make its first "war reserve" pits. As of June 2014, NNSA had the capacity to manufacture about 10 non-war reserve pits per year in PF-4. The second track involved a facility with thecapacity to make pits on an industrial scale. That facility appears unlikely to proceed. that facility would have conducted operations in support of pit production "for at least five years" (described later), which would support an exit from a 1950s-era plutonium building at LANL by 2019, as a separate line item in the FY2016 budget. Use of retired pits in life extension programs would reduce the number of new pits that would have to be manufactured. The House Appropriations Committee recommended a substantial increase in funding "for a robust experimental effort in fiscal year 2015 to better understand the properties of plutonium" The NNSA can support certification requirements for pit reuse as an option for future [nuclear weapon life extension Programs] In 2013, a Department of Defense (DOD) official stated that "there is no daylight" between the Department of Energy and the Defense. In 2014, an NNSA document changed the date for achieving a 30-ppy capacity to "by 2026" Section 3114 of the FY2015 defense authorization bill, H.R. 4435, would require NNSA to produce 30 WR pits per year during 2023, at least 50 during 2026, and to demonstrate for at least 90 days during 2027 the ability to manufacture WR pits. Congress remains deeply involved in efforts to increase pit production capacity. Section 3114 of H.R. 4435 sets a schedule for production of WR pits. In its report on S. 2410, the Senate Armed Services Committee directed NNSA to include construction of modules (described later) The modules would support an exit from a 1950s-era plutonium strategy. The modules are described later in this article. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. at PF-4 halted in June 2013, the actual manufacturing rate in June 2014 was zero for pits of any type. Work is resuming at the end of June 2014. NNSA anticipates manufacturing a few pits a year in the near future to prepare to manufacture WR pits. The schedule for ramping up pit production is uncertain. A Department of Defense spokesman said the agency has no immediate plans to resume pit production. The Department of Energy said the decision to halt pit production was made to protect the safety of the fleet. During the Cold War, the Rocky Flats Plant (CO) manufactured as many as 2,000 pits per year (ppy) On June 6, 1989, armed agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Environmental Protection Agency raided the plant to investigate suspected environmental crimes. DOE first suspended pit production at Rocky Flat later that year, subsequently halted it permanently, and eventually dismantled the plant and remediated the site. With Rockyflats closed, Congress and the Administration searched for many years for a way to make pits. AC. Finding enough space and MAR for AC should be simpler than for pit manufacture because more options are readily available. At the height of the Cold War, the Department of Energy's Rocky Flats Plant produced between 1,000 and 2,000 pits per year. The plutonium for each pit required AC. Because currently-anticipated rates do not approach that level, the nuclear weapons complex has a considerable amount of excess space. This capacity resides at several buildings in the complex, including Building 332 at Lawrence. Some favor a capacity of greater than 80 ppy, while others argue that a lower number would suffice. That debate is beyond the scope of this report, which focuses on how to achieve the high end of DOD's range. Congress remains deeply involved in efforts to increase pit capacity. The debate over that capacity would take on added salience to the extent that it moves within the realm of feasibility, the report says. The U.S. military has been unable to reach that goal for more than a quarter-century. number of new pits that would have to be manufactured. The committee also recommended $35.7 million for moving certain activities out of the Chemistry and Metallurgy Research building (described below) While DOD has a requirement for up to 80 ppy, some key questions about how to manufacture at that rate remain not only unanswered but also unasked. These questions involve details about the facilities at LANL and perhaps elsewhere that would fabricate pits and perform supporting tasks. Without answers, Congress cannot know whether existing buildings, without modifications, could manufacture 80 p py. with the capacity to make pits on an industrial scale, on the order of 100 or more ppy. Several facilities were proposed, as described in "A Sisyphean History: Failed Efforts to Construct a Building to Restore Pit Production" None came to fruition. For example, in the FY2006 budget cycle, Congress eliminated funding for the Modern Pit Facility, which was to have a capacity between 125 and 450 ppy, and in its FY2013 budget request the Administration "deferred" a facility. required vs. available would show whether there is enough space and MAR at the moment. Over time, however, various factors will affect availability and requirements. While few of these factors can be predicted, this report discusses ways to offset any adverse effects from them. In addition, decisions will be needed regarding analytical chemistry, which supports pit manufacturing. For background, see CRS Report R43406, U.S. Nuclear Weapon "Pit" Production Options for Congress. For more information, see the CRS report R43428. U.S. policy is not to build new-design nuclear weapons for new missions. Some argue that the capacity to manufacture new pits may be needed to extend the service life of certain existing weapons. A pit is a hollow plutonium shell that is imploded with conventional explosives to create a nuclear explosion that triggers the rest of the weapon. It is a key component of a nuclear weapon and can be used to test new weapons or to replace pits in deployed weapons that develop pit problems unexpectedly, and to hedge against possible pit problems. drive down costs. On the other hand, it is possible that some lessons learned would lead to increased costs. What is the first module estimated to cost? The second? How sensitive is the cost of pit manufacturing to capacity, and what tradeoffs might a sensitivity analysis reveal? As a hypothetical example, if it cost an additional several billion dollars to move from 70 to 80 ppy, would it be worth spending the added money? Would it be less costly to move Pu-238 or hemishell casting to a module? be less costly to move Pu-238 to INL, SRS, or a newly-built module? In deciding how to proceed on pit manufacture, Congress would likely want to know if there is enough space margin and MAR margin for 80 ppy. Available space and MAR are known, as of certain dates, as this report shows. Congress may choose to direct NNSA to provide these two numbers. Once these numbers become available, Congress will decide whether or not to proceed with pit manufacture. whether all AC should be done at LANL and, if not, how much AC should. be done there and how much at another site. It would be simple to compare data on the required MAR and space, once they become available, against the amount of MAR. But without data on such matters as building condition and cost for any required upgrades and equipment, it is not possible to determine the relative merits of the options. Figure 8 shows a notional decision sequence for downselecting pit manufacturing options. Congress would need data on MAR margin, space margin, and cost for various pit manufacturing options in order to best determine which options are feasible and affordable. Not shown in the figure is that MAR and space margins may change over time, as Figure 1 shows. Such changes may make currently-feasible options infeasible, and vice versa. The following questions highlight how these data could support decisionmaking. Questions such as the following can only be answered with data on how muchMAR and space suffice for pit manufacturing. space, once they become available, against the amount of MAR and space released by each option to see which options provide a positive margin. Non-feasible options would not merit further consideration. The next step would be to estimate the cost of the feasible options and decide which are affordable. These data are needed to eliminate unaffordable options, which is important before planning begins because high cost has caused the demise of several nuclear weapons complex projects. Finally, having downselected to options that are feasible and affordable, one would compare those options against other possible criteria to make a decision. manufacturing totaling 26,700 sf. (Space for some other tasks, such as Plutonium Recycle and Purification, would also support pit manufacturing) LANL maintains that a key advantage of modules is that they would permit expansion of capacity on an as-needed basis. Others respond that modules could be costly and, if existing buildings can be used, may not be needed. Another option (not shown) would be to build one module and use it as part of a larger facility. the two buildings—having 9 kg of plutonium in CMR, as at present, poses a much greater risk than having 400 grams in RLUOB. If NNSA is able to implement its path forward, LANL could perform all the AC needed to support manufacture of up to 80 ppy. In that case, the key question for AC would be how much, if any, AC one or more sites other than LANL should perform. The foregoing discussion shows how much additional space and MAR various construction options would make available for pit manufacturing. Concentrating as much plutonium work as possible at LANL would strengthen its position as the nation's plutonium center. Data on the MAR and space requirements, and the cost of the LANL, LLNL, and SRS options, would be needed to provide a basis for decision. The option of having LLNL or SRS conduct a substantial fraction of the AC needed to support manufacture of plutonium would be a good one. SRS and LLNL could both do this work, but their facilities presumably have different capacities and would require different upgrades. ppy would require increasing AC capacity. Most pit-related AC is performed in the CMR building. Increasing manufacturing capacity would require more equipment, more space, and more MAR. Finding enough space and MAR for AC should be a priority for the NNSA in the near future, the report says. The NNSA plans to achieve a 30-ppy capacity by FY2026, it says. But producing 80 ppy would require additional AC, as AC must be performed on multiple samples for each pit. substantial fraction of the AC needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy must be evaluated in light of a revised path forward for AC that NNSA developed in June 2014. Based on an initial analysis by Los Alamos National Laboratory, NNSA determined that the combination of PF-4 and RLUOB with a higher plutonium limit, if properly equipped, could likely conduct all the AC. The planning for this approach will be conducted by personnel from NNSA headquarters (including the Office of NNSA). whether existing buildings, without modifications, could manufacture 80 ppy; or if modest upgrades would suffice. This report provides a framework for analyzing requirements for manufacturing, details key questions, and raises the possibility that Congress may choose to direct NNSA to generate the data needed to answer them. Regardless of what capacity is needed, and when, Congress and the Administration will need to decide among options. It focuses on two metrics: the amount of two facility resources, and how they can be used together. focuses on two metrics: the amount of two facility resources (laboratory floor space and Material At Risk (MAR), discussed next) available for pit manufacturing. It shows that it is not known whether available amounts suffice. While NNSA has extrapolated space and MAR requirements for manufacturing 80 ppy from much lower numbers, extrapolations set an upper bound and would overstate requirements. As such, they are of questionable value for decisionmaking. Comparing space andMAR required vs. available would show whether there is enough space. with the Committee's previous direction to the NNSA to carry out all CMR replacement activities in accordance with DOE Order 413.3B. While the capacity and amount of process equipment needed may be evolving due to changing programmatic requirements for plutonium, the scope of the additional work being requested is consistent with the original mission need to provide analytic chemistry and material characterization space in a different facility than the legacy CMR building. Similarly, PF-4 reconfiguration activities are also appropriate to be conducted as part of the original CMR Replacement project so long as they are limited to re-equipping lab space. PF-4 is located in Technical Area (TA) 55. The Chemistry and Metallurgy Research (CMR) building currently provides AC support for limited pit manufacture and other plutonium tasks in PF-4. Most of it was completed in 1952. It is "genuinely decrepit" and "structurally unsound," in the words of two studies, and is much more vulnerable to collapse in an earthquake than more recent buildings. NNSA maintains its commitment to cease programmatic operations in the CMR facility at LANL in approximately 2019. project. REI-2 and PEI would also permit NNSA to exit the CMR building, a long-time goal of NNSA. CMR was built to the seismic standards of the late 1940s, so it is much more vulnerable to collapse in an earthquake than is RLUOB. studies have found it to be "decrepit" and "structurally unsound," as noted under " Terminology ." NNSA points out that—comparing the quantity of plutonium, the age, and the structural integrity of the two buildings—having 9 kg of plutonium in CMR, as The Chemistry and Metallurgy Research Replacement (CMRR) line item construction project remains open. CMRR-NF was "deferr[ed] … for at least five years" in the FY2013 budget request on cost grounds. NNSA plans to include funds for two subprojects in the C MRR project beginning with the FY2016 request. One is removing excess special nuclear materials from the storage vault in PF-4, work that has been underway for some years. It would cost substantially less than CMRr-NF because it would avoid building a large plutonium facility. AC and MC subprojects as part of the Program Readiness component of Readiness in Technical Base and Facilities (RTBF), which in turn is a component of NNSA's Weapons Activities account. While the House Appropriations Committee recommended including these funds as RTBF Construction, using the CMRR line item to fund these projects is consistent with the committee's recommendation: 04-D-125, Chemistry and Metallurgy Research (CMR) Replacement Project, LANL. — The Committee recommends $35,700,000, instead of providing funds for these activities as in the budget request. project beginning with the FY2016 request. One is adding new AC equipment to RLUOB so it can perform AC to support 80 ppy. The other involves decontaminating some rooms, removing some old gloveboxes, and installing new materials characterization (MC) equipment. A separate activity, not part of the CMRR project, is removing excess special nuclear materials from the C MRR facility. This would be "Plutonium Equipment Installation," or PEI. PEI would support MC, and relates to plutonium physics. to onsite or offsite personnel in the event of a worst-case accident would be very low. A Hazard Category (HC) 3 facility can hold between 38.6 grams and 2,610 grams of Pu-239E, or about 26 to 1,760 grams of WGPu. NNSA considered several options for raising the MAR limit in RLUOB. One option was to retrofit the building by adding various safety upgrades to make it HC-3 at the highest level. is so small. NNSA calculated that RLUOB, with 400 grams WGPu, could likely be operated as HC-3 without significant facility modifications. Because of modern building features, the dose from the increased material in a worst-case accident would still be below the dose thresholds set by DOE Orders. Operating RLU OB as an HC-2 facility would not require congressional approval. Instead, congressional oversight would come through the normal reviews associated with the normal review process for such facilities. If the MAR limit for RLUOB is increased to 400 grams of WGPu for AC, how much more MAR and space, if any, would be needed for AC at LLNL or SRS? If the 26-gram limit is retained for R LUOB, would it be less costly to perform the remaining AC atLLNL or at S RS? What would it cost to enable RLU OB to hold 400 grams W GPu? Would it be cheaper to perform AC for 80 ppy at SRS or LLNL? Radiological Laboratory-Utility-Office Building (RLUOB, pronounced "rulob") was completed in FY2010. NNSA plans that RLUOB would house AC equipment needed to support pit manufacture, and possibly enough to support manufacture of 80 ppy. An approach to maintaining confidence in nuclear weapons may help provide lessons for decisionmaking on pits. In 1992, the United States began a moratorium on nuclear testing that continues to the present. This section describes that approach, then modifies it to make it applicable to pits. conducted by personnel from NNSA headquarters. A Radiological Facility like RLUOB is permitted to hold up to 38.6 grams of plutonium-239 equivalent (Pu-239E), or 26 grams of WGPu. Radiological Facilities do not require stringent safety or security measures because the dose to onsite or offsite personnel in the event of a disaster would be much lower than for a conventional facility. The study was conducted over the summer and fall of 2014 to understand the costs and benefits of this approach. cause, and the requirements for a building depend on dose. There are myriad other regulations, all of which come together in a document called a Documented Safety Analysis, or DSA. While each building in the Hazard Category system requires a DSA, a Radiological Facility, such as RLUOB, does not because the amount of radioactive material is so small. Therefore, to increase the amounts of WGPu, a building must have a higher level of radiation than it would otherwise have. AC work required. Another option was to create a "Hazard Category 4," splitting off the lower part of the HC-3 range into a separate category. That option, however, would have necessitated a revision of 10 C.F.R. 830, Nuclear Safety Management. The various limits on plutonium are based on the dose to onsite workers and offsite personnel that a worst-case accident could be expected to cause, and the requirements for a building depend on dose. Congress has been deeply involved for decades in setting policy, providing funding, and supporting or rejecting programs for the nuclear weapons enterprise. For example, it established the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), a semi-autonomous component of the Department of Energy. It also rejected a major facility to manufacture a key nuclear weapon component. It initiated and later rejected the Reliable Replacement Warhead; and directed NNSA, the Government Accountability Office, and others to conduct studies on nuclear weapon issues. One  LANL, another lab or plant in the nuclear weapons complex, NNSA, DOD, or an independent group like the National Academy of Sciences or the JASON defense advisory group could perform the study. Since LANL is intimately familiar with PF-4, it could be argued that it should do the report. On the other hand, LANL could be perceived as having a conflict of interest. An independent group would not have this potential conflict of interests but wouldn't have LANL's knowledge ofPF-4.  LANL and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory are both nuclear weapon design laboratories. LANL might conduct the initial study and an independent group could review it. Since the two labs have often competed for projects and have a reputation as "friendly adversaries," involving LLNL would provide an added measure of confidence in the study. Before the study could begin, the Nuclear Weapons Council would have to approve the study before it could go ahead. The study would be peer-reviewed by LLNL and prepared by LANL. AC measurements and processes from time to time. LANL and LLNL have for decades, since before the end of nuclear testing, held that peer review is essential in developing or maintaining weapons. A second site could accommodate a surge in AC needs or provide a backup in case AC operations at LANL were suspended or disrupted. The second site would provide another source of technicians trained for plutonium AC. Several factors could contribute to the decision, including the availability of a second site and the cost of such a site. another source of technicians trained for plutonium AC. It might cost more to perform AC at two sites rather than one, though it is impossible to know without the data. A second site would necessitate shipping many plutonium samples per year from LANL to another site, which would increase the risk of an accident and could cause public concern. It may be beneficial to have all plutonium AC technicians at one site so they would have the same training and operate according to the same formal and informal procedures.. Before the study could begin, the Nuclear Weapons Council would need to define key parameters: What capacity is being sought? Is it 80 ppy, or 50 with a surge capacity to 80, or 80 with a Surge capacity to 125, or something else? What operating tempo is planned? Would manufacturing use 1 shift per day/5 days a week, 2 shifts per day, or operate 24/7? The answer is related to capacity. If the capacity sought is 80 pPy using 3 shifts each day, a higher surge capacity would be difficult at best. would be difficult at best. The answer is also related to cost and equipment. Using two shifts per day, it might be possible to reach 80 ppy with equipment that would support 50 ppy on a single shift. A more costly option would be to increase the amount of equipment (and thus floor space used) to enable production of 80 with asingle shift. Would the capacity be held in standby mode most of the time, available for use as needed; operated for months or years at 80 p py for certain pit campaigns and held in low-rate production mode for. For example, LANL is validating an AC system that may require a sample size of 1.5 mg of WGPu instead of 225 mg. It may be difficult to provide enough MAR and floor space at LANL for the AC for 80 ppy. LANL and a second site could cross-check the accuracy of each other's AC measurements and processes from time to time.. The case for having a second. site perform some of the AC needed for 80. ppy while maintaining the full suite of AC. needed for80 ppy is: LANL would gain little if any technical competence by conducting AC for. 40 ppy vs., say, 40.ppy. this latter number be much reduced if the samples were all analyzed at LANL? What turnaround time would be required for samples moved onsite or shipped offsite? The time required to receive AC results would be needed in order to estimate the number of gloveboxes and temporary storage locations. The analysis would need to take into account that most AC is done on a confirmatory basis, i.e., manufacturing proceeds on the assumption that AC results will confirm that samples are within specifications. Such AC is not time-sensitive. Determining how much MAR and space would be needed to manufacture 80 ppy would require an industrial process analysis. An extrapolation provides an upper bound: LANL is planning to facility layout, and process flows must be considered. Adding further complexity, determining the space needed for 80 p py requires analyzing the entire manufacturing process, including answers to such questions as: How much additional space will be needed in PF-4 for supporting infrastructure, such as packaging, shipping, receiving, waste management, and temporary storage? An extrapolation provides an upper bound: LANL is planning to increase PF-4's capacity to 30 ppy. However, such a study is likely to find that less space and equipment would suffice because of efficiencies. In a process step, for example, a piece of equipment that could support manufacture of 300 ppy would suffice for any number less than 300, whether 10, 30, or 80. A study would need to take into account that there are many ways to make more ppy than 300.  module might free up enough MAR but not enough space for 80 ppy, or that moving Pu-238 programs to another site would suffice. (Other factors may enter into feasibility as well, such as the condition of a building.) But without data for space and MAR needed to manufacture 80 p py, one cannot know which options are infeasible, which provide excess capacity and thus entail excess cost, and which are "just right" Regarding AC, the discussion shows that there are multiple options to provide AC capacity, and highlights the issue of whether all AC should be done at LANL and, if so, where. for 80 ppy, would it be less costly to perform the remaining AC at LLNL or at SRS? LANL is conducting projects to bolster the seismic robustness of PF-4. If 2,600 kg PE is not enough MAR, could additional projects raise the MAR allowance enough to accommodate manufacture of 80 p py? LANl maintains that each successive module should cost less than the one before it. On the other hand, it is possible to increase the MAR from 1,800 to 2, 600 kg PE (or more or less) LANL could manufacture 70 ppy using existing buildings and an operating cost of $500 million per year, but it would cost $2 billion for new construction. It appears that it would take over a decade to reach 80 ppy, and the path to that capacity is obscure. If the path becomes clearer, it would become more important to determine if 80 is the right number for LANL to manufacture. A sensitivity analysis would provide the data, but the answer would be a matter of judgment. Quantification of Margins and Uncertainties was developed by LANL and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) The idea underlying QMU was that several steps in a nuclear weapon must all work for the weapon. The idea was that transmission of a signal to detonate the weapon, explosion of the high explosive surrounding the pit, transmission of the energy from the explosion to the secondary stage, and detonation of the second stage were all key to the success of the nuclear weapon. LNL and LANL developed a stockpile stewardship program to maintain nuclear weapons without testing. minimum required quantity. At the same time, there are uncertainties in the predicted quantity. Did the calculation incorporate all relevant variables? Were there biases in experiments on which the calculations were based? Were the most relevant nuclear tests used as a data source? The uncertainty can be quantified through calculations (such as computer models). Further, the amount of uncertainty is bounded because each gate has an upper and a lower limit. If margin exceeds uncertainty for a particular gate, then there can be confidence that the weapon will "pass through" that gate satisfactorily. Each step, or "gate" in QMU terminology, can be quantified. For example, a certain amount of energy must be transmitted to the secondary for it to detonate. Another QMU concept is margin. margin is the amount by which the predicted quantity exceeds the minimum required quantity. At the same time, there are uncertainties in predicting the detonation rate of a QMU weapon, such as how much energy will be needed to trigger the detonator's detonator. The QMU system is based on the idea that each step in the process must work in a certain way for the weapon to function. The longer the timeframe, the more uncertainties can be expected to emerge. It would not be acceptable to let uncertainties that materialize into actual events reduce margin below zero. One way to maintain enough margin to support a specified pit manufacturing capacity is to develop multiple means to counterbalance uncertainties that would reduce margin. Some means could be implemented promptly; others could be developed, held in reserve, and implemented only as needed. Having these means available for future deployment would add confidence that sufficient margin could be maintained. that gate satisfactorily, and if margin exceeds uncertainty for all gates, there can be confidence that the weapon will work. The degree of confidence at each gate is expressed as margin divided by uncertainty; the higher the number, the greater the confidence. QMU provides three key concepts relevant to decisionmaking on pit manufacturing. Margin is the amount by which (1) space available for pit manufacturing exceeds (2) space required to manufacture 80 ppy, and (3) MAR available for Pit Manufacturing exceeds (4) MAR required tomanufacture 80ppy. Congress may choose to consider three decisions. Decision 1: For pit manufacturing, is there currently enough margin for space and MAR in PF-4? If not, what can be done to provide it? Decision 2: What steps can be taken to maintain these margins over decades in the face of uncertainties? Decision 3: For AC, space andMAR available across the nuclear weapons complex exceed these two numbers. At issue: How much AC should be done in the event of a change in margin. Mar and space margins could be calculated precisely for the present moment, but they cannot be calculated in advance. Uncertainty : Margins can change over time. Many actions, events, decisions, and discoveries have the potential to create uncertainties that could increase or decrease availability of, or requirements for, space and MAR. Figure 1 shows hypothetical examples of uncertainties. Those in red could reduce margin, and those in green could increase it. The margins are not at issue because the nuclear weapons complex has ample space. MAR for AC for 80 ppy. Certain pit campaigns could be held in low-rate production mode for other periods; operated at a steady rate, less than 80 ppy; or operated at full capacity at all times. What programs could be moved out of PF-4 if necessary to create enough space or MAR, where would they go, what would the move cost, and who would pay? What is a reasonable tradeoff between cost and capacity? As a notional example, if LANL could manufacture 70 ppy using existing buildings and an could make more space available for pit manufacture. Pit fabrication occupies 12,000 sf, which is available for immediate repurposing. One option involves building one or more " modules," reinforced-concrete structures that would be buried near PF-4. Figure 3 shows how moving these two tasks into two modules could release space in PF-3. It shows 5,000sf being moved from Pu-238 programs to Module 1, with the released space used for pit manufacturing. Another 5,00sf is moved from pit fabrication space inPF-4 to Module 2, making that much more net space available for pit production. such as materials characterization, which occupies 5,600 square feet of laboratory space. Moving out these two activities would release about 6,800square feet of lab space. Some waste processing activities in PF-4 are also lower-MAR. While these activities have a lower MAR level, they would still require Hazard Category 3-level facilities. LANL expects these modules would be comparable in cost to Hazard Category-2 modules. The current 12,000 sf inPF-4 available for pit fabrication is enough to fabricate 30 pit modules. shifted from one purpose to another, and LANL is undertaking such projects. If manufacturing 80 ppy requires more space than is available in PF-4, NNSA would need to find alternatives. It would be difficult for Congress to decide how to obtain the space and MAR sf, to be made available for pit manufacturing, as well as the 4,700 sf of repurposable space. A fourth option to release space would be to build one or more modules for lower-MAR activities now housed inPF-4. to facilitate possible future deployment. Any option could be deployed promptly or held in reserve. For each, a decision would be needed on whether to proceed and, if so, when. Such decisions would depend on how much space was needed given then-current space availability and, later, on the extent of any reduction in space margin. This analysis also applies to " MAR Options for PF-4 ," below, and is not repeated there. Figure 2 shows the 2012 allocation of space inPF-4 by program. The gray area, 4,700 square feet, is available for immediate repurposing. for 80 ppy, is there a need to move any pit fabrication work (such as hemishell casting), Pu-238 work, or any other high-MAR work out of PF-4, whether to modules or to another site? If the MAR allowance in PF- 4 is not sufficient to accommodate manufacture of 80 p py, by how much would it have to be raised to do so? Could that be done, and if so what would the project entail? MAR is not evenly distributed across space. 91% of Pu- 238 MAR was at one point concentrated in 5,000 sf. Would one module release enough MAR and space in PF-4 for pit manufacture? Would moving the entire Pu-238 line, 9,600 sf, to another site have the same result? Or would the released space be needed to accommodate added equipment needed to manufacture 80 ppy? At present, RLUOB is permitted to have 26 grams of WGPu MAR for AC. If this limit remains in place, how much more MAR would be needed for AC at LLNL or SRS? Another option (not shown) would be to build one module for Pu-238 work or pit casting. This option would release some 5,000 sf in PF-4 in addition to the 4,700 sf available for repurposing. A third option would move Pu- 238 work from LANL. Two sites, Savannah River Site (SRS) (SC) and Idaho National Laboratory (INL) have stated that they have, or could modify, buildings to do this work. total PF-4 MAR (2,600 kg PE) as 100%, Module 1 would have 1.5% as much MAR asPF-4 and Module 2 would have 6.5%. Option 2 would move the Pu-238 MAR contained in 5,000 sf of PF- 4 to one module, releasing 52% of the space. Option 3 would move all Pu- 238 work to INL or SRS. This would free up all the MAR, vs. 91% for Option 2. As with space, it may be possible to increase MAR margin without major construction. February 27, 2013, was 1,800 kg PE. The gray space, 21.5%, represents the PF-4 MAR allowance unused on that date. As noted, this analysis assumes that seismic upgrades increase PF-3 MAR to 2,600 kg PE, and assumes that programs other than pit manufacturing use the MAR they used on that day. If the newly-available 800 kg PE of MAR and the unallocated MAR are both allocated to pit manufacturing and combined with the pit fabrication MAR, then 57.0% of the MAR inPF-4 would be available for pit work. for a smaller fraction of the higher MAR allowance. If adding 800 kg of MAR is not sufficient to support 80 ppy, at least three other options would release more MAR. While Pu-238 is only a small fraction of PF-4's radioactive material by weight, it is so radioactive that it is allocated 40% of the MAR allowance, though it did not use that much on February 27, 2013. Nor is MAR spread evenly within a program space, as discussed below. For more information, or to request a copy of the report, visit the National Nuclear Security Administration website. MAR required to manufacture 80 ppy. (The two margins are independent.) Thus, solving for margin requires four numbers. Various options could make more space available in PF-4 for pit manufacture. Note that while margin must always be greater than zero, the amount of available space and MAR needed to maintain margin could expand or contract. For example, MAR insufficient for 80 p Py might suffice for 40 ppy, or 40 pPy might not be enough for 80. For more information on the pit manufacturing process, visit the plutonium supply and waste management page. pit manufacturing, and points out that various non-construction options would also increase space and MAR margins. As of 2012, 4,700 sf was available for immediate repurposing in PF-4. Is that space, plus the 12,000 sf for pit fabrication, plus space for other pit-related tasks, enough to manufacture 80 ppy? If there is enough space andMAR margin inPF-4 for 80 p py, is there a need to move any Pu-238 programs? become more important to determine if 80 is the right number, or if it should be higher or lower. This report starts with a static approach to pit manufacturing, examining the space and MAR margins for 80 ppy. This static approach provides a baseline and metrics to indicate whether margin is ample, minimal, or insufficient. Next, the report takes a dynamic approach, noting that uncertainties could affect margin and how they might affect the industry. The report concludes by looking at the impact of future deviations from this baseline. and MAR required to manufacture 80 ppy. Available space and MAR figures would probably need to be updated. Once those numbers are provided, Congress would be in a better position to determine which options would free enough space andMAR in PF-4 to manufacture. LANL (and perhaps other sites) has computer models and other resources needed to perform these calculations. The floor layout to manufacture 30 ppy would fully consume the space, and most of the MAR allowance, currently available inPF-4. Further, updated seismic modeling results raised concerns that an 80-ppy plant would be dangerous.  detailed analysis would be needed to determine whether enough MAR allowance and space could be made available in PF-4 to manufacture 80 ppy. Given that margin can change over time, it might be useful to have an annual review of margin and potential factors that could affect it. Which organization could perform such a study? Candidates include NASA, the Air Force, and the Department of Energy, among others. To learn more about how to make more space or MAR available, see " Space Options forPF-4 " and " MAR Options for PF- 4 ." There are options to provide more MAR. Such options would almost surely be faster and less costly than major construction. Without data on space required for 80 ppy, it is not possible to know if they would provide enough space. On the other hand, a higher tempo for an extended period could increase operating cost, require more maintenance, reduce time available for maintenance, increase the likelihood of equipment failure, and have more impact on production if equipment fails. The total MAR allowance for PF-4 on February 27, 2013, was 1,800 kg PE. some or all Pu-238 work out of PF-4, the main plutonium building at LANL, would make MAR and space available for other purposes. MAR is measured in units of plutonium equivalent (PE), which is about 1.38 times as radioactive as Pu-239. This analysis assumes a MAR allowance of 2,600 kg PE and, as noted in the sidebar, uses space data from 2012. It would be about a half-century old when production is anticipated to reach 80 ppy.  LANL is undertaking several projects that would increase the MAR permitted in PF-4. Once some additional upgrades are completed, the MAR allowance may revert to 2,600 kg or perhaps some other number. Various projects to increase seismic robustness have been underway for years; see the section " Increasing MAR Margin Without Major Construction ." They proceed on an open-ended basis guided by results of continuing analyses. This article originally stated that the maximum amount of material that can be stored in a building is 1,800 kg. We are happy to clarify this. possible to increase MAR margin without major construction. One approach is to strengthen PF-4 seismically to reduce the risk of building collapse. Steps include wrapping supporting columns in carbon fiber bonded with epoxy to strengthen them, anchoring the wall more strongly to the ceiling, installing braces that tie columns to beams, building shear walls, and installing a drag strut on the roof ofPF-4. Other steps could reduce the chance that plutonium would escape even if the building collapsed. plutonium escaping in an accident causes dose.