Security Presidential Directive 54 establishing the CNCI is classified. Some details of the initiative have been made public through departmental press releases, speeches by executive branch leaders, and analysis offered by individuals who follow cybersecurity- and terrorism-related issues. Rather than serving as an overarching national strategy document with specific instructions for federal agency implementation activities, the C NCI is seen as a plan of action for programs and initiatives to be addressed at the operational and tactical level. It also delineates "an approach that anticipates future cyber threats and technologies" The Administration's 60-day review's near-term action plan calls for preparing and updating a new national strategy for securing communications and information infrastructure. Others say it is not a comprehensive strategy but is instead a set of recommendations, much like the CSIS Commission report. Legislation proposed in S. 733 calls upon the President to present a national strategy within one year of the bill's enactment. This bill would also create a national advisory panel to oversee implementation of the strategic plan and to periodically advise. Some have criticized the provision, which would give the President emergency control over public and private networks in the event of a crisis. As this legislation is marked up, alternative proposals may be considered. Some Members of Congress have proposed legislation that would create new offices or to periodically advise the president on the need for revising the strategy. Some have argued that the bill is vague in addressing civil liberties protections. As the federal government continues to organize to defend its strategic cyber assets, some members of Congress are proposing legislation. President Obama announced the creation of a new cabinet-level position to coordinate cybersecurity strategy and policy across the federal government. This new "Cyber Coordinator" would report to the National Security Advisor and the Director of the National Economic Council. The new coordinator will have "regular access to the president" and will be considered a key member of the national security staff, while working closely with the economic team. Some duties will include improving federal agencies' computer security and coordinating with the White House and Congress. reorganizing the executive branch to better address cybersecurity-related issues, nor does it discuss the military's role in securing federal cyber networks. A common theme emerging from a review of the current proposals is the need for a current comprehensive national cybersecurity strategy. Critics maintain that without an overall government strategy and underlying policies to outline cybersecurity priorities, goals, and how to achieve them, executive organization and program funding may be a muddled process. Congress may consider drafting legislation that would outline a strategic security framework and priority areas. In a December 2008 report, the Commission provided findings and recommendations to secure cyberspace during the 44 th presidency. In May 2009, President Obama issued the results of the Administration's 60-Day Cyberspace Policy Review (60-day review) The review's goal was to assess U.S. policies and organizational structures for cybersecurity. In order to develop a strategic framework, the review noted the following near-term action plan issues: Appoint a cybersecurity official to coordinate interagency strategy and policy. Prepare and update national strategy to secure the information and communications infrastructure. Since 2008, numerous executive branch, legislative, and think tank recommendations and proposals have been offered to address various aspects of ongoing and emerging cybersecurity issues. Complicating the issue is a lack of consensus on the definition of "privacy" in the context of the Internet. The White House 60-Day Cyberspace Policy Review is the most current attempts to frame the issue and are often referred to when discussions arise regarding how best to identify challenges and implement changes to the current U.S. approach to cybersecurity. Department of Commerce's National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has primary responsibility for reducing cyber vulnerabilities in the electrical grid. Congress directed NIST to lead the Department of Energy and other agencies in ensuring an interoperable, secure, and open energy infrastructure. NIST is also tasked to promote the development of key security standards and guidelines to support the implementation of and compliance with the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA; P.L. 107-347 ). The Department of Health also has responsibility for cyber security. for all federal government information systems and networks managed by the Department of Commerce. The section would require the Secretary of Commerce to develop and integrate a national licensing, certification, and periodic recertification program for cybersecurity professionals. The Director of the National Science Foundation to give priority to computer, information science, and engineering research to ensure support is provided to meet cybersecurity challenges. See under: Section 5—State and Regional Cybersecurity Enhancement Program; Part A—Creation and Support of Cybersecurity Centers. Department of Health and Human Services has recently adopted new interoperability standards for health care information technology. HHS is responsible for implementing privacy and security standards for electronic personal health information. Department of Homeland Security leads the cybersecurity coordination for non-military departments and agencies in the federal government. National Cyber Security Directorate works with private industry on a voluntary basis to promote safe cybersecurity practices. DHS is also home to the National Cyber security Center, a clearinghouse whose mission is to coordinate information from all agencies to help secure. A persistent set of issues has stymied significant progress in detecting and deterring existing threats and implementing effective safeguard measures. Issues that appear to continually challenge U.S. cybersecurity efforts include uncertainty of the geographic location of the perpetrators of cyber attacks. The introduction of new vulnerabilities to the nation's infrastructure from increasingly sophisticated threats. A poorly coordinated federal-private sector approach to addressing emerging risks; and legal ambiguities with respect to U.s. cybersecurity. The evolving integration of mobile technology devices into critical information infrastructure. addressing emerging risks; and legal ambiguities with respect to U.S. response and offensive actions. Many security observers suggest that an equally daunting group of strategy and policy challenges must be addressed if the United States is to continue to rely on technology as a major component of societal activities. Since 2008, a number of strategy. and policy proposals have been offered that may assist in addressing the appropriate balance of relying on emerging technology and network-centric governance, according to the National Security Council. appropriate balance of relying on emerging technology and network-centric governance while safeguarding critical infrastructure and control systems. Recent events such as the April 2007 cyber attacks on Estonia and cyber attacks during the 2008 Georgian incursion have served to increase awareness that cybersecurity is not just about protecting computers. The Obama Administration declared that U.S. critical information infrastructures are a strategic national asset in a May 29, 2009, speech by the President. Recognizing the importance of cyberspace over the past few years. provide a report that includes "a summary that ranks the risks within and across transportation modes, including vulnerability of a cyber attack" H.R. 1910 Chief Technology Officer Act of 2009 Status of bill : Introduced in House—referred to House Subcommittee on Information Policy, Census, and National Archives. Section 2 would require the Chief Technology officer to assess the impact of information technology and networked information technology systems. See under: Section 2—Office of the Chief technology Officer; Policy Planning, Analysis and Advice. the impact of information technology and networked information technology systems and applications on cybersecurity and personal privacy. advise the President on steps necessary to mitigate and manage security and privacy risks. The CTO would also be responsible for "fact-gathering, analysis, and assessment of the federal government's information technology infrastructures, information technology strategy, and use of technology" Other responsibilities would be ensuring "the security and Privacy of theFederal information technology infrastructure and networks" and "coordinating closely with other federal departments and agencies" security of classified networks. 8. Expand cyber education. 9. Invest in high-risk, high-reward research and development to ensure transformational change. 10. Define enduring deterrent technologies and programs. 11. Develop multi-pronged approaches to supply chain risk management (potential tampering within the production line and the risk associated with computer products and parts made outside the United States). 12. Defining the role of cybersecurity in private sector domains. A Cybersecurity Commission (the Commission) organized by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) was formed in 2008 to provide advice to the new Administration. Department of Defense has a number of programs designed to address vulnerabilities and threats to its own networks. Secretary Gates recently announced the creation of a new sub-unified command under the U.S. Strategic Command. This new command is to coordinate a unified approach to defending and securing military cyber networks. The December 2006 National Military Strategy for Cyberspace Operations (NMS-CO) guides computer network attack and defense principles. The Defense Industrial Base is a non-profit organization that provides information and support to the Department of Defense. The Defense Industrial Base (DIB) initiative provides a vehicle through which DOD and industry partners can better share information on cyber threats and defense practices. DOD also has established a Cybercrime Center (DC3) that assists in criminal, counterintelligence, counterterrorism, and fraud investigations by the Defense Criminal Investigative Organizations (DCIOs) and DOD counterintelligence activities. In addition to setting forensics standards, it provides training and testing laboratories for protection of defense information systems. Common themes often noted by many cybersecurity experts underscore a lack of transparency and dearth of defined departmental roles and responsibilities.  cybersecurity is broadly defined as the protection of critical information infrastructure and its processes and content. For the Department of Defense, cybersecurity takes on an offensive or defensive national security role. Conceptual and definitional differences among agencies make a unified government strategic approach to cybersecurity a challenge to coordinate. Some of the apparent gaps discovered may actually be addressed by existing classified programs, which cannot be discussed in this unclassified report.. Federal executive branch programs, strategy documents, and reports have been analyzed to illustrate the government's response to emerging challenges in cybersecurity. Cybersecurity is a cross-cutting field that affects many government and non-governmental stakeholders. The U.S. military views cyberspace as a warfighting domain as well as a force enabler. Agencies may have their own response plans, procedures, and responsible entities that vastly differ from those of other cooperating agencies. Some security observers are concerned about the federal government's present ability to first detect and then respond in a coordinated way to a cyber incident of major significance. The Department Cyberspace is a framework for organizing and prioritizing federal cybersecurity efforts, including the private sector. duties will include improving federal agencies' computer security and coordinating national cybersecurity awareness campaigns. Some security observers are concerned that the lack of apparent authority of the coordinator will reduce his ability to comprehensively address changes enumerated in the 60-day review. Programs in several departments address various aspects of cybersecurity within their respective areas of responsibility. While every department and agency has an individual and collective role in securing federal cyber enterprises, some organizations have more of a role than others in securing the nation's cyber infrastructure. as "information assurance"—as well as enabling the freedom of movement to fight and win battles in cyberspace. This approach differs from that of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), which is tasked to coordinate cybersecurity between the rest of the federal government and the private sector. Some point to the 2003 National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace as a framework for organizing and prioritizing federal cybersecurity. DHS's task is complicated, as technology and processes are largely owned and operated by the privatesector. There is no single congressional committee that can claim primary jurisdiction over cyberspace. Neither is there a single executive agency or department with sole cybersecurity responsibility or commensurate authorities. As the President stated, "No single official oversees cybersecurity policy across the federal government. No single agency has the responsibility or authority to match the scope and scale of the challenge. Indeed, when it comes to cybersecurity, federal agencies have had to work together to address the problem" The White House has not commented on the President's comments. entities that vastly differ from those of other cooperating agencies. The Cyber Incident Annex to the National Response Plan of December 2004 describes many different authorities and policy documents to guide a response. Multiple federal information systems enterprise networks make a concerted strategic approach to network security even more difficult. Another cybersecurity difficulty for the government is balancing the protection of civil liberties and individual privacy protections with the desire for comprehensive security. The U.S. government has a responsibility to protect the privacy of its citizens, and to provide them with a level of security they can trust. and dearth of defined departmental roles and responsibilities in addressing cyber-related issues from a comprehensive national approach. Such concerns often assert that a continuation of addressing cyber incidents as a myopic individual agency responsibility will eventually lead to increased systemic national vulnerabilities and put the nation at greater risk. It is argued by some that a more strategic approach to detecting, identifying, mitigating, and responding to future cyber incidences may strengthen both the individual agency and the whole-of-government approach to securing the technologies that underpin every aspect of modern society. stated at an information technology security conference that there are 12 objectives supporting the initiative's goal. These include the following: Move toward managing a single federal enterprise network with common security standards across the network. Develop and deploy intrusion prevention tools. Review and potentially redirect research and funding. Develop a government-wide cyber intelligence plan. Increase the security of classified networks. Expand cyber education. Define cyber security issues in the U.S. for the first time in more than a decade. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. as one of the President's key management priorities and establish performance metrics. Designate a privacy and civil liberties official in the NSC cybersecurity directorate. Convene appropriate interagency mechanisms to conduct legal analysis of priority cybersecurity issues. Initiate a national cybersecurity public awareness and education campaign. Develop U.S. government positions for an international cybersecurity policy framework. Prepare a cybersecurity incident response plan. Develop a framework for research and development strategies that focus on "game-changing" technologies that enhance security. and non-disclosure policies written into statutory frameworks that may not specifically address cybersecurity. Civil liberties is an area of concern for both Congress and privacy advocates, but does not appear to be an immediate priority reflected in legislative action to date. This may suggest to some that existing programs have emphasized securing networks before tackling the attendant issues such as freedom of speech, privacy, and civil liberties. The Cybersecurity Act of 2014 is a bipartisan bill that aims to improve the security and privacy of the Internet. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPA A) Status of bill: P.L. 104-191 , 110 Stat. 1936.  Defines criminality of security breaches and unauthorized access to data on federal computer systems and certain financial institutions. The Financial Services Modernizati on Act of 1999 (Gramm-Leach-Blil ey) status of bill : P.l. 106-102 , 113 Stat. 1338, enacted November 12, 1999. 1338, enacted November 12, 1999. Requires financial institutions to provide consumers with a privacy notice at the time the consumer relationship is established and annually thereafter. The privacy notice must explain the information collected about the consumer, where that information is shared, how that information was used, and the option to opt-out of sharing with third-party companies. See under: Disclosure of Nonpublic Personal Information (Financial Privacy Rule) for more information about the rule. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. It is difficult to secure information infrastructures and their content without tradeoffs between security and the freedoms associated with the Internet. Many concerned about civil liberties fear that the executive branch will use its national security powers and national defense mandate as justification for encroaching on privacy. Others regard security measures, such as network traffic monitoring, as a violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which states that "no one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy, family, home or home" Title I of the ECPA protects wire, oral, and electronic communications while in transit. It sets down requirements for search warrants that are more stringent than in other settings. Title II of theECPA, the Stored Communications Act (SCA) protects communication held in electronic storage, most notably messages stored on computers. 18 U.S.C. § 1030 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1984 Status of bill: P.L. 98-473 , 98 Stat. 2190 on October 12, 1984. S. 177 Strengthening Our Economy Through Small Business Innovation Act of 2009 (referred to Senate committee)—cybersecurity mentioned as a research priority for small businesses. H.R. 1131 Community Protection and Response Act of 2008 includes a cyber attack in the listing of major disaster. S. 2454 American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2010 (placed on calendar in Senate) includes cyber security as a concern. HR. 2200 Transportation Security Administration Authorization Act (reached Senate committee after responsibilities regarding security and privacy of the infrastructure and networks) S. 177 Strengthening Our Economy Through Small Business Innovation Act of 2009. The bill would amend the Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act to improve federal response efforts after a terrorist strike or other major disaster affecting homeland security. In the section for the definition of a major disaster it would include cyber attack on computer systems as one of the possibilities under "terrorist attack" See under: Section 6—Inclusion of Energy, Security, Transportation, And Water Related Research In The List of Topics Deserving Special. Water Related Research In The List of Topics Deserving Special Consideration As SBIR Research Topics. The bill would extend allocation of funds for research programs related to the Small Business Innovation Research program. Section 6 includes cybersecurity as one of the topics of interest, in particular the research by the National Academy of Sciences relating to cybersecurity. S. 1391 Department of Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 Status of bill: Awaiting conference. See under : Title IX—Department of Defense Organization and Management; Subtitle D—Other Matters; Section 932—Instruction of Private Sector Employees in Cyber Security Courses of the Defense. amend Part II of the Federal Power Act in order to address cybersecurity threats to the reliability of the bulk power system. In addition, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission would be authorized to respond in cases of imminent cyber security threats. The bill attempts to improve the cybersecurity of the critical electric infrastructure through added powers and responsibilities for the Secretary of Homeland Security as well as the Federal energy Regulatory Commission. The section also emphasizes ensuring that the Commission protects cybersecurity-related information. H.R. 2195 To provide additional authorities to adequately protect thecritical electric infrastructure against cyber attack, and for other purposes. Senate committee). H.R. 266 Cybersecurity Education Enhancement Act of 2009 (referred to House subcommittee)—expansion of professional cybersecurity education programs. S. 778 To establish, within the Executive Office of the President, the Office. of the National Cybersecurity Advisor. H.r. 2195 To amend the Federal Power Act to provide. additional authorities to adequately protect the critical electric infrastructure against cyber attack. and for other purposes. HR. 2165 Bulk Power System. electric infrastructure from cyber attack, and to provide emergency authority to address future cybersecurity threats to the reliability of the bulk power system. H.R. 2165 Bulk Power System Protection Act of 2009 would establish the National Office for Cyberspace within the Executive Office of the President. The Office would play a crucial role in deterring cyber attacks and defending the cyber critical infrastructure. The bill seeks to amend Part II of the Federal Power Act in order to protect the bulk power system from cybersecurity threats. See under: Section 3—Protection of Bulk Power system From Cybersecurity Threats. See also: Section 2-3 of the bill. Transportation Security Administration Authorization Act (referred to Senate committee after being received from House) S. 1436 Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2010 (placed on Calendar in Senate)—for the "purpose of forming and governing a national energy sector cyber organization" The section would allocate funding for the Department of Energy as it relates to electricity delivery and energy reliability. As part of the funding the Secretary must establish an "independent national energysector cyber security organization to institute research, development and deployment priorities" agencies to identify areas where federal agencies with jurisdiction may best support efforts to enhance security of the bulk power electric grid. One of the objectives of the mentioned "federal policy" is to provide cybersecurity for the regional electrical grid. H.R. 3293 Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2010 (placed on calendar in Senate) Provides $607,482,000 for the public health and social services emergency fund to support activities related to countering potential threats to civilian populations. Appropriations Act, 2010 Status of bill: Awaiting conference. The bill would allocate $1,700,000 for the Center for Counterterrorism and Cyber Crime, located in Norwich University, Northfield, Vermont. H.R. 2454 American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009 status of bill : Placed on Calendar in Senate. See under: Title III—Protection, Preparedness, Response, and Recovery; Federal Emergency Management Agency; State and local programs; item 12 (B) H.R. 2200 Transportation Security Administration Authorization Act. Referred to Senate Committee after being received from House. Would require TSA to implement system of risk-based allocation of resources. Would also require report that includes "a summary that ranks the risks and benefits of various technologies and programs" for the U.S. electricity grid. The bill would also require "integration of smart grid technology to enhance the security of the electricity grid" The bill was passed by the House and is now being referred to the Senate. Private Sector Employees in Cyber Security Courses of the Defense Cyber Investigations Training Academy. No more than 200 full-time student positions may be filled at any one time by private sector employees enrolled under this section. Eligible private sector. employees will be those engaged in providing significant defense related support to the Department of Defense or other federal agencies or. those whose work product is relevant to national security policy or strategy. in Cyber security Courses. In addition to the Cyber Security. Courses, the bill provides authority for the Secretary of Defense to permit private. sector employees to enroll in and receive instruction at the Defense. Cyber investigations training academy. governments of foreign countries to improve cybersecurity." Procurement Title XLI —procurement (in thousands of dollars) Under "Procurement—Defense Wide": Major Equipment DISA #027—Cyber Security Initiative $18,188. Under "Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Air Force": Cybersecurity for control networks research $4,000. Under Defense-wide: # 0305103G Cybersecurity initiative unknown amount (classified). Under "Operational Systems Development" Defense-side: # 0301372L Cybersecurity Initiative GDIP unknown amount. The annual report on the military power of the People's Republic of China must include "developments in China's asymmetric capabilities" Section 1814 requires the Secretary of Defense to prepare a plan for response to natural disasters and terrorist events. Section 3123 includes cybersecurity threats as part of the "plan for addressing security risks posed to nuclear weapons complex" P.L. 110-161 ( H.R. 2764 ) Consol idated Appropriations Act, 2008 . Includes $143,539,000 in FBI salaries. P.L. 110-329 ( H.R. 2638 ) Consolidated Security, Disaster Assistance, and Continuing Appropriations Act, 2009. Includes $143,539,000 in FBI salaries and expenses to "address emerging threats in counterterrorism and cybersecurity" P.L110-329 would have directed $3,500,000 for State and local cybersecurity training. Would have also directed $4,000,000 to the Idaho National Laboratory's Power and Cyber Systems Protection, Analysis, and Testing Program. The bill would establish an Office of the National Cybersecurity Advisor. The position would serve the President as the principal advisor for all cybersecurity related matters. The bill would authorize the Secretary of Homeland Security to establish a program to award grants to institutions of higher education for the Cybersecurity Education Enhancement Act of 2008. In section 4, under the "authority of Director of Office of Management and Budget to establish information security," the bill would have authorized the purchase of equipment to provide training in cybersecurity for professional development and degree programs. Presidency reports, Congress may consider other options when addressing current and emerging cyber risks to the nation. Additional options may include the following: Drafting legislation, strategy, and policies that take into account rapidly changing telecommunications and Internet-based technologies. Requiring the Department of Homeland Security annually to produce cybersecurity risk assessments for all nonfederal government entities with security responsibilities. Establishing a permanent Congressional Commission or Task Force that would assess and report to Congress successes and ongoing challenges in U.S. cybersecurity programs and activities. Programs. Establish/update legal authorities —expanding and/or clarifying roles and responsibilities of cybersecurity stakeholders. Privacy and civil liberties —maintaining privacy and freedom of speech protections on the Internet while devising cybersecurity procedures. Awareness, research, education, and training —developing a workforce to meet cybersecurity goals. Raising citizenry awareness of cybersecurity best practices, and developing more secure technologies. These broad themes are used to compare current policy and legislative proposals with executive branch initiatives. attendant issues such as freedom of speech, privacy, and civil liberty protections as they pertain to the Internet. Another common area of focus appears to be addressing issues related to workforce development, outreach, and collaboration-based initiatives. The proposed S. 733 in its initial version contained provisions for presidential cybersecurity authorities. Such activities could be replaced or supplemented with the inclusion of additional focus on the training, education, and research aspects of cybersecurity. Questions of resources and appropriate organizational structures appear to be a concern. Congress have proposed legislation that would create new offices or positions, or give greater authority and direction to existing positions. It is unclear how proposals such as S. 778 to establish the Office of the National Cybersecurity Advisor fits with the administration's recently proposed Cyber Coordinator. Privacy and civil liberties concerns are not highlighted in recent congressional proposals. However, there are Internet privacy and non-disclosure policies written into statutory frameworks that may not be covered by legislation. The proposal was introduced by Rep. Steve Israel, R-New Jersey. S. 773 Cybersecurity Act of 2009 Status of bill: Introduced in Senate. Section 3 would instruct the President to designate a Cybersecurity Advisory Panel. Section 4 would require the Secretary of Commerce to implement a system to provide dynamic and real-time cybersecurity status and vulnerability information for all federal government information systems and networks. The bill would have established the "American Cybersecurity Commission" to investigate the current threats to the cybersecurity of American business and infrastructure from foreign entities. The commission would have focused on "strategy for American business, national infrastructure, and United States Government non-military and non-national security related related" to ensure support is provided to meet cybersecurity challenges. S. 778 would establish the Office of the National Cybersecurity Advisor. The bill would require the President to develop and implement a comprehensive national cybersecurity strategy that includes such thigs as a long-term plan of the nation's cybersecurity future as well as a Quadrennial Cyber Review. It was introduced in the Senate and referred to the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. It has not yet been voted on by the Senate. Table 1 notes corresponding legislation proposed in both the 111 th Congress and the 110 th Congress to relevant existing statutory frameworks. Current appropriations bills are shown to illustrate congressional spending priorities. These lists are not exhaustive, but rather are designed to give a representative overview of cybersecurity related activities in the federal government. This information is current as of September 28, 2009. For the most up-to-date information, please consult the Legislative Information System (LIS) at http://www.congress.gov/ . to award grants to institutions of higher education for the establishment or expansion of cybersecurity professional development programs. Section 4 would require the Secretary of State to submit to the Senate and House a report describing "any actions taken by the United States to work with the governments of foreign countries to improve cybersecurity" S. 1438 Fostering a Global Response to Cyber Attacks Act was introduced in Senate and referred to Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. The bill expresses the interest of Congress is improving the nation's cybersecurity overall. work product is relevant to national security policy or strategy. Section 1222 "Report on Cuba and Cuba's Relations With Other Countries" includes "the status and extent of Cuba's cyberwarfare program" as one of the seven subjects to be addressed by the report. H.R. 2647 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 Status of bill: Awaiting conference. Section 340 would improve congressional oversight of federal cybersecurity programs. S. 1494 Intelligence Authorization Act of Fiscal Year2010 Status of Bill: Passed/agreed to in Senate. sections mention cybersecurity in connection with overall security for chemical facilities. S. 1494 Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 (passed/agreed to in Senate)—has an extensive and detailed section (340) on cybersecurity oversight. H.R. 1910 Chief Technology Officer Act of 2009 (referred to House subcommittee)—to create the Office of the Chief technology Officer within the Executive Office ofThe President. Bill called for the President to create a "comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative advisory panel" P.L. 110-139 ( H.R. 6) Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007. Mandates that the "smart grid" must incorporate "full cybersecurity" P.L., 110-181 ( H,R. 4986) National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008. Indicates that the annual report on the military power of the U.S. will be published. P.R., 110, 110-53 ( H.,R. 1) Implementing Recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Act of2007. Section 340 would improve congressional oversight of federal cybersecurity programs. S. 1494 would require that the President inform Congress about every cybersecurity program currently in operation and every new program created thereafter. H.R. 2868 Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Act of 2009 defines "chemical facility security performance standards" S. 921 would establish the National Office for Cyberspace within the U.S. Information and Communications Enhancement act of 2009 would set up the National office for Cybersecurity in the United States. Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 (awaiting conference)—civilian cybersecurity training authorization, creation of Joint Program Office for Cyber Operations Capabilities. Peripheral cybersecurity related or mentions P.L. 111-5 ( H.R. 1 ) American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, 2009 —under Title XXX Health Information Technology and Quality, section 13001 directs privacy standards for electronic health information. Title VI directs the Commerce Department and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to institute and expand the "broadband technologies and opportunities program" infrastructure, and United States Government non-military and non-national security related computer systems." Final status : Introduced in House. Summary list of Statutory Foundations for Cybersecurity Legislation 44 U.S.C. § 3541 Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 Status of bill: P.L. 107-347 on December 17, 2002. See under: Title III of the E-Government Act of2002. Contains standards for securing information and information systems within federal agencies, and requires compliance reports be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget.