FPS does not have specific national guidance on when and how guard inspections should be performed. Inspections are typically completed by FPS during regular business hours and in locations where FPS has a field office. On an occasion when FPS officials conducted a post inspection at night, they found a guard asleep at his post after taking a break from work. The quality of guard posts at GSA buildings are inconsistent and the quality varied in the six regions we examined. The GSA has limited assurance that its guards are complying with post orders. to explain why it was not able to verify the status of the remaining 5,900 guards. In 2008, we recommended that FPS develop and implement specific guidelines and standards for measuring its performance and improve how it categorizes, collects, and analyzes data. RAMP could be the vehicle through which FPS implements these recommendations, but the use of inaccurate and unreliable data will hamper performance measurement efforts. Furthermore, it is unclear whether FPS will meet the implementation goals established by the RAMP program. FPS conducted an audit of CERTS to determine the status of its guard training and certification. Results of the audit showed that FPS was able to verify the status for about 7,600 of its 15,000 guards. One of its regions did not meet the deadline for submitting data to headquarters because its data were not accurate or reliable and therefore about 1,500 guards were not included in the audit. FPS was not able to explain why it was not can not verify the guards' status. our recommendation and stated that FPS will submit a monthly report to the Secretary. FPS took on a number of immediate actions with respect to contract guard management in response to our covert testing. For example, in July 2009, the Director of FPS instructed Regional Directors to accelerate the implementation of FPS’s requirement that two guard posts at Level IV facilities be inspected weekly. FPS also required more X-ray and magnetometer training for inspectors and guards. FPS has recently issued an information bulletin to all inspectors and Guards to provide them with information about package contents. FPS does not have a fully reliable system for monitoring and verifying guard training and certification requirements. 62 percent of the guards had at least one expired certification, including a declaration that guards have not been convicted of domestic violence. We also found that some guards were not provided building-specific training, such as what actions to take during a building evacuation or a building emergency. This lack of training may have contributed to several incidents.safety features had been repaired. We found that FPS doesn't have a Fully reliable system to monitor and verify guard training, certification requirements, or safety features. FPS requires that all prospective guards complete about 128 hours of training. In one region, FPS has not provided the X-ray or magnetometer training to its 1,500 guards since 2004. The chances of omitting major steps in the risk management process increase if personnel are not well trained in applying risk management. Insufficient X-rays and magnetometers may have contributed to several incidents required oversight hours and officials in another region said they are struggling to monitor the delivery of contractor-provided training in the region. inspectors and guards to provide them with information about package screening. FPS produced a 15-minute training video designed to provide information on bomb component detection. According to FPS, each guard was required to read the information bulletin and watch the video within 30 days. Despite the steps FPS has taken, there are a number of factors that will make implementing and sustaining these actions difficult. First, FPS does not have adequate controls to monitor and track whether its 11 regions are completing these new measures. It is unclear whether the new measures will be implemented in time. X-ray and magnetometer training may have contributed to several incidents at GSA buildings in which guards were negligent in carrying out their responsibilities. For example, at a level IV federal facility in a major metropolitan area, an infant in a carrier was sent through an X-ray machine due to a guard’s negligence. Because the guard was not paying attention and the woman placed the carrier on the X-rays machine, the infant was sent to a child care facility. The incident occurred at a facility that has child care services. X-ray machine. Because the guard was not paying attention and the machine’s safety features had been disabled, the infant in the carrier was sent through. FPS investigated the incident and dismissed the guard; however, the guard subsequently sued FPS for not providing the required X-ray training. The guard won the suit because FPS could not produce any documentation to show that the guard had received the training, according to an FPS official. In addition, FPS officials from that region could not tell us whether the X-rays machine”s safety Features had been repaired. Lack of training may have contributed to several incidents where guards neglected their assigned responsibilities. At a level IV facility, the guards did not follow evacuation procedures and left two access points unattended, thereby leaving the facility vulnerable. FPS has limited assurance that its guards are complying with post-emergency procedures, according to the report. The report was published by the Center for Security Studies at the University of Florida. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. they found a guard asleep at his post after taking a pain-killer prescription drug. FPS also found other incidents at high-security facilities where guards neglected or inadequately performed their assigned responsibilities. For example, a guard failed to recognize or did not properly X-ray a box containing handguns at the loading dock at a facility. Because guards were not properly trained and did not comply with post orders, our investigators—with the components for an improvised explosive device (IED) concealed on their persons—passed undetected through access points controlled by guards. concealed on their persons—passed undetected through access points controlled by FPS guards at 10 of 10 level IV facilities in four major cities. The specific components for this device, items used to conceal the device components, and the methods of concealment that we used during our covert testing are classified, and thus are not discussed in this testimony. The facilities included district offices of a U.S. Senator and aU.S Representative as well as agencies of the federal government. Of the 10level IV facilities our investigators penetrated, 8 were government owned and 2 were leased facilities. In 2006, FPS had recommended, based on the results of its risk analysis, the use of this dog and an X-ray machine. The dog and handler work 12-hour shifts Monday through Friday when most mail is delivered and shipped. The GSA regional security officials we spoke with questioned whether this approach was more effective and efficient than using an on-site enhanced X-Ray machine that could detect biological and chemical agents as well as explosives. In accordance with its policies, FPS conducted a BSA of the site in 2008 and determined that using a dog would bring the projected threat rating down from moderate to low. and a U.S. Representative as well as agencies of the Departments of Homeland Security, Transportation, Health and Human Services, Justice, State, and others. The two leased facilities did not have any guards at the access control points at the time of our testing. Using publicly available information, our investigators identified a type of device that a terrorist could use to cause damage to a federal facility and threaten the safety of federal workers and the general public. The device was an IED made up of two parts—a liquid explosive and a low-yield detonator. a low-yield detonator. Investigators determined that the detonator could also be used to set off a liquid explosive and cause significantly more damage. To gain entry into each of the 10 level IV facilities, investigators showed a photo identification (a state driver’s license) and walked through the magnetometers. To ensure safety during this testing, we took precautions so that the IED would not explode. For example, we lowered the concentration level of the material. The material included a variety of materials not typically brought into a federal facility by employees or the public. identification (a state driver’s license) and walked through the magnetometers without incident. Our investigators also placed their briefcases with the IED material on the conveyor belt of the X-ray machine, but the guards detected nothing. At security checkpoints at 3 of the 10 facilities, our investigators noticed that the guard was not looking at theX-ray screen as some IED components passed through the machine. A guard questioned an item in the briefcase but did not search it. At each facility, once past the guard screening checkpoint, our investigators proceeded to a restroom and assembled the IED. A guard questioned an item in the briefcase at one of the 10 facilities but the materials were subsequently allowed through the X-ray machines. At some of the facilities, the restrooms were locked. Our investigators gained access by asking employees to let them in. With theIED completely assembled in a briefcase, our Investigators walked freely around several floors of the facility and into various executive and legislative branch offices. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately.Mark L. Goldstein at (202) 512-2834 or by e-mail goldsteinm@gao.gov. a security equipment countermeasure. The upgrade of a surveillance system shared by two high-security locations would cost around $650,000. Members of one building security committee (BSC) said they approved spending between $350,000 and $375,000 to fund their agencies’ share. But the BSC of the other location would not approve funding; therefore, FPS could not upgrade the system it had recommended. In November 2008 FPS officials told us that they were moving ahead with the project by drawing on unexpended revenues. FPS is developing a National Countermeasures Program. The program will establish standards and national procurement contracts for security equipment. According to FPS, the program will also include life-cycle management plans for countermeasures. FPS officials said they established an X-ray machine contract and that future program contracts will also explore the use of the schedule as a source for national purchase and service contracts. The agency says the program should provide the agency with a framework to better manage its security equipment inventory; meet its operational requirement to identify, implement, and maintain security equipment; and respond. the National Countermeasures Program is fully implemented, FPS will continue to rely on individual inspectors to make technology decisions. For example, FPS had anticipated that the X-ray machine and magnetometer contracts would be awarded by December 2008, and that contracts for surveillance and intrusion detection systems would be awards during fiscal year 2009. In May 2009, FPS officials told us that theX-rayMachine contract was awarded on April 30, 2009. They anticipated awarding the magnetometer contract in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 and an electronic security services contract for Surveillance and intrusion Detection systems during the same period. requirement to identify, implement, and maintain security equipment; and respond to stakeholders’ needs. National Countermeasures Program includes improvements that may enhance FPS’s ability to leverage technology. It does not establish tools for assessing the cost-effectiveness of competing technologies and countermeasures and implementation has been delayed. Security professionals are faced with a multitude of technology options offered by private vendors, including advanced intrusion detection systems, biotechnology options for screening people, and sophisticated video monitoring. The National Counter Measures Program will enable inspectors to develop countermeasure cost estimates. the cost- effectiveness of alternative technologies into FPS’s planned improvements in the security acquisition area would represent an enhanced application of this key practice. We recently recommended that FPS develop a methodology and guidance for assessing and comparing the cost-effectiveness of technology alternatives, and DHS concurred with our recommendation. Another concern is that FPS had planned to implement the program throughout fiscal year 2009, but extended implementation into fiscal year 2010. Until the National Countermeasures Program is fully implemented, FPS will continue. offices, as described above. Leveraging technology is a key practice over which FPS has somewhat more control. FPS does not have a comprehensive approach for identifying, acquiring, and assessing the cost-effectiveness of the security equipment that its inspectors recommend. Individual FPS inspectors have considerable latitude in determining which technologies and other countermeasures to recommend. The inspectors receive little training and guidance in how to assess the relative cost-effectiveiveness of these technologies or determine the expected return on investment. FPS officials told us that inspectors make technology decisions based on the initial training they receive, personal knowledge and experience. FPS inspectors receive some training in identifying and recommending security technologies as part of their initial FPS physical security training. Since FPS was transferred to DHS in 2003, its refresher training program for inspectors has primarily focused on law enforcement. FPS does not provide inspectors with specialized guidance and standards for cost-effectively selecting technology. In the absence of specific guidance, inspectors follow the Department of Justice minimum countermeasure standards and other relevant Interagency Security Committee standards, but these standards are not set by FPS. FPS does not have a strategic human capital plan to guide its current and future workforce planning efforts. Instead, FPS has developed a short-term hiring plan that does not include key human capital principles, such as determining an agency’s optimum staffing needs. FPS has been transitioning to an inspector-based workforce, thus eliminating the police officer position and relying primarily on FPS inspectors for both law enforcement and physical security activities. FPS believes that this change will ensure that its staff has the right mix of technical skills and training needed. capital plan has also contributed to inconsistent approaches in how FPS regions and headquarters are managing human capital activities. FPS officials in some of the regions we visited said they implement their own procedures for managing their workforce. FPS does not collect data on its workforce’s knowledge, skills, and abilities. These elements are necessary for successful workforce planning activities, such as identifying and filling skill gaps and succession planning. We recently recommended that FPS improve how it collects data to help it improve its workforce planning efforts. FPS believes RAMP will provide inspectors with the information needed to make more informed and defensible recommendations for security countermeasures. FPS also plans to use RAMP to track and analyze certain workforce data, contract guard program data, and other performance data such as the types and definitions of incidents and incident response. FPS is designing RAMP so that it will produce risk assessments that are compliant with Interagency Security Committee standards, compatible with the risk management framework set forth by the National Infrastructure Protection Plan. as the types and definitions of incidents and incident response times. FPS intends for RAMP to improve its approach to risk assessment, human capital management, and performance measurement. FPS plans to transfer data from several of its legacy systems, including the Contract Guard Employment Requirements Tracking System (CERTS), into RAMP. In July 2009, we testified on the accuracy and reliability issues associated with CERTS. FPS has not fully addressed some implementation issues with RAMP, we say. We urge FPS to address these issues as soon as possible. is unclear whether FPS will meet the implementation goals established in the program’s proposed timeline. FPS began designing RAMP in early 2007 and expects to implement the program in three phases, completing its implementation by the end of fiscal year 2011. Until RAMP components are fully implemented, FPS will continue to rely on its current risk assessment. The program is expected to be fully implemented by the beginning of fiscalyear 2010, according to FPS officials. It is not clear whether FPS plans to implement a pilot version of RAMP by that time. FPS will continue to rely on its current risk assessment tool, methodology, and process, potentially leaving GSA and tenant agencies dissatisfied. We recently recommended that FPS provide the Secretary of Homeland Security with regular updates on the status of RAMP including the implementation status of deliverables, clear timelines for completion of tasks and milestones, and plans for addressing any implementation obstacles. DHS concurred with this recommendation and stated that FPS will submit a monthly report to the Secretary. Finally, as we stated at the outset, the protection of federal real property has been and continues to be a major concern. FPS cannot say with certainty that it is being done. New directives appear to be based primarily on what works well from a headquarters or National Capital Region perspective. In addition, another regional official estimated that his region is meeting about 10 percent of the required oversight hours. Officials in another region said they were meeting about 20 percent of required hours. The agency has 11 regions and can't track whether its 11 regions are completing these new requirements, a regional official said. It is not clear if the new requirements will be implemented by October 1. landscape changes and new threats emerge. implementing our specific recommendations related to areas such as human capital and risk management will be critical steps in the right direction. Overall, following this framework would enhance FPS’s chances for future success and could position FPS to become a leader and benchmark agency for facility protection in the federal government. We are pleased to answer any questions you might have. For further information on this testimony, please contact Mark L. Goldstein at (202) 512-2834 or by e-mail goldsteinm@gao.gov. The Interagency Security Committee is using its key facility protection practices as key management practices to guide its priorities and work activities. FPS faces challenges that are similar, in many respects, to those that agencies across the government are facing. With millions of people visiting the nation’s nearly 400 park units annually, ensuring their security and the protection of our national treasures is paramount. More emphasis on the key practices would provide greater assurance that Park Service assets are well protected, the committee said in a report. Homeland security information sharing can be ineffective and fragmented. It is critical that FPS and GSA reach consensus on sharing information in a timely manner. DHS did not explicitly commit to reaching consensus with GSA in identifying building security information that can be shared, the authors say. The steps we outlined in our recommendation comprise a comprehensive plan for sharing and safeguarding sensitive information, they say. They say it is important that FPS engage GSA to identify what building security info can be sharing and follow the information sharing and safeguard steps. the BSA is needed for GSA to fulfill its responsibilities related to the protection of federal buildings and occupants. establish internal controls to ensure that shared information is adequately safeguarded. provide guidance for employees to use in deciding what information to protect with sensitive but unclassified designations. provisions for training on making designations, controlling, and sharing such information with GSA and other entities. A review process to evaluate how well this information sharing process is working, with results reported to the Secretary of Homeland Security. The ability to share security-related information can unify the efforts of federal agencies in preventing or minimizing terrorist attacks. In the absence of comprehensive information-sharing plans, many aspects of homeland security information sharing can be ineffective and fragmented. Information is a vital tool in fighting terrorism, and the timely dissemination of that information to the appropriate government agency is absolutely critical to maintaining the security of our nation. In a post-September 11th era, it is crucial that federal agencies work together to share information to advance homeland security and critical infrastructure protection efforts. At one location, FPS had received inaccurate square footage data from GSA and had overcharged the primary tenant agency for a guard post that protected space shared by all the tenants. Once GSA was made aware of the problem, the agency obtained updated information and worked with the tenant agencies to develop a cost-sharing plan for the guard post. BSC members told us that security expenses were somewhat more equitable. GSA officials commented that this tenant adheres to its agency’s building security protocols and does not necessarily follow GSA's tenant policies and procedures. BSC members were confused about procedures for screening visitors who are passengers in employees’ cars that enter the building via the parking garage. One of the tenants recounted an incident in which a security guard directed the visitor to walk through the garage to an appropriate screening station. According to the GSA property manager, this action created a safety hazard. The BSC had no written policy on the procedure that members could access. Additionally, BSC members were not aware of the BSC’s policy on screening visitors. FPS plans to implement education and outreach initiatives to improve customer service to tenant agencies. 53 percent of e-mail addresses and 27 percent of the telephone numbers for designated points of contacts were missing from FPS’s contact database. FPS recommended that FPS collect and maintain an accurate and comprehensive list of all facility-designated points of contact, as well as a system for regularly updating this list. DHS concurred with our recommendations and recommended FPS develop and implement a program forEducation and outreach to GSA and tenant agencies to ensure they are aware of the current roles, responsibilities, and services provided by FPS. FPS, GSA, and tenant agency representatives did not all meet together regularly to make security preparations or manage security operations during construction. FPS officials told us they had not been invited to project meetings, although GSA officials said they had invited FPS and that FPS attended some meetings. In May 2008, FPS discovered that specific surveillance equipment had been removed. Survey of GSA tenant agencies found that they had mixed views about some of the services they pay FPS to provide. On average, one-third of tenant agencies could not comment on how satisfied or dissatisfied they were with FPS’s level of communication. met regularly, but GSA officials told us they were not invited to these meetings. At one location, GSA undertook a major renovation project beginning in April 2007. GSA said they do not receive timely incident information for the site from FPS and suggested that increased communication among the agencies would help them be more effective managers of their properties and provide tenants with better customer service. The GSA, FPS, and tenant agency representatives did not speak to CNN for this report. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. FPS faces challenges in ensuring that its fee-based funding structure accounts for the varying levels of risk and types of services provided at federal facilities. FPS’s basic security fee, which funds most of its operations, does not account for the risk faced by specific buildings. The level providing the service differs significantly among different users, as is the case with FPS.require additional expertise and resources. Finally, FPS continues to struggle with funding challenges that impede its ability to allocate resources to more effectively manage risk. FPS charges federal agencies the same basic security fee regardless of the perceived threat to a particular building or agency. In fiscal year 2009, FPS charged 66 cents per square foot for basic security. FPS categorizes buildings according to security levels based on its assessment of each building’s risk and size. For example, level I facilities typically face less risk because they are generally small storefront-type-type buildings. The assessment does not affect the security fee FPS charges. The fee does not account for the risk faced by specific buildings, the level of service provided, or the cost of providing services. typically face less risk because they are generally small storefront-type operations with a low level of public contact, such as a Social Security Administration office. These facilities are charged the same basic security fee of 66 cents per square foot as a level IV facility that may contain high-risk law enforcement and intelligence agencies and highly sensitive government records. We also have reported that basing government fees on the cost of providing a service promotes equity, especially when the costs of providing the service differs significantly among different users. since 2004 and critical law enforcement services have been reduced or eliminated. For example, FPS has eliminated its use of proactive patrol to prevent or detect criminal violations at many GSA buildings. According to some FPS officials at regions we visited, not providing proactive patrol has limited its law enforcement personnel to a reactive force. In the past, proactive patrol permitted its police officers and inspectors to identify and apprehend individuals that were surveilling GSA building. In contrast, when FPS is not able to patrol federal buildings, there is increased potential for illegal entry and other crimes. buildings, there is increased potential for illegal entry and other criminal activity. In one city we visited, a deceased individual had been found in a vacant GSA facility that was not regularly patrolled by FPS. FPS does not fully ensure that its contract security guards have the training and certifications required to be deployed to a GSA building. We have noted that the effectiveness of a risk management approach depends on the involvement of experienced and professional security personnel. Further, that the chances of an incident like this happening are very high. FPS does not have a reliable data management system that will allow it to accurately track these measures. Without this ability, FPS has difficulty determining whether it has mitigated the risk of GSA facilities to crime or a terrorist attack. FPS is taking some steps in each of the key practice areas to improve its ability to better manage its resources, the report says. It is difficult for FPS to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of its efforts to protect federal employees and facilities, allocate its limited resources, or make informed risk management decisions. FPS is limited in its ability to assess the effectiveness of its efforts to protect GSA buildings. FPS has identified output measures that are a part of the Office of Management and Budget’s Performance Assessment Rating Tool. These measures include determining whether security countermeasures have been deployed and are fully operational. The amount of time it takes to respond to an incident, and the percentage of BSAs completed on time are also included in FPS’S federal facilities security index, which is used to assess its performance. activities. Without greater attention to key protection practices, FPS will be ill equipped to efficiently and effectively fulfill its responsibilities. FPS is responsible for assessing risk, strategically managing its workforce and contract guard program, recommending countermeasures, sharing information and coordinating with GSA and tenant agencies to secure GSA buildings. It is also responsible for measuring and testing its performance as the security landscape changes and new threats emerge. The committee established subcommittees for technology best practices and training, and working groups in the areas of performance measures and strategic human capital management. countermeasures to implement or were unable to obtain funding from their agencies. Compounding this situation, FPS takes a building-by-building approach to risk management. GSA and tenant agencies have concerns about the quality and timeliness of FPS’s the key practice areas to improve its ability to better protect GSA buildings. FPS is developing the Risk Assessment and Management Program (RAMP), which could enhance its approach to assessing risk, managing human capital, and measuring performance. It believes RAMP will provide inspectors with the information needed to improve the quality of BSAs. agencies have concerns about the quality and timeliness of FPS’s risk assessment services. For example, GSA officials told us they have had difficulties receiving timely risk assessments from FPS for space GSA is considering leasing. An inefficient risk assessment process for new lease projects can add costs for GSA and create problems for tenant agencies that have been planning for a move. Therefore, G SA is updating a risk assessment tool that it began developing in 1998, but has not recently used. FPS assesses risk and recommends countermeasures to GSA and tenant agencies. FPS’s ability to influence the allocation of resources using risk management is limited because resource allocation decisions are the responsibility of GSA. It is critical that FPS and GSA have well-established lines of communication with each other and with tenant agencies to ensure that all parties are aware of the ever- changing risks in a dynamic threat environment, the authors say. The authors recommend that FPS provide law enforcement and related security services for GSA buildings. FPS uses BSA executive summary to convey countermeasure recommendations to GSA. Document includes cost estimates but no analysis of alternatives. GSA and tenant agencies have limited assurance that investments in technologies are cost-effective, consistent across buildings, and best available alternatives. In 2006, FPS had had an explosives detection dog used to screen mail that is distributed elsewhere. For example, at one location we visited, an explosives Detection Dog was used to screens mail that was distributed elsewhere in the building. The types of information shared at the regional and building levels are inconsistent. Overall, FPS and GSA disagree over what information should be shared. GSA officials at all levels cite limitations with the BSA executive summary. FPS believes that this document contains sufficient information for GSA to make decisions about purchasing and implementing FPS’s recommended countermeasures. The two organizations are partners in protecting and securing GSA buildings, but disagree over how much of the information in the B SA should be share. practice in October 2008, GSA security officials said that these briefings mostly focused on crime statistics and did not constitute comprehensive threat analyses. FPS is only required to meet formally with GSA property managers and tenant agencies as part of the BSA process. We identified information sharing gaps at several level III and IV sites that we visited, and found that in some cases these deficiencies led to decreased security awareness and increased risk. At one location, we observed during our interview with the FPS employee that the employee had not been aware of the information sharing gap. summary saying, for example, that it does not contain enough contextual information on threats and vulnerabilities to support FPS’s countermeasure recommendations. GSA security officials told us that FPS does not consistently share BSA executive summaries across all regions. Instead, GSA wants to receive BSAs in their entirety so that it can better protect GSA buildings and the tenants who occupy them. According to GSA, building protection functions are an integral part of its property preservation, operation, and management responsibilities.