Incumbents in Full-Time PAS Positions, as of the End of the 111 th Congress Incumbents. in Full time PASPositions. FHFA Nomination Action During the 111. th Congress Incumbent in Full- time Pas Positions. MCC Nomination action During the. 111. th Congress incumbents in full-time PASpositions. OSTP Nomination Action During the 111. th Congress Incumbented in full-Time PAS Pos positions. OPM Nominationaction During the 111. the 111 th Congress OPM nominates the OPM to be the next secretary of state for the U.S. Nominations and Appointments to Independent and Other Agencies Appendix B. Nomination Action by Agency Type, 111 th Congress Appendix C. Agency Abbreviations Independent Agencies ARC—Appalachian Regional Commission BBG—Broadcasting Board of Governors CIA—Central Intelligence Agency CNCS—Corporation. Incumbents in Full-Time PAS Positions, as of the End of the 111th Congress ARC Nominated Action During the 111 th House of Representatives. Private Investment Corporation OPM—Office of Personnel Management OSC —Office of Special Counsel PC—Peace Corps SBA—Small Business Administration SSA—Social Security Administration SSS—Selective Service System TDA—Trade Development Agency USAID—United States Agency for International Development Executive Office of the President (EOP) CEA—Council of Economic Advisers CEQ—Council on Environmental Quality OMB—Office. of Management and Budget ONDCP— Office of National Drug Control Policy OSTP—Office, Science. and Technology Policy OUSTR— office of U.S. Trade Representative Multilateral Banking Organizations AfDB—African Development Bank AsDB—Asian Development Bank EBRD—European Bank for Reconstruction and Development Development IJC—International Joint Commission, U.S. and Canada IMF—International Monetary Fund Legislative Branch Agencies AC—Architect of the Capitol GAO—Government Accountability Office GPO —Government Printing Office LC—Library of Congress. IJC is the International Joint Commission of the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom. IMF is the IMF's legislative branch of the International Monetary Fund. GPO is the Government Printing Office. LC is the Library of Congress' library of records. Regional Commission BBG—Broadcasting Board of Governors CIA—Central Intelligence Agency CNCS—Corporation for National and Community Service CSOSA—Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia DRA—Delta Regional Authority EPA—Environmental Protection Agency FHFA—Federal Housing Finance Agency FMCS—Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service GSA—General Services Administration MCC—Millennium Challenge Corporation NARA—National Archives and Records Administration NASA—National Aeronautics and Space Administration NFAH—National Foundation on the Arts and Humanities NSF—National Science Foundation NBRC—Northern Border Regional Commission ODNI—Office of the Director of National Intelligence OGE —Office of Government Ethics Each nomination action table provides the average "days to confirm" in two ways: mean and median. While the mean is a more familiar measure, the median does not tend to be influenced by outliers. Presenting both numbers is a good way to get a sense of how long it will take to confirm a nominee to a position. For example, a nomination that took an extraordinarily long time might cause a significant change in the mean, but the median would be unaffected. For more information, go to the U.S. Senate website.  appendix A presents a table of all nominations and recess appointments to positions in independent and other agencies. It identifies the agency involved and the dates of nomination. The table indicates if and when a nomination was confirmed, withdrawn, or returned. The mean and median numbers of days taken to confirm a nomination are also provided. But the median would be unaffected. Presenting both numbers is a better way to look at the central tendency of the data. The median would also be unaffected but the mean would be. Congress appear in two tables for each agency, "Incumbents in Full-time PAS Positions, as of the End of the 111 th Congress" and "Nomination Action During the 111th Congress" As noted, some agencies had no nomination activity during this period of time. For most presidentially appointed positions requiring Senate confirmation, the pay levels fall under the Executive Schedule. As of January 2011, pay levels ranged from level I ($199,700) for Cabinet-level positions. of January 2011, ranged from level I $199,700 for Cabinet-level offices to level V ($145,700) for the lowest-ranked positions. An incumbent's name followed by "(A)" indicates an official who was, at that time, serving in an acting capacity. Vacancies are also noted in the first table. The nomination action table provides, in chronological order, information concerning each nomination. It shows the name of the nominee, position involved, date of nomination and date of confirmation. This report explains the process for filling positions to which the President makes appointments with the advice and consent of the Senate. It identifies, for the 111 th Congress, all nominations to full-time positions requiring Senate confirmation in 41 organizations in the executive branch. Of these nominations, 92 were confirmed, 14 were returned to the President, and 1 was withdrawn. The length of time a given nomination may be pending in the Senate varies widely. Some nominations are confirmed within a few days, others may not be confirmed for several months.  appendix B provides a table with summary information on appointments and nominations by four agency categories. For each of these categories, the table provides the number of positions, nominations, individual nominees, confirmations, nominations returned, and nominations withdrawn. The table also provides the mean and median number of days to confirm a nomination. Appendix C provides a list of department abbreviations. Incumbents in Full-Time PAS Positions, as of the end of the Obama administration. For more information, visit the White House website. A profile of each agency tracks the agency's nominations, providing information on Senate activity. The profiles also identify, for each agency, positions requiring Senate confirmation, the incumbents in those positions as of the end of the 111 th Congress, and the pay levels of those officials. The Constitution (Article II, Section 2) empowers the President to nominate and, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to appoint the principal officers of the United States. Reports are based on U.S. reports. The act does not apply to positions on multi-headed regulatory boards and commissions or to certain other specific positions which may be filled temporarily under other statutory provisions. In addition, during a presidential transition, the 210-day restriction period does not begin until either 90 days after the President assumes office, or 90 day after the vacancy occurs. During the 111 th Congress, President Barack Obama submitted to the Senate 107 nominations to full-time positions in independent agencies, agencies in the Executive Office of the President (EOP), multilateral agencies, and legislative. for each independent agency nomination confirmed in the 111 th Congress, the number of days between nomination and confirmation ("days to confirm") The mean (average) number of. days taken by the Senate to confirm a nomination to a position covered by this report was 93.1. The median number of Days to Confirm a nominee was 65.5. The agency profiles provide data on presidential nominations and appointments to full-time positions requiring Senate confirmation, and Senate action on the nominations. Data on appointment actions during the 111th Congress appear in two tables for each agency. Congress has enacted provisions that restrict the pay of recess appointees under certain circumstances. Under the provisions, if the position falls vacant while the Senate is in session and the President fills it by recess appointment, the appointee may not be paid from the Treasury until the end of the following session of Congress. Because most potential appointees to full-time positions cannot serve without a salary, the President has an incentive to use his recess appointment authority in ways that allow them to be paid. The President has occasionally used the recess appointment power to circumvent the confirmation process. Similar wording was included in annual funding measures for most or all of the previous 50 years. Another recent congressional response to the President's use of recess appointments was the decision to restructure the Senate's longer recesses into a series of shorter recesses divided by pro-recesses. "No money ... shall be paid to any person for the filling of any position for which he or she has been nominated after the Senate has voted not to approve the nomination of said person," the bill says. Department of Justice interpreted law to preclude payment of appointee who is given successive recess appointments to the same position. Recess appointees whose nominations to a full term are subsequently rejected by the Senate may continue to serve until the end of their recess appointment. A provision of the FY2008 Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act that is still in effect today may prevent them from being paid after their rejection. The provision reads, "Hereafter, no part of any appropriation contained in this or any other Act shall be paid to any person" by the Senate within 30 days before the end of the session and an individual other than the one whose nomination was rejected thereafter receives a recess appointment. A recess appointment falling under any one of these three exceptions must be followed by a nomination to the position not later than 40 days after the beginning of the next session of the Senate. For this reason, the President generally submits a new nomination for the nominee even when an old nomination is pending. These provisions have been interpreted by the Department of Justice to the tables in this report. Under Senate rules, nominations must be returned to the White House if the Senate goes on recess for more than 30 days. The Senate structured its 2010 pre-election break as a series of shorter recesses separated by pro forma sessions. The use of the practice reportedly stemmed from a lack of agreement between the Senate majority leader and the Senate minority leader regarding the disposition of pending nominations over the break. The two sides this week could not agree on which nominees to return and which to keep active. recesses into a series of shorter recesses divided by pro forma sessions. Premised on the notion that the President can be restricted from making recess appointments during a recess that is no more than three days. Beginning in November 2007, the Senate agreed to regularly scheduled pro-forma sessions during periods that would have otherwise been recesses of duration of a week or longer. The Senate did not use the pro- forma session practices during the first session of the 111 th Congress. The Senate historically has confirmed most, but not all, executive nominations. Rarely, however, has a vote to confirm a nomination failed on the Senate floor. Usually, unsuccessful nominations fail to be reported or discharged from committee. Failure of a nomination to make it out of committee has occurred for a variety of reasons, including opposition to the nomination, inadequate amount of time for consideration of the nomination and factors that may not be directly related to the merits of the nominations. The Senate rules provide that "[nominations neither confirmed nor rejected during the session at which they are made shall not be acted upon at any succeeding session without a vote" Much of the Senate confirmation process occurs at the committee level. Committee nomination activity has generally included investigation, hearing, and reporting stages. Hearings provide a public forum to discuss a nomination and any issues related to the program or agency for which the nominee would be responsible. Even where confirmation has been thought by most to be a virtual certainty, hearings have provided Senators and the nominee with opportunities to go on the record with particular views or commitments. A committee may decline to act on a nomination at any point—upon referral, after investigation, or after a hearing. In the second stage, the Senate alone determines whether or not to confirm a nomination. The Senate's scrutiny of a nomination has depended largely on the importance of the position involved, existing political circumstances, and policy implications. Two other factors have sometimes affected the examination of a nominee's personal and professional qualities: whether the President's party controlled the Senate, and the degree to which the President became involved in supporting the nomination. Much of the Senate confirmation process takes place behind closed doors in the Senate. President has cleared the candidate, the nomination is ready to be submitted to the Senate. The selection and clearance stage has often been the longest part of the appointment process. At the end of 2004, in an effort to reduce the elapsed time between a new President's inauguration and the appointment of his or her national security team, the White House began a new process for the selection of national security advisers. The process has been called the "National Security Nominee Selection and Appointment Process (NSCAP)". Congress enacted amendments to the Presidential Transition Act of 1963. These amendments encourage a President-elect to submit, for security clearance, potential nominees to high-level national security positions as soon as possible after the election. A separate provision of law, enacted as part of the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, lengthens, during presidential transitions, the potential duration of a temporary appointment by 90 days. Although this provision might give some additional flexibility to an incoming President, it might also lengthen the appointment process for some positions. the appointee may not be paid from the Treasury until he or she is confirmed by the Senate. However, the salary prohibition does not apply (1) if the vacancy arose within 30 days before the end of the session of the Senate; or (2) if a nomination for the office, other than the nomination of an individual appointed during the preceding recess, was pending before the Senate for its advice and consent. The salary prohibition doesn't apply if the Senate rejects a nomination within a certain period of time. who is occupying a position requiring Senate confirmation to perform those tasks. The temporary appointment is for 210 days, but the time restriction is suspended if a first or second nomination for the position is pending. In addition, during a presidential transition, the 210-day period can be extended to a maximum of two years. The President may select any officer or employee of the subject agency who is occupies a position for which the rate of pay is equal to or greater than the minimum rates of pay at the GS-15 level. shall not be acted upon at any succeeding session without being again made to the Senate by the President. In practice, such pending nominations have been returned to the President at the end of the session or Congress. Pending nominations also may be returned automatically to the president at the beginning of a recess of more than 30 days. In the final stage, the confirmed nominee is given a commission, which bears the Great Seal of the United States and is signed by the president. The Senate rule providing for this return is often waived. and is signed by the President, and is sworn into office. The President may sign the commission at any time after confirmation, at which point the appointment becomes official. The Constitution also empowers the President to make a limited-term appointment without Senate confirmation when the Senate is in recess, either during a session (intrasession recess appointment) or between sessions. Recess appointments expire at the end of the following session of Congress. Presidents have made recess appointments in the past, but they have not been confirmed. may also be temporarily filled under the Vacancies Act. A nominee who is hired by the agency as a consultant while awaiting confirmation may serve only in an advisory capacity. Authority to act comes once there is Senate confirmation and presidential appointment, or if another method of appointment, such as a recess appointment or a temporary appointment, is utilized. For further information on these methods, see section entitled " Recess Appointments " and " Temporary Appointment " below. In the second stage, the Senate alone must approve the nominee. Congress has provided limited statutory authority for the temporary filling of vacant positions requiring Senate confirmation. Those pro-forma sessions will keep the White House's nominations alive but also block any recess appointments. Under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, an executive agency position requiring confirmation becomes vacant. It may be filled temporarily in one of three ways: (1) the first assistant to such a position may automatically assume the functions and duties of the office; (2) the President may direct an officer in any agency who is occupying a position requiring Senateirmation to perform that function. opposition party because of their positions in the Senate. Recess appointments have sometimes had political consequences, however, particularly where Senators perceived that such an appointment was an effort to circumvent their constitutional role. Some Senate-confirmed positions may also be temporarily filled under the Vacancies Act. If circumstances permit and conditions are met, the President could give the nominee a recess appointment to the position (see section entitled " Recess Appointments " below). The President would likely consider how it will fare in the confirmation process. consent of the Senate, to appoint the principal officers of the United States, as well as some subordinate officers. Three distinct stages mark the appointment process: selection and nomination, confirmation, and appointment. In the first stage, the White House selects and clears a prospective appointee before sending a formal nomination to the Senate. There are a number of steps in this stage of the process for most Senate-confirmed appointees. For more on this story, go to CNN.com/politics. steps in this stage of the process for most Senate-confirmed positions. Members of Congress and interest groups sometimes recommend candidates for specific PAS positions. In general, the White House is under no obligation to follow such recommendations. In the case of the Senate, however, it has been argued that Senators are constitutionally entitled, by virtue of the advice and advice of their colleagues, to offer their own recommendations. The White House Office of Presidential Personnel is responsible for vetting candidates for the position. The President selects a candidate for the job and the Senate confirms him or her. The President nominates an individual recommended by one or both Senators (if they are from the same party as the President) from that state. If neither Senator is from the President's party, he usually defers to the recommendations of party leaders from the state. Occasionally, the President solicits recommendations from Senators of the opposition party because of their positions in the Senate. For positions located within a state (U.S. attorney, U.s. marshal, and U. S. district judge), the President, by custom, normally nominates a person recommended by the state's Senators. Senators are constitutionally entitled, by virtue of the advice and consent clause, to provide advice to the President regarding his selection. As a practical matter, in instances where Senators perceive insufficient pre-nomination consultation has occurred, they have sometimes exercised their procedural prerogatives to delay or even effectively block consideration of a nomination. During the clearance process, the candidate prepares and submits several forms, including the "Public Financial Disclosure Report" (Standard Form (SF) 278) and the "Questionnaire for National Security Positions" (SF 86) Security Positions" (SF 86), and the White House "Personal Data Statement Questionnaire" The Office of the Counsel to the President oversees the clearance process, which often includes background investigations conducted by the FBI and Office of Government Ethics. If conflicts of interest are found during the background investigation, OGE and the agency ethics officer may work with the candidate to mitigate the conflicts. Once the nomination is ready, it can be submitted to the Senate for consideration. The Senate will vote on the nominee in the coming weeks.