This questionnaire can be filled out using MS-Word and returned via e-mail to USTSurvey@gao.gov. If you prefer, you may print copies of the questionnaire and complete them by hand. Please use your mouse to navigate by clicking on the field or check box you wish to answer. To select a check box or button, simply click on the center of the box. To change or deselect a checkbox response, simplyclick on the the response field. To answer a question that requires that you write a comment, click on the answer box ____ and begin typing. The box will expand to accommodate your answer. To help ensure consistency in survey responses from the various states, we provide definitions for terms in this survey at or near the point at which the term appears. Please consider these definitions when responding to survey questions. Have there been any reviews of the recent review? If so, e-mail: LaudermilkG@gao.gov. funding sources for cleanups. The practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce nonsampling error. For selected survey questions, where we were able to, we independently corroborated survey data by comparing these data with EPA data. We then followed up with states and EPA as needed about discrepancies. We included a series of data reliability questions in the survey to assess the accuracy of the information provided to us. We accepted responses to the survey through mid-October 2006. We sent e-mail reminders and conducted follow-up telephone calls with nonrespondents. survey to assess the accuracy of the information provided to us by the respondents. We collected information about (1) the databases states used to provide survey data; (2) the internal controls on those databases; and (3) whether the data provided were actual or estimates. We also requested supporting documentation if states noted their database(s) had been reviewed for quality. We used a data collection the states’ database reviews and database limitations identified in their survey responses. We contacted state officials to clarify survey responses when necessary and used a centralized tracking document to record all changes. interviewed the officials to ensure that the (1) questions were clear and unambiguous. As a result of our pretests, we made changes to some of the survey questions. We sent an announcement on November 18, 2005, of the upcoming survey to state contacts (including the District of Columbia) and then e- mailed the survey as an attachment on January 19, 2006. We asked respondents to return the survey by e-mail, fax, or mail by the end of January 2006. to selected questions and the wide variance in the reliability of those responses. With these provisos, the survey data are sufficiently reliable as they are used in the body of the report. The survey data presented in appendix II are not reliable for state level comparisons. We conducted interviews regarding data reliability with a nonprobability sample of seven states (see next page for a further discussion of this sample of states). These interviews included in-depth questions focusing on topics such as the states’ database reviews and database limitations. We used a data collection instrument (DCI) to systematically and consistently record all available data reliability information. The DCI was then reviewed by an independent person who assessed the accuracy of DCI data entries and the reasonableness of the judgments on the reliability of states’ survey data. 17 states generally reported having fairly recent data quality reviews, several internal controls on the data, no significant data quality problems. There was wide variability in the level of oversight of the databases that states use to track underground storage tank information. use to track underground storage tank information. There was similar variability in the ways state officials described how they arrived at responses to certain questions. Some states provided explanations for their responses that were precise and grounded in reasonable mathematical or trend based assumptions, while others noted that their responses were educated guesses. Given the limitations in the information reported from some states, we determined that the survey data are not comparable by state, nor should they be reported using such terms as “actual” sums, budgets, or outlays. of the surveys, and verified the computer programs used to generate survey results. From the population of 51 state contacts who were asked to participate in our survey, we received 50 questionnaires for an overall response rate of 98 percent. We did not receive a questionnaire from South Dakota. We do not know if responses for South Dakota would have differed materially from those of the states that completed the survey. from the responses we received, we gathered information about (1) state databases used to track underground storage tank information. underground storage tanks, as defined by EPA. A few states reported they were not able to provide us with data specific to federally regulated underground storage tanks for selected questions. Instead, they generally provided us with either data including a different universe of tanks or data prorated based on the number of federally regulated storage tanks in the state for these questions. Most survey questions that asked for data for a specific year referred to the federal fiscal year. If states were unable to provide data for theFederal fiscal year, we asked them to provide them with data for that year. We then attempted to contact all listed state officials via e-mail and asked them to tell us whether they or someone else in their state would be the most appropriate contact. In states where we were not able to contact the officials on EPA’s list, we sent the e-mails regarding the mostappropriate contact to officials named on lists of state contacts from two other professional organizations that also conduct surveys about underground storage tanks. Upon receiving this e- mail, a few officials identified more appropriate survey respondents. England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission and the Association of State and Territorial Solid Waste Management Officials. We pretested the survey with officials from four states between October 28, 2005, and December 21, 2005. States were selected for the pretests to ensure variation in size of workload and status of the state financial assurance fund. We then interviewed the officials to ensure that the questions were (1) questions were correct. We sent agency officials a draft of the survey and used their feedback to refine the survey. discuss each topic of interest. We then calculated a score for each state based on the number of relevant topics they could discuss, as indicated by their survey responses. We interviewed all states that had scores at or above a threshold score that we determined, based on how many states we would need to discuss the relevant topics with to obtain sufficient information for the purposes of this report. We also conducted interviews with regional program officials from EPA’s Underground Storage Tank Program in six EPA regions to gather additional information. have identified the states that fall into each category. Overall, given the limitations in the information reported from some states, data reported by states and presented in this appendix should not be used to compare state programs. To aid in our continuing reviews of the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Underground Storage Tank program, we are currently surveying the 50 states as part of a study of how states operate. The GAO is an agency of the legislative branch that reviews federal programs on behalf of the U.S. Congress. does not consider the number of releases from tanks without a viable owner in various states. According to officials in two states, the information they report in the semiannual activity reports is based on estimates rather than actual performance. For example, a Maine official told us that the Maine official said that the state does not have a viable tank owner. The EPA develops information on states’ needs and performance from states�’ semiann annual activity reports on their tank numbers and cleanup activities. However, our survey disclosed several concerns regarding the accuracy of these reports, including the following: program officials found many sites being reported that were duplicates or involved releases that did not come from regulated tanks. A Maryland Department of the Environment official acknowledged that it has been reporting semiannual performance data incorrectly. An Oklahoma Petroleum Storage Tank Division official told us that the division had been reporting performance data on all tanks regulated by the state, including the aboveground storage tanks. The state also undercounted the number of “active tanks” by excluding tanks that were only temporarily out of service. EPA recommends that the regions review each state’s data submission for reasonableness. When any of the states’ data appear questionable, the regions are asked to follow up with the states to obtain an explanation or corrected data. In some cases regional officials were not aware of reporting problems with states in their regions that our survey disclosed. To ensure that states properly understand EPA's definition of the data reporting elements, at least one EPA region reminds its states of the EPA definitions each time a semiannual activity report is due. at most, helped confirm what regions already saw as problem states. States provided data with gaps or further clarifications needed in key areas, such as the number of release sites awaiting funding. EPA decided to collect data again in 2006 without changing its method. Results for 2006 were not available as of December 2006. The 2005 Act also included language providing that EPA may withdraw approval of a state fund for financial responsibility coverage without the state’s approval. It was also included in the 2005 Act. performance. A Maine official told us that the data the state reports is generated by canvassing their regional staff. Because EPA reports call for data on releases rather than sites, Wyoming provides its best estimate of release data. An Arizona program official said the program was uncertain of EPA’s definition of “performance.’’ A Wyoming official said that the state tracks contaminated sites rather than releases. The state has found errors in the data reported in the past, the official said. 4. What are the known limitations of the current data (e.g., data elements that are known to be incomplete, incorrect, or out-of-date) for each of the databases you listed above? 5. Is there any additional information about the way your states’ data for UST management is collected, entered, stored, and quality reviewed that would help inform our interpretation of these data? In this survey we are concerned with federally regulated USTs, as defined by EPA. These tanks include “any one or combination of tanks” septic tank; (d) certain pipeline facilities; (e) surface impoundment, pit, pond, or lagoon; (f) storm- water or wastewater collection system; (g) flow-through process tank; or (h) liquid trap or associated gathering lines directly related to oil or gas production and gathering operations. 6. What are the cumulative data for the number of federally regulated USTs for your state, first as of September 30, 2004, and then as of Sept. 30, 2005? provided fairly precise and mathematically grounded explanations for their calculations. 26 states and the District of Columbia generally reported having some internal controls on the data, and/or some data quality problems. 6 states reported having few, if any internal controls and significant data quality issues. In tables 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10 in this appendix, we have identified the states that fall into each category. Overall, overall, the U.S. economy is doing better than it has been in decades. . Have there been any reviews of the recent review? [Enter quality of the data? UST management? 4 digit year.]. What procedures are used to ensure all data contained in the databases you listed above are accurately recorded? a. What are the known limitations of the current data? A. What types of information do each of the databases contain? B. What type of information does each database contain? C. What kind of information is contained in each database? D. What is the current state of the UST database? MTBE was added to gasoline to fulfill requirements set in the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments to reduce certain types of emissions. Because MTBE dissolves easily in water and does not cling to soil very well, it migrates faster and farther through the ground than other gasoline components. MTBE’s health effects have not been conclusively established, but the federal government says the health effects are not clear enough to make a judgment on their effect on public health. The EPA says MTBE is a gasoline additive designed to reduce emissions and raise octane. effects have not been conclusively established, but the federal government has determined it to be a potential human carcinogen. The effects of exposure to MTBE include headaches; eye, nose, and throat irritation; coughs; nausea; dizziness; and disorientation. Low levels of MTBE can make drinking water supplies undrinkable due to its offensive taste and odor. Because of uncertainties about MTBE’s health effects, EPA has not set a national standard for MTBE in drinking water. EPA estimates that a release costs about $125,000 on average to clean up. If responsibility cannot be established, the state must then fund any cleanup of the site. With regard to releases involving MTBE, EPA has reported that the additional cost for cleaning up these releases varies widely, from no additional cost to a substantial increase, depending on the history of the release. The cost can vary based on several factors, including the extent of contamination, the cleanup method selected and the presence of MTBE or groundwater contamination. EPA has stated that releases that have contaminated groundwater are generally more complicated and more expensive to clean up. 34 states provided estimates for the average public cost toClean up all releases. States’ estimates varied widely: about 60 percent of these states reported that it was more expensive for them to Clean up releases involving groundwater contamination. About 40 percent of states said it was cheaper to Clean Up Releases that have Contaminated Groundwater. The average cost of cleaning up a release in a state is about $1,000. EPA and states have made progress in cleaning up releases from underground storage tanks. Of the almost 450,000 releases confirmed as of fiscal year-end 2005, cleanups had been initiated for about 93 percent and completed for about 74 percent. As cleanups have progressed, methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE)—a gasoline additive designed to reduce emissions and raise octane—has been removed from the tanks. The removal of MTBE has been a key step in reducing emissions and raising octane. Congress also took action through the 2005 Act to reduce the use of MTBE in gasoline by eliminating the requirement from the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments. States reported that completing the cleanup of approximately 54,000 known releases from leaking underground storage tanks would likely require substantial amounts of public funds from state and federal resources. The public cost of cleaning up releases from tanks without a viable owner, as well as the number of releases in states’ cleanup, is estimated to be in the tens of millions of dollars. A state official expressed concern that the state’s definition of cleanups initiated may not agree with the EPA definition. The state reports a site as “cleanup initiated” when the release has been confirmed and a case number assigned. According to the EPA, cleanup initiated requires the state or responsible party has evaluated the site and initiated physical activity (e.g., removal or treatment of the contamination, removal of the contaminated soil, or monitoring of the groundwater or soil being remediated) or monitoring of the groundwater or soil being remediated. Cleanup initiated should also be reported in situations where the state has evaluated the site and determined that no physical activity is necessary to protect human health and the environment. A Louisiana Underground Storage Tank Program official told us that a review of its files disclosed that the program had been reporting duplicate entries and releases that did not meet EPA’s definition. An Oregon Underground storage Tank Program Coordinator told us in the process of cleaning up its database information, program officials found many sites being reported that were duplicates. your state’s cleanup backlog, as of September 30, 2005 is: 0. Is this number correct? Yes .................... No...................... a. What is the correct number? Please refer to this number when answering questions about your state's cleanup backlog in completing the remainder of this survey. Considering the number of releases in your state , how many have affected groundwater at levels requiring cleanup? Is this an exact number or an estimate? groundwater .................................... a. How did you calculate the number of releases in your state”s cleanup backlog that involve the release of MtBE? authorizing cleanup work that the fund could pay for within 90 days. Officials generally preapprove cleanup work only at the sites where contamination is most severe. The most urgent category includes releases deemed emergencies. As of August 2006, less than 40 percent of the releases were being actively cleaned up. The remaining categories are ranked based on how soon the release is likely to affect human health and the environment, as well as its impact on groundwater. The state categorizes releases into one of four categories. our report is included as appendix IV. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies to the EPA Administrator and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. it would cost to clean up approximately 54,000 known releases. States were unable to estimate the cost of cleaning up more than another 8,000 releases whose cleanup will require at least some public funds. States also reported that, overall, the proportion of releases cleaned up using public funds is likely to decline in the future. Some states that do not use their financial assurance funds to provide financial responsibility coverage for newly identified releases, such as Florida and Columbia, may not be able to afford the cleanup. responsibility coverage for newly identified releases, such as Florida and Arizona, expect particularly sizable declines. These states expect that owners or operators will use private sources of financial responsibility coverage to pay for the cleanup of most releases identified in the next 5 years. In 2005, these states confirmed a combined 8,000 releases, compared with their projections of an average of about 7,400 releases per year for the next five years. Most states use financial assurance funds to pay to clean up releases from underground storage. funding from all sources was spent (in actual outlays) on cleaning up releases from USTs, both WITH and WITHOUT a viable owner. Is this an exact number or an estimate? Is this the total amount ($0) spent in the past year for the public funding portion of cleanups at federally regulated UST sites? Yes .................... No...................... d. Why is this amount different? Sites? Yes    Yes ................... No.............................. f. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year. How many new releases from federally regulated USTs did your state confirm in each of the last five federal fiscal years? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Are these numbers exact or estimated? Cumulative data, as of estimate? estimate? a. Active tanks ................. b. Closed tanks ............. c. Confirmed releases....... d. Cleanups initiated......... e. Cleanup completed ..... f. Emergency responses... 7. September 30, 2005? Arethese numbers exactor estimated? for which some amount of public funding will be required? 14. How did you estimate the number of releases that fall into each category of funding? 15. Based on your experience with cleanups, how many would you estimate will require public funding amounts in the following ranges? $0 - $99,999 ............................................... b. $100,000-$499,000 .................................... c. $500,000-999,999 or $1,000,000 or more ................................... Number for which costs cannot be e. estimated....................................................  EPA computes your state’s “cleanup backlog” by subtracting the cumulative number of cleanups completed from the cumulativeNumber of confirmed releases. How did you estimate the number of new releases over the next five years that will require at least some amount of public funding to clean up? 9. Estimated number of. new releases in the next year that will need at least. some amount. of public money to pay for clean-up c. 10. Based on the numbers you provided above, your state's cleanup backlog, as of September 30, 2005 is: site cleanup costs will be paid for exclusively by responsible parties and the number of these releases for which some amount of public funding will be required. How did you estimate these average costs in public funding? 16. In the past year, what was the total amount spent (in actual outlays) to pay for the public funding portion of cleanups at federally regulated UST sites? If possible, provide this amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05). Is this an exact number or an estimate? costs associated with site response concerning prevention or mitigation of threats to public health, welfare, or the environment. These costs include emergency responses, site investigations, exposure assessments, the planning and design of corrective action, and the conduct, management and oversight of long-term remedial corrective actions. 13. Considering the number of releases in your state’s cleanup backlog as of September 30, 2005, what is your estimate of thenumber of these releases for which EPA-defined site cleanup costs will be paid for exclusively by responsible states? releases from USTs your state confirmed in each of the last five years? 8. How many of these new releases over the next five years do you estimate will require at least some amount of public funding to clean up? 9. How did you estimate the number of new releases from federally regulated USTs that your state will confirm over theNextFive years? 10. How does your state compare to other U.S. states in terms of number of releases it has confirmed in the last 5 years? each category of funding? 15. Based on your experience with cleanups of leaking federally regulated USTs that require some amount of public funding, what do you estimate is the average cost in public funds to fully address each release? 16. What do you Estimates is the Average Cost in Public Funds to Fully Address Each release that involves MtBE at levels requiring cleanup? 17. Estimated cost in Public funds to Fully address Each Release that involves MountBE at Levels requiring Cleanup? 18. Estimated Cost in public Funds to fully Address Each Release That involves Mt BE at Levels Requiring Cleanup. 9/30/05)? Yes .................... No...................... h. On what date does the year for which you are reporting start? 18. Is there any additional information about the amounts of public funding listed above that would help inform our interpretation of your responses to these questions? 19. Among the current sources of public. funding for LUST cleanups, which sources, if any, do you believe have a high probability of no longer being. available in the next 5 years, and why not? 20. For purposes of this survey, consider tanks among your state’s cleanup. these parties and eliminated overlap where feasible. Your prompt response to this survey is very important. Without your state’s response, we will not be able to accurately report to the Congress on the magnitude of LUST cleanup costs across all 50 states. This questionnaire can be filled out using MS-Word and the Surveymonkey app for the iPhone and the iPad. To answer some of our questions, you may need to coordinate your responses with other state agencies responsible for certain aspects of the program. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. been covered in this survey that you anticipate affecting the availability of public finding for cleanups in the next 5 years? 58. Are there any additional comments you wish to make regarding the issues in this Survey or other matters related to USTs? Thank you for completing the survey! Please save this file now and send an e-mail with your saved questionnaire file and supporting documentation as an attachment to: USTSurvey@gao.gov. In addition to the individual named above, Vincent P. Price, Assistant Director; Krista Breen Anderson; Jenny Chanley; Richard P. Johnson; Jerry Laudermilk; Jennifer Lutzy McDonald. Johnson; Jerry Laudermilk; Jennifer Lutzy McDonald; Anne McDonough-Hughes; Rebecca Shea; Carol Herrnstadt Shulman; Dominique Sasson; and Nico Sloss made key contributions to this report. Johnson: "I think we're in a good place right now. I don't think it's going to get any worse than it is right now" Johnson: 'I think the world is going to come around to what we're trying to do' The LUST Trust Fund is funded by a $0.001/gallon excise tax on gasoline and other motor fuels. By fiscal year-end 2005, the fund had collected about $3.7 billion in revenue. appropriations totaled about $1.2 billion, leaving a fund balance of approximately $2.5 billion. The fund balance has been growing at an average rate of about $129 million per year since 1987, Figure 11 shows. The tax has been in effect continuously since 1987 except for a short period in 1990. approval of a state fund for financial responsibility coverage without withdrawing approval of the overall state underground storage tank program. EPA has formed a workgroup to examine the issue of how to assess the soundness of state financial assurance funds. The guidance had not been made final as of December 2006. Annual appropriations from the LUST Trust Fund have averaged about $71 million in recent years. Typically, about 80 percent of the money is spent on underground storage tanks in the state where the tank is located. fiscal year 2005, EPA distributed about $58 million of LUST Trust Fund money to the states, or about $1.2 million per state. 45 states each reported spending an average of $24 million in 2005 to clean up contamination from leaking tanks. Nine states reported spending more than $2 million each in 2005 alone to cleanup contamination from tanks without a viable owner. The EPA headquarters uses a formula to determine the amount each state should receive and then divides the money among the regions.  Appropriations from the LUST Trust Fund have been relatively stable since fiscal year 1998. Between fiscal years 1998 and 2005, annual appropriations from the trust fund have ranged from about $65 million to $76 million per year. EPA uses the balance of the annual appropriations to support cleanup activities on Indian lands and its own cleanup-related activities. Forty-eight states reported spending about $15 million on site cleanup activities in 2005, by far the largest single source of federal money for this purpose reported in our survey. largely of emergency responses, site investigations, exposure assessments, and corrective actions. In fiscal year 2005, most of the states reported spending at least some of their LUST Trust Fund money in all three categories. However, some states focused their spending on just one or two categories. For example, 10 states reported they did not spend any of their money on cleanup activities. Regional officials told us that many states prefer to use their Luster Fund money to fund clean-up activities, rather than emergency responses. The 2005 Act authorizes appropriations from the LUST Trust Fund through fiscal year 2011 of $555 million per year for a variety of activities. This annual amount includes $200 million for cleanups of releases from leaking underground storage tanks. $100 million for activities including onsite inspections, groundwater protection, and enforcement. $55 million for delivery prohibition, operator training, and release prevention and compliance. An additional $50 million peryear is authorized from the general fund to cover administrative expenses and other activities. seriousness of exposure, and estimating resulting health risks; cleaning up contaminated soil and water; providing safe drinking water to residents at the site of a tank leak; providing for temporary or permanent relocation of residents; and providing reasonable and necessary administrative and planning expenses directly related to these activities. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (the 2005 Act), enacted in August 2005, expanded the permitted uses of the LUST Trust Fund. It authorizes states to use a portion of their LUST Fund money for inspections and other leak prevention purposes. The 2005 Act also extended until 2011 the tax on petroleum products that capitalizes the federal LUST Trust Fund. Under EPA policy, except in rare circumstances and in Indian Country, states will address underground storage tank releases. EPA will undertake a cleanup only when (1) there is a major public health or environmental emergency, (2) the state is unable to respond, and (3) no responsible party is able or willing to provide an adequate and timely response. According to EPA, over the past 10 years, on average, states have used roughly one-third of their Lust Trust Fund money. EPA's goals for the underground storage tank program included completing 14,500 cleanups. Money from the LUST Trust Fund is meant, in part, to address releases from tanks without a viable owner. In a November 2005 report, we recommended that EPA measure program performance against the national goals it establishes in accordance with the Government Performance and Results Act. On the basis of the states’ reports for fiscal year 2005, EPA reported that all the goals were met. The report was published in November 2005. The 1986 amendments to RCRA established the LUST Trust Fund to finance the cleanup of petroleum releases from underground storage tanks. Until recently, states could use these funds only for cleanup and related administrative and enforcement activities. Within this restriction, trust fund money could be used for the following general categories of activities: testing tanks for leaks when one is suspected; investigating a site to evaluate the source and extent of petroleum; assessing the number of individuals that may have been exposed to petroleum contaminants and the seriousness of exposure. adequate and timely response. In these circumstances, EPA’s involvement is to be limited to stabilizing the immediate situation. The expectation is that further cleanup will be conducted by the state under its cooperative agreement with the agency. States are responsible for overseeing cleanup work performed by the party responsible for the contamination and for performing the cleanup at sites where no responsible party can be found. In addition to the LUST Trust Fund, federal money from the Brownfields program can be used to clean up sites contaminated by petroleum under certain circumstances. certain circumstances. Only certain governmental organizations, nonprofit organizations, and nonprofit educational institutions are eligible for Brownfields cleanup grants. In fiscal year 2005, EPA provided eligible entities with about $22.3 million in Brownfields grants for cleaning up sites contaminated with petroleum. About $4.0 million of these grants were awarded for direct cleanup work, $13.3m for site assessments, and $5.0m for revolving loan fund programs. The grants are limited to sites whose expansion, redevelopment, or reuse of which may be complicated by the presence or potential presence of a hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant. EPA Region 5 official says states in their region initially used their LUST Trust Fund money to perform cleanups. But they soon decided that funding staff positions was more cost effective than performing the cleanup. By funding additional staff positions rather than cleanup activities, states were often able to identify the responsible parties and force them to do the cleanups, thereby avoiding the time and expense of pursuing cost-recovery. EPA generally relies on states to decide how to use these federal funds, within the permitted parameters. Some states view the cost recovery process as a deterrent to using the federal money for cleanup activities. Because they have state money available for cleanup efforts, states can use theFederal money for staff salaries. Some states actually require the use of state money for cleanups, and thus federal money is used for administrative or enforcement activities, particularly salaries. An EPA official in Region 4, however, took issue with states that do not use LUST.cleanups, thereby avoiding the time and expense of pursuing cost-recovery actions. This amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05)? Yes......................... No .......................... b. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year 29. How much of the amount deposited into your state’s financial assurance fund in the past year was from each of the following sources? Is this an exact number or an estimate? 30. What do you anticipate will happen to revenues to your state's fund? Are these amounts for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05)? Yes .................... No...................... b. On what date does the the UST program? Is this an exact number or an estimate? 44. As of September 30, 2005, had your state decided to stop accepting new capable tanks? If applicable, for what purposes did your state divert funds from the fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner? 49. According to EPA, states may sometimes not spend a given amount. to Q37. Accepting and paying all valid claims without restriction. Go to Q27 Accepted and paying claims with some restrictions ....... a. Is your state fund limiting the number of claims it accepts based on the amount of funds it has available to pay for those claims? Yes ....................... No......................... c. Isyour state’s financial assurance fund ONLY accepting claims for releases that occurred before or after a certain date (e.g., an eligibility sunset date)? No ....................... Yes...................... d. What are the eligibility dates this type of fund.......................... Skip to Q47. owner, and (2) funds that are devoted solely to the cleanup of contamination from tanks without a viable owner. In this survey we ask about both types of funds as applicable to your state. Has your state EVER had a state financial assurance fund, as defined in (1) above? Yes ....................... No......................... Skip to Q37. What was the status of your state’sfinancial assurance fund as of September 30, 2005? Not applicable, never had this type of fund. Fund is no longer active. No decision made to stop collecting claims ........ 36. What was the status of your state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner as of September 30, 2005? . Not applicable, never had this type of fund.......................... Skip to Q47. State Fund Dedicated to Tanks without a Viable Owner 37. What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? a. The state's financial assurance fund is capable of meeting future demands upon it, but not able to meet any. you anticipate will happen to revenues to your state's fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner over the next 5 years, compared with the annual revenues accrued to the fund in the past year? Large increase................ Moderate increase......... Stay about the same...... Moderate decrease........ Large decrease............... a. What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? 41. What was the overall balance of your state’s fund dedicated. to tanksWithoutViableOwner.com as of September 30, 2005? Is this an exact number or an estimate? date)? No ....................... Yes...................... d. What are the eligibility dates for releases? [Fill in either or both dates as applicable] e. Are there other restrictions on accepting and paying claims? 27. How much was deposited into your state’s financial assurance fund in the past year? Is this an exact number or an estimate? 28. Please describe the deductible amount(s) paid by responsible parties and any maximum amount the stateFinancial assurance fund will pay for each release from a federally regulated UST. viable owner ONLY accepting claims for releases that occurred before or after a certain date (e.g., an eligibility sunset date)? No...................... Yes .................... d. What are the eligibility dates for releases? [Fill in either or both dates as applicable.] [Enter mm/dd/yy.] e. Are there other restrictions on accepting and paying claims? 38. How much was deposited into your state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner in the past year? Is this an exact number or an estimate? What was the overall balance of your state’s financial assurance fund as of September 30, 2005? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Obligated........................................ 32. During the past 5 years, what amount of funding, if any, did your state divert for purposes other than those related to the UST program? g. If applicable, for what purposes did your states divert funds from the fund for? 33. What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? Reimbursed ................................. g. If applicable, for what purposes did your state divert UST financial assurance funds? 34. As of September 30, 2005, had your state decided to stop accepting new claims against the state financial assurance fund after a certain date? Date after which claims will no longer be accepted No decision made to stop accept claims......... 35. As a result of your state's decision to stop collecting revenues for the state Financial Assurance Fund, how did you pay back the money? How did you repay the money you received? Cleanup of leaking underground storage tanks can affect the percentage of releases in a state that are cleaned up using at least some public funding. One such approach is whether a state has chosen to set up a financial assurance fund that provides financial responsibility coverage for tank owners. For example, in North Dakota, where nearly all tanks are covered by the state’s fund, the state expects that more than 95 percent of releases will be cleaned up with public money. Six states reported that they had a state fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner. resources from other types of state funds, such as financial assurance funds, or from the federal LUST Trust Fund. Four states reported that they may wait until the property on which the leaking tank is located is purchased and rely on the new owner to clean the site up. States may have releases from tanks without a viable owner in their backlog because the owner or operator responsible for the tank failed to maintain adequate financial responsibility coverage. Maintaining adequatefinancial responsibility coverage ensures that money will be available to clean up releases. Lack of timely cleanup is a concern because the longer pollution from releases is left in place, the greater the potential for it to spread. States reported that they primarily use financial assurance funds to pay the costs of cleaning up leaks from underground storage tanks. Concerns have been raised about whether tank owners have incentives to prevent releases when they can rely on the bulk of the cleanup costs. EPA estimates that releases cost about $125,000 to clean up, on average, most state financial assurance Funds charge a deductible of $25,000 or less.  tank owners may be less likely to voluntarily report releases if they know that reporting a release could lead to a mandatory cleanup. To ensure that funds are available to clean up releases in a timely and appropriate manner, state financial assurance funds must be financially sound. In the event of a release, tank owners covered by these funds usually pay a relatively small deductible, while the funds provide sometimes large sums of public funding to complete the required cleanup. Because these deductibles are often small, they may not provide an incentive for tank owners to prevent releases from occurring. State laws addressing when a specific owner or operator is considered to be responsible for a release can affect who pays for cleanups. Michigan program officials previously told us that the state’s causation standard exacerbates the funding problem for tanks without a viable owner. Proving responsibility becomes difficult in cases where releases have occurred in the past and ownership of the property has changed. If responsibility cannot be established, the state must then must then be held responsible for cleanup. The state must first prove that the present owner/ operator is responsible. The 2005 Act requires each state receiving federal funding to inspect all of their underground storage tanks on a 3-year cycle. For those states that currently inspect sites less frequently, the additional inspections could lead to a spike in the number of releases discovered. State financial assurance funds may also be affected by future natural disasters, such as hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005. For example, officials in Texas told us that underground storage tank facilities in their state are inspected about every 10 years, on average. Releases in this state that may not have otherwise been found for as long as 10 years may be discovered much sooner, leading to an increase in confirmed releases. that money will be available to clean up releases from underground storage tanks. This money, in turn, contributes to timely completion of cleanup and thus reduces the risk to human health and the environment posed by releases that are not cleaned up in a timely manner. We asked states about the number of cases they had encountered in the past 5 years in which tank owners did not have adequate financial responsibility coverage. In general, states that we talked with more in-depth about financial responsibility said replaced underground tanks located near sources of drinking water or to require evidence of financial responsibility. potentially, the risk posed by the sites increases so much that they require more urgent cleanup. The farther these contaminants are allowed to spread, the greater the chance becomes that they will contaminate drinking water and other sensitive resources. In addition, when state financial assurance funds do not pay cleanup claims on a timely basis, tank owners may not be able to afford to clean up the sites. The longer contamination from these releases is left in place, thegreat the potential becomes for the contamination to spread. beginning after the state has inspected tanks that have not been inspected since December 1998. The 2005 Act also extended until 2011 the cleanup of releases from underground storage tanks. State financial assurance funds may face additional challenges to remaining financially sound in coming years for the following reasons: Financial assurance funds might take on additional liability from tank installers and manufacturers, and they may be required to provide coverage for the costs of cleanup directly related to releases caused by improper tank manufacture or installation. If these challenges are not addressed, then EPA would be concerned about the financial soundness of the fund. EPA indicated it has issued draft guidelines that would require inspections of underground storage tanks to assess compliance with financial responsibility requirements. EPA indicated that it would strengthen its oversight by improving a recently developed monitoring tool and by developing guidance for its oversight process. Regarding our recommendation that EPA assess the relative effectiveness of public and private options for financial responsibility coverage, EPA indicated it would improve its oversight of the solvency of state assurance funds. The agency indicated it will strengthen its Oversight of State Assurance Funds by improving its monitoring tool. purposes of this survey, consider tanks among your state’s cleanup backlog without a viable owner to be those tanks where, as of September 30, 2005, the responsible party was unknown, unwilling, or unable to perform the needed cleanup. For how many releases in your state's cleanup backlog has the state not yet determined whether a responsible party is known, willing, and able to perform cleanup? Is this an exact number or an estimate? 23. In the past year, how much public funding from all sources was spent (in actual outlays) on cleanup projects? as well as the number of releases in states’ cleanup backlogs that lack a viable owner, is not fully known. States reported that cleaning up known releases from leaking underground storage tanks would cost an estimated $12 billion in public funds from state and federal sources. Some states expected all releases in their backlogs to be cleaned up using at least some public funds, while other states did not expect public funds to be used to clean up any releases. The approach that different states use regarding who pays for the cleanup of leaking underground tanks can affect the amount of public funds used. Just over half of the approximately 117,000 releases that states reported in our survey had not yet been fully cleaned up will be cleaned up using at least some public funds. Tank owners or operators will pay the entire costs to clean up another 34 percent of these releases, according to state officials. The full extent of releases from tanks without a viable owner is unknown. The public cost of cleaning up releases from Tanks Without A Viable Owner is also not fully known, the survey found. It would cost a total of $2.7 billion to complete the cleanups of known releases. The objectives of this review were to provide information on states’ estimates of the cost in public funding from state and federal sources to clean up known releases. The survey was focused specifically on federally regulated underground storage tanks, as defined by EPA. We provided states with the definition of public funding described previously in this section, and we asked them to respond to all survey questions about such funding according to this definition. For the purposes of this clean up releases from tanks they either own or operate—this money would be considered to be provided by the responsible party. 50 states as part of a study of how states finance the cleanup of leaking underground storage tank (LUST) sites. We will use the information gathered in this survey to provide the Congress with information about the magnitude of LUST cleanup costs across all 50 states. We are aware of similar survey efforts conducted in the past year by the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation and by EPA’s Office of Underground Storage Tanks. We have discussed our survey with these parties and eliminated overlap where feasible. Your prompt response to our survey was helpful. Public funding: Includes any funding controlled and/or provided by state and federal agencies. Do not include funds spent by federal, state, and local governmental agencies to clean up releases from tanks they either it will cost to complete the remainder of the cleanups for all of these releases? None ................. Go to Q25. a. How did you estimate the cost for the backlog of releases from USTs without a viable owner? A. What is your interpretation of your responses to questions about the scope and type of UST cleanups in your state? In those cases where a state fund is dedicated solely to coverage of tanks without a viable responsible party, the survey provides a separate space to answer questions about such a fund. Responsible party funding: Includes both direct expenditures by responsible parties and indirect expenditures. EPA-defined site cleanup costs: “All costs associated with site response concerning prevention or mitigation of the problem’s source.” The survey does not provide specific cost data for these types of cleanup costs. The survey is open to the public. The 2005 Act included language providing that, if a state diverts resources from its financial assurance fund, EPA may not distribute a certain portion of LUST appropriations to that state for enforcement purposes. This provision affects only the 37 states whose financial assurance funds still provide financial responsibility coverage for new releases. Officials we interviewed in Pennsylvania and South Carolina were uncertain about the 2005 Act’s impact on future diversions. Two states even commented in their responses to our survey that they anticipated diversions in 2006. Of the 43 states that have had financial assurance funds, 16 reported in our survey that they had diverted a total of nearly $435 million from their funds between 2001 and 2005. Officials in most of these states reported that the diverted amounts went to the state’s general fund or to offset state budget shortfalls. A few states reported using diverted funds for specific programs, such as Brownfields grants and been addressed, was delayed, according to state officials. In the largest case of a diversion reported to us, for example, the Pennsylvania financial assurance fund loaned the legislature $100 million in 2002. diverted funds for specific programs, such as Brownfields grants and loans, a lead- based paint removal program. Officials we interviewed in two states where diversions occurred reported a negative impact on the state program’s ability to clean up sites. In Florida, for example, $20 million was diverted in 2002. As a result, financial assurance fund managers had to adjust the threshold for cleanup, meaning that the cleanup of less urgent releases, which otherwise would have been addressed, was delayed. As late as June 2006, the impact of the flooding caused by these hurricanes on Louisiana’s financial assurance fund was not yet fully known. If all underground storage tanks that could have been affected by the flooding turn out to have had releases, the workload of the state assurance fund would increase by 25 percent, an official says. Payouts from the state assure fund would increased by approximately $4 million per year, according to this official. Diversions from state financial assurance funds may also limit some states’ ability to. Over one-fifth of states’ public spending to clean up releases from underground storage tanks in 2005 came from these financial assurance funds. Florida’s fund last provided financial responsibility coverage for new releases on December 31, 1998. Seven states and the District of Columbia have never had funds that providedFinancial responsibility coverage. In these states, tank owners and operators use other ways of demonstrating financial responsibility.primarily through private insurance, according to state officials. In 2005, Florida spent almost $150 million on cleanups in 2005. Florida estimates average cost of $380,000 in public funds to fully address each release requiring public funds. As of August 2006, less than 40 percent of the releases in these categories were being actively cleaned up. The state fund is only able to actively conduct cleanup work at about one-third of the 12,000 remaining sites. The approximately 8,000 other sites in the fund’s backlog await cleanup. funds are not enough to pay for all of the cleanups that need to be done. Florida may have spent more than $1 million per year on such sites in the past. New Jersey, Texas, and Utah also told us that public funds could be used in cases involving inadequate financial responsibility coverage. Florida officials noted that the state attempts to recover these funds from the tank owners but indicated that such efforts have not always been successful in thePast. to fully address each release requiring public funds. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. State taxes on gasoline and other fuels accounted for about $1.3 billion (92 percent) of this income to state funds. States reported that financial assurance funds also received revenues totaling about $42 million (3 percent) from fees paid by tank owners and operators. Many states have maximum limits on the overall balance of their funds. Generally, if a state’s maximum limit is reached, its financial assurance fund may not be available for cleaning up underground storage tanks.. Only four states’ financial assurance. funds collected tank fees but not gasoline taxes. 39 states held unexpended balances of approximately $1.3 billion, according to estimates. Four states did not have or did not report a fund balance. The top five states account for more than half of the total balance in these funds. Because many state assurance funds also pay to clean up releases from other types of tanks, the entire balance of any one state’s financial assurance fund may not be available for clean-up. The full report is available at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/money/state-assurance-funds-report. Officials in nine states reported that their funds limit the amount of cleanup work they finance based on funding availability. The situation of three such funds, as described by state officials, follows. North Carolina. The revenues to the state’s financial assurance fund have not been sufficient in recent years to address all of the fund's high- risk sites. As of February 2006, the state was only authorizing cleanup work that the fund could pay for within the next six months. The state was not authorizing work that was not within the six-month period. State financial assurance funds can provide substantial amounts of funding for cleaning up releases. But funds in some states may not have sufficient resources to do so. Generally, if a state’s maximum limit is reached, its fund ceases collecting revenues from one or more of its revenue sources until the fund balance drops below a minimum threshold. For example, Idaho has not collected certain fees for its fund since 1998 when the balance of its fund exceeded $30 million. The fund will again begin collecting revenue from these fees once its balance drops to $15 million. Some states have provided cleanup funds to address releases from underground storage tanks. Four of these states reported paying for such cleanups from state sources in 2005. At federal fiscal year-end 2005, state financial assurance funds in 39 states held unexpended balances of approximately $1.3 billion. In the state of Washington, for example, the state’s reinsurance program helps owners and operators of underground storage Tanks obtain affordable pollution liability insurance by assuming part of the risk for each loss. Most states have, or have had, financial assurance funds. As of September 30, 2005, 37 states had funds that met federal requirements for financial responsibility. A state assurance fund is financially sound if it provides reasonable assurance that money is available to pay for cleanup costs and other liabilities. Unless EPA improves how it monitors the soundness of state assurance funds, it will not be aware of deficiencies in coverage before they occur or in sufficient time to take action to avoid funding shortages, which could delay the cleanup. EPA would be concerned about the soundness of a state financial assurance fund if the funding levels or claim processing time caused undue delays in cleaning up releases. In Texas, for example, claims substantially exceeded revenues during the early years of the state’sfinancial assurance fund. By 1992, the fund had a backlog of unpaid bills totaling about $170 million. This amount exceeded the fund’S annual income by approximately 300 percent, and new claims arriving daily added to the backlog. In order to catch up, 7 states and the District of Columbia have never had financial assurance funds that were approved by EPA to provide financial responsibility coverage. Only about one-third of states check coverage on an annual basis, while the remaining states generally reported they check less frequently or not at all. EPA lacks assurance that states are adequately overseeing and enforcing financial responsibility provisions, the authors say. The authors say EPA should provide specific guidance to the states as to whether or how frequently they should verify financial responsibility Coverage for new releases. annual letter with financial information supporting their ability to pay. Owners or operators that choose private insurance for financial responsibility coverage must pay annual premiums to maintain coverage. EPA does not provide states specific guidance on whether or how frequently states should engage in routine verification of financial responsibility Coverage. Most states reported to us that they attempted to checkFinancial responsibility coverage on a regular basis. Only about one-third of the states reported that they required annual proof that tank owners or operators were maintaining coverage. The remaining states generally report that they checked this coverage. The remaining states generally reported that they checked this coverage less often or not at all. States that do not check financial responsibility coverage on an annual basis may not know if owners or operators are maintaining required coverage. If the required coverage is not in place when a release occurs, funds may not be available to pay for cleanup in a timely manner. Many states could not provide information on the extent of inadequate financial responsibility in their states for the past 5 years. If states do not verify coverage on a routine basis, it may be difficult for them to know whether owners or operator will have the required Coverage in the event of a release. Twenty-three states reported cases of inadequate coverage in the past 5 years. Only 7 states and the District of Columbia reported no cases. 19 other states reported that they did not know the number of cases involving inadequate coverage. The number of case involving inadequate financial responsibility coverage may indicate a problem with the system, experts say. The federal government says it has no plans to change the way financial responsibility is defined. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services says it does not provide financial responsibility insurance. used in these types of situations in the past. Some options that owners or operators can choose for coverage either require annual updates or are often renewed annually. Owners or operators that self-insure, or choose to demonstrate that they have sufficient assets to cover costs resulting from a release, must prepare an annual letter with financial information supporting their ability to pay. Checking financial responsibility coverage helps to ensure that an owner or operator has the required paperwork to demonstrate coverage. For more information, go to www.insureyourself.com. Officials in several states indicated that penalties were not usually imposed simply if multiple releases occurred. Rather, most states imposed penalties on the basis of evidence that the tank owner did not comply with applicable regulations or failed to report a release. For example, New Hampshire officials indicated that, while the state has authority for administrative fines and civil penalties in cases involving multiple releases, such actions are not automatically imposed. Instead, fines and penalties may be assessed if a tank owner is found to have released more than one tank. Fines and penalties may be assessed if a second release results from a tank owner’s recalcitrance in achieving and maintaining compliance with operational regulations. EPA approves state financial assurance funds to provide financial responsibility coverage. According to EPA guidance, the agency can withdraw this approval if a fund no longer provides coverage that ensures timely and adequate cleanup of releases. Of the 20 states that provided comments in response to our survey question regarding multiple releases, none indicated that increased penalties were imposed simply based on the occurrence of a secondrelease. government or the state (local government only) ......................... k. A dedicated fund (localgovernment only) ............................................. l. ................ 52. Is there any additional information about how you calculated the number of tanks covered by the various financial responsibility mechanisms that would help inform our interpretation of your responses? 53. Which of the following describe your state's procedures for determining whether a tank owner’s financial responsibility is current? 56. Does your state ever impose penalties on responsible parties for multiple releases from federally regulated USTs? Yes ....................... No......................... Go to next question. How frequently, if at all, does your state check whether a tank owner’s financial responsibility is current? At least annually ................................................................................................ Every 1 to 2 years .............................................................................................. Every 3 years or longer...................................................................................... State does not check financial responsibility..................................................... ........................................................................... 55. Over the past 5 years, how many cases has your state encountered in which tank owners did not have adequate financial responsibility? Is this an exact number or an estimate of the number of cases? Have active federally regulated USTs in your state demonstrate financial responsibility? Please list the number of tanks covered by the various available financial responsibility mechanisms below. Is this an exact number or an estimate? a. State financial assurance fund......... b. Financial test of self-insurance ....... c. Corporate guarantee ........................ d. Insurance coverage.......................... e. Surety bond ..................................... f. Letter of credit................................. g. Trust fund set up by owner or operator ........................................ h. Bond rating test (local government only) ............................................. i. Financialtest (localGovernment only) ......................... k. Guarantee from another local government or the state (local Government only) daily added to the backlog. In order to catch up, the fund temporarily slowed down some cleanup work. Even though the fund stopped accepting new releases after December 22, 1998, state officials expect it to remain in place at least until 2008. In 2005, EPA’s Office of Underground Storage Tanks began collecting information from states on various aspects of their financial assurance funds. Officials in four of the six EPA regions we interviewed conducted fund soundness oversight primarily by discussing the financial position of the state assurance fund with relevant state officials. The goals of this effort included providing a better tool to monitor state financial assurance funds’ soundness. According to some EPA officials, however, the data collected were of limited usefulness. One region’s program manager did not expect that the agency's effort would provide any new information, except data to document what he already knew. An EPA headquarters official, who is closely involved with the effort, agreed that the information collection, at most, helped confirm what regions already saw as problem. the federal fiscal year, we asked them to provide us with the starting date of their alternative reporting year. As a result, we present such data in the report as 2005 data. In addition to conducting a survey to address our three objectives, we also interviewed agency officials in a nonprobability sample of eight states. Specifically, we talked with this group of states about topics such as their use of LUST Trust Fund money, restrictions within their state financial assurance fund, and other topics. We selected this sample of states in order to discuss as many of our topics of interest as possible within a limited number of interviews. To select the states, we first reviewed all states’ responses to survey questions related to the relevant topics to determine which states would be able to discuss each topic of interest. We then calculated a score for each state to determine its level of interest in each topic. We selected the states to discuss topics such as fund money, diversions from their state financial assurance funds, and cases of inadequate financial responsibility coverage in their state. solvency of states’ financial assurance funds. To obtain further information about the federal funding to address these releases, we interviewed Department of the Treasury officials. We interviewed EPA headquarters and regional officials to determine the process by which EPA distributes LUST Trust Fund money. We gathered documentation regarding appropriations of money from the fund to EPA, states' expenditure of fund money, and the balance of the fund and its annual revenues. We selected these sources based on EPA officials’ indications that they were the most appropriate sources for the purposes of this report. Treasury’s financial statements and internal controls. These audits were conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We found the data elements that we used in this report from Treasury's financial statements sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this review. We conducted our work from June 2005 to December 2006. As described in appendix I, our assessment of the reliability of the data provided by states in their surveys found wide variability in the data. We also discussed the reliability. of Treasury”s LUST Trust Fund data with knowledgeable EPA and Treasury officials. EPA’s distribution of LUST Trust Fund money to states depends on data that may not be accurate. States are not required to report data to EPA on the number of releases from tanks without a viable owner. In addition, developing national data on the extent to which releases remaining to be cleaned up are attributed to tanks without viable owners would be useful to both EPA and the Congress. We recommend that the Administrator, EPA, take the following four actions: Ensure that states verify, on a regular basis, that tank owners and operators are maintaining adequate financial responsibility coverage. In 2005 report, we recommended that EPA collect available information from states. This information would improve EPA’s ability to determine how to most efficiently and effectively distribute LUST Trust Fund dollars to the states. In our survey, 37 states and the District of Columbia reported data on the number of tanks without viable owners that had known releases. We provided EPA with a draft of this report for its review and comment. EPA agreed with our recommendations and provided information on the agency's plans and activities to address each of them. information about (1) states’ primary sources of money for addressing releases from leaking underground storage tanks, (2) these sources’ future viability, and (3) the federal funding available to address these releases. We selected these regions primarily because survey responses from one or more states in these regions raised questions about similar data they had reported to EPA. We spoke with regional officials about these apparent discrepancies, as well as about the regions’ processes for distributing money from the LUST Trust Fund. a viable owner. EPA currently allocates resources to the states without taking into account the number of such releases in each state. In our November 2005 report, we recommended that EPA collect available data from the states. In commenting on this recommendation, EPA expressed concern about placing an undue burden on states. in our response, we explained that we were not suggesting that states should try to try to find a viable owner for a tank that had no viable owners. We were simply suggesting that EPA take a look at the available data and make a decision. EPA regional officials consider the components of the state formulas, along with additional factors, to determine the actual amount to be distributed to each of the states in their region. Additional factors that may be considered, according to EPA regional officials, include states’ actual need for money in light of such things as funding carryovers from prior years. For the most part, the EPA Regional officials whom we interviewed stated that deviations from the formula distributions, when they occur, are usually relatively minor. The total for the states within each region. EPA headquarters uses a formula to distribute LUST Trust Fund money to the regions. The formula includes a minimum of $300,000 per state and a need-based amount. It also includes a performance-based bonus to states that meet or exceed the national averages for the numbers of cleanups initiated and completed. The distribution formula does not consider the number of releases from tanks without tanks without water in them, the EPA says. The distributions, when they occur, are usually relatively minor, the agency says. Tanks include “any one or combination of tanks (including underground pipes connected thereto) that is used to contain an accumulation of regulated substances, and the volume of which is 10 percent or more beneath the surface of the ground. This term does not include any. farm or residential tank of 1,100 gallons or less capacity used for storing motor fuel for noncommercial purposes.’’ “ tank used for storage heating oil for consumptive use on the premises where stored.”