Completing the approximate $2.4 billion cost of SSN-23 would require about $1.5 billion in additional funding. The Administration requested $1,507.5 million in FY1996 to complete the cost of the ship. Congress provided only $700 million in procurement funding, leaving about $807.5m to complete cost of ship. Rather than requesting all $807m or so in FY1997, the Administration requested. $699.1m in FY 1997 and deferred the final $105m to FY1998. SSN-23 was originally procured in the FY1992 defense budget, which Congress passed in 1991. In early 1992, the George H. W. Bush Administration terminated procurement of further Seawolf-class submarines. In 1993, as part of its Bottom-Up Review (BUR) of U.S. defense policy and programs, the Clinton Administration decided to reinstate procurement of SSn-23 in FY1995 or FY1996. By this point, $382.4 million had already been obligated and expended on SSN- 23. Low rate of shipbuilding was driving higher costs, which in turn further reduced shipbuilding rates, creating a downward spiral. The committee believes that stable ship requirements, increased funding in the shipbuilding budget, and increased flexibility for funding large capital ships are critical elements of any strategy to reverse this trend. The program of record for CVN-78 has the detail design and construction funding split between two years. This provision would authorize that same funding to be split over four years, thereby allowing needed funding flexibility. The committee is concerned about this delay. The committee has been told there is no technical reason for the delay, but that the delay was driven by budget considerations. Both the Secretary of the Navy and the Chief of Naval operations testified that large capital assets such as aircraft carriers are difficult to fund under the traditional full-funding policy, and that more flexible methods of funding are needed. The delay translates into a cost growth for CVN-78 of approximately $400.0 million, according to the Navy. The Navy originally planned to procure the first CVN-21 class aircraft carrier in fiscal year 2006. Since then, the Navy has delayed procurement to 2008. This has delayed fielding this vital capability, while significantly increasing the aircraft carrier's procurement cost. Procurement delays, excess inflation, and material escalation have been reported as significant contributors toCVN-77 cost growth. The shipbuilder has proposed to achieve significant CVN/21 class program savings through a stable procurement plan, and through procurement of economic order. The Senate Armed Services Committee recommended approval of the Navy's proposed use of split funding FY2007 and FY2008 for procuring LHA-6 and the two lead DDG-1000s. The budget request included $739.1 million in Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) for CVN-78 advance procurement. The provision would also authorize advance requirements to potentially optimize economic order quantity savings and escalation avoidance (to include offsetting factors) for the first three vessels of theCVN-21 class. Under four-year incremental funding, the main portion of the procurement cost of CVN-78, for example, would be divided into four increments that would be provided in FY2008, the ship's year of procurement, and the three following years. Section 121 would also authorize the Navy to contract in FY2007 for the procurement long-lead items forCVN-79 and CVN.80, aircraft carriers that the Navy plans to procure in FY2012 and FY2016, respectively. This authority resembles an economic order quantity (EOQ) arrangement. 2007 budget submission of $520,670,000 for the fifth and sixth LCS flight 0 ships. Navy revealed the LCS unit cost estimate used as a basis for last year's appropriation was exclusive of contract change orders, planning and engineering services, program management support and other costs not included in the ship construction contract. The Committee is troubled by this revelation and recommends rescinding the insufficient fiscal year 2006 funds currently allocated to the fourth LCS fiscal year 2007 budget request is insufficient to procure two ships. Instead, the Committee recommends $300,000,000 to fully fund procurement of one LCS seaframe, which is a reduction of $220,000,.000 and one seaframe from the request. The Committee is aware that the new Chief of Naval Operations [CNO] is actively reviewing shipbuilding programs and is considering several options for controlling long-term costs. In an effort to assist the Navy in the short-term, the Committee recommends providing the Navy financial management authorities that have previously been denied. This authority allows the Navy, through above threshold reprogramming procedures, to increase funding for programs experiencing unforeseen shortfalls. The Committee believes the situation requires more proactive program, budgetary and contract management and encourages the Navy to improve. more proactive program, budgetary and contract management and encourages the Department of Defense to consider whether using advance appropriations in future budgets will improve the shipbuilding program. The fiscal year 2006 President's budget requests $225,427,000 for [the]DDG-51 [destroyer program] for what the Navy describes as "program completion requirements and shutdown costs" These funds are requested for a mix of Class and ship specific plan, basic construction, ordnance, certification, and inspection costs. Such costs are traditionally included in the budget request for each ship. when signing the multiyear contract for the construction of the final DDGs of the Class, the Department decided to change its policy and budget for these costs after the last ship was appropriated. The Committee finds this decision troubling. First, budgeting for such costs after procurement of the last vessel obscures the actual cost to procure each ship and overstates savings attributable to themultiyear contract authority under which these ships were purchased. The Congress approved the Navy's request for multiyear procurement authority in fiscal year 2002 assuming a level of savings to the taxpayer. The Committee is alarmed that the Navy would knowingly sign a multibillion dollar contract for ships that would be both non-operational and undeliverable unless additional dollars, outside the contract, were provided. The Committee directs the Secretary of the Navy to provide a detailed report of all the costs required to complete each of the remaining 11 ships and a rationale for such a contractual arrangement by December 1, 2005. Until sufficient explanation is provided, the Committee recommends only providing funds for plans and those costs directly attributable to ships scheduled to deliver. The Senate Appropriations Committee remains gravely concerned about the overall health and stability of Navy shipbuilding. The Committee finds unanticipated cost overruns to be the root cause of much of the instability in the program. Until budget estimates become more realistic, requirements stabilize and penalties are exercised, ship construction costs are unlikely to improve. The committee is aware that the new Chief of the Navy is aware of the Committee's concerns and is working to resolve the issues as soon as possible. In a letter dated September 29, 2005, the Committee expressed its concern about the stability of the U.S. Navy. The report includes the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account in the list of accounts identified for advance appropriations in the Senate. S.Amdt. 146 to S.Con.Res. 18 is the earlier Senate version of the budget resolution. The amendment would increase the amount of advance appropriations by $14 billion, to $37.393 billion. The report notes that Section 401 reflects an overall limit on advance appropriations of $23.158 billion in fiscal year 2007. Use of advance appropriations for Navy ship procurement was supported by some Navy officials and some Members of Congress. The Navy in 2001 apparently did not receive approval from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to use the approach for ship procurement. The House Appropriations Committee, in its for funding Navy ships, was dismayed that the Navy continues to advocate the use of alternative financing mechanisms to artificially increase shipbuilding rates. In attempting to establish advanced appropriations as a legitimate budgeting technique, those Navy advocates of such practices would actually decrease the flexibility of future Administrations and Congresses. The House Appropriations Committee directed the Navy to reconsider its proposal to request split funding for the LHA(R) over the FY2007-08 timeframe. The Senate did not agree with the House direction. The conference conferees understand the Navy may review whether advance appropriations can improve its procurement of ships and provide savings as it designs its 2007 budget. They agree to consider either split funding or full funding if proposed by the Administration. The Conference Report on H.Con.Res. 95 (Concurrent Resolution on FY2006 Budget) natural disaster, or other impact arising from outside the Navy's shipbuilding program. (Page 180) Appendix B. Legislative Activity for FY2006 H.R. 1815 / P.L. 109-163 (FY2006 Defense Authorization Bill) House In its report ( H.Rept.109-89 of May 20, 2005) on H.r. 18 1515 , the House Armed Services Committee states: [Chief of Naval Operations] Admiral [Vernon] Clark, in his posture statement before the House Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Defense stated, "We need to partner with Congress and industry to regain our buying power" FY2007 budget, approved the Navy's requested first increment of funding for LHA-6. Navy's proposed FY2008 budget requests the second increment of funds for the ship. Navy in its proposed FY2007 budget proposed procuring the first two DDG-1000 destroyers in FY 2007 using split funding in FY2007 and FY2008. CVN-78 aircraft carrier to be funded over a total of nine years, with about 35.2% of its procurement cost provided in advance procurement funding between FY2001 and FY2007. Section 124 authorizes the procurement of the first two DDG-1000 destroyers in FY 2007 using split funding in FY2007 and FY2008, as requested by the Navy. The Navy's proposal requires special legislative authority to be executed. This authority is not included in the House-passed National Defense Authorization Act, 2007 ( H.R. 5122 ). (Page 139) Senate In its report ( S.Rept. 109-292 of July 25, 2006), the Senate Appropriations Committee recommends approving the Navy's request for FY2007 procurement funding. In its report ( H.Rept. 109-452 of May 5, 2006) on H.R. 5122 , the House Armed Services Committee recommended approval of the Navy's proposed use of split funding FY2007 and FY2008 for procuring LHA-6. The committee for FY2007 instead recommended full funding for one DDG-1000, and design funding for a second. The report states: The conferees agree to provide $2,568,111,000 for the DDg-1000 (formerly DDX) Destroyer Program, and agree to delete language proposed by the House requiring full funding of a single lead ship. one of which is funded in the item's year of procurement, the other the following year. The Committee reminds the Navy that this is a unique acquisition strategy and should not be used as a precedent for incrementally funding any future DDG—1000 or any other shipbuilding program. The report recommends funding the procurement of one Littoral Combat Ship, or LCS (rather than the requested two) in FY2007, and rescinding funding (in Section 8043) for one of the three LCSs procured in FY2006. in FY2007 and FY2008 for procuring the two lead DDG-1000 destroyers. The committee for FY2007 instead recommended full funding for one DDg-1000. In the case of the F-22, incremental funding is requested in the middle of the production run. The use of incremental funding mortgages the future of the procurement budget of the Defense Department in a manner that is not acceptable to the Committee. The Committee cannot support such a far-reaching policy change which has implications beyond the Navy's. provide the entire cost of the item in the item's year of procurement. For this reason, the full funding policy for DOD procurement programs can be described in simplified terms as "one decision for one pot of money" A few Navy and DOD ships have been procured in recent years, are currently being procured, or are proposed to be procured with incremental funding. Examples include DOD sealift ships, the attack submarine SSN-23, the amphibious assault ships LHD-6, L HD-8, and LHA-6. in the request, including for the first time construction of a surface combatant, the next-generation destroyer DD(X) The committee remains concerned that the use of incremental funding is not a solution to the Navy's problem in funding shipbuilding. While incremental funding can allow the Navy to smooth out the dramatic spikes in shipbuilding funding required as a result of budget cuts, it is not an ideal solution to shipbuilding problems. The Navy sought and was granted the authority to use incremental funding for the next aircraft carrier, which will be recorded as procured in 2008. on the FY1993 defense budget, Congress created the National Defense Sealift Fund (NDSF)—a revolving fund in the DOD budget for the procurement, operation, and maintenance of DOD-owned sealift ships. Since the NDSF is outside the procurement title of the defense appropriation act, DOD's Large, Medium-Speed, Roll-on/Roll-off (LMSR) ships were actually applied to help finance portions of 16 LMSRs whose construction contracts were awarded between FY1993 and FY1997. In explaining its use of funds in the LMSR program, DOD stated: The National Defense sealift Fund is not a procurement appropriation but a revolving fund. that would include the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account on a list of accounts identified for advance appropriations. The amendment was ordered to lie on the table. The Senate passed S.Con.Res. 18 on March 17, 2005. This appendix discusses Navy and DOD ships that have been procured in recent years or are currently being procured using incremental funding. The appendix also discusses DOD LMSR-Type Sealift Ships as part of its action on the FY1993 defense budget. and Clark (TAKE-1) dry cargo ships procured since FY2003 ) have not been subject to the full funding policy as traditionally applied to DOD procurement programs. As discussed in a 1996 CRS report, although individual LMSRs were ostensibly fully funded each year by Congress, in some cases DOD applied LMSR funding provided in a given year to partially finance the construction of L MSRs authorized in various years. For example, although Congress ostensibly approved $546.4 million in FY1995 for the procurement of two L MSR, the FY1995 funds were actually applied to help finance the procurement. by Congress in the two years (FY1997 and FY1998) following the year (FY1996) in which SSN-23 was (for a second time) procured. Congress included a provision in the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) sections of both the FY2000 and FY2001 defense appropriations acts. The ship in question is LHD-8, which was funded on an incremental basis, with the final increment provided in FY2006. The Navy in its FY2007 budget proposed procuring the amphibious assault ship LHA-6 in FY 2007 using split funding in FY2007 and FY2008. Senate Armed Services Committee approved the Navy's FY2008 request for the second of two increments of procurement funding for the amphibious assault ship LHA-6. House In its report ( H.Rept. 109-452 of May 5, 2006) on conference report on H.R. 1815 / P.L.109-163 of January 6, 2006 authorizes the use of incremental funding in FY2007, FY2008, and FY2009 for the procurement of the aircraft carrier CVN-78. incremental funding was detrimental to funding stability. Future congresses may find themselves unwilling, or unable, to fund completion of ships begun in prior years and only partially funded. The committee has approved the use of split funding for certain ships in certain cases. However, the committee does not believe that a blanket policy supporting incremental funding for any class of ship is appropriate. (Pages 68-69) Senate Section 121 of the Senate version of the FY2007 defense authorization bill would authorize use of four-year incremental funding. Virginia class submarine, the replacement amphibious assault ship (LHA(R), the future major surface combatant ship (DD(X), and the future aircraft carrier CVN-21. Section 1004 of the bill as reported by the committee states: Senate Section 122 of the FY2006 defense authorization bill ( S. 1042 ) would permit the aircraft carrierCVN-78 to be procured with split funding (i.e., incremental funding) during the period FY2007-FY2010. appropriations can be matched to funding requirements for completing natural components of the useful segment. Advance appropriations have the same benefits as regular appropriations for improved planning, management, and accountability of the project (investment) Because advance appropriations involves a one-time decision by Congress to approve the entire procurement cost of the end item, advance appropriations can be described in simplified terms as "one decision for multiple pots of money" Opponents of advance appropriations could argue that it retains one of the key potential disadvantages of incremental finding. preferred because it leads to tradeoffs within the budget year with spending for other capital assets. Full funding for a capital project (investment) over several years with regular appropriations for the first year and advance appropriations for subsequent years may bias tradeoffs. Advance appropriations, because they are scored in the year they become available for obligation, may constrain the budget authority and outlays available for regular appropriations of that year. If lumpiness caused by regular appropriations cannot be accommodated within an agency or Appropriations Subcommittee, advance appropriations can ameliorate that problem. action to cancel or modify an annual funding increment in a future-year budget. In this sense, advance appropriations can be thought of as a legislatively locked in form of incremental funding. OMB Circular A-11 allows for the use of advance appropriations to help finance capital assets under certain circumstances. Regular appropriations for the full funding of a capital project or a useful segment (or investment) in the budget year are preferred. If this results in spikes that, in the judgment of OMB, cannot be stopped, the advance appropriations are used. full funding in the budget year with regular appropriations alone is preferred. Full funding is met as long as a combination of regular and advance appropriations provide budget authority sufficient to complete the capital project or useful segment or investment. Full Funding is preferred because it leads to tradeoffs within the budgetyear. The full funding of a capital project, a useful segment, or an investment should be proposed in the Budget. It is not possible to provide full funding for all projects and investments in the same budget year. This is because of the nature of capital projects and useful segments. Good budgeting requires that appropriations for the full costs of asset acquisition be enacted in advance. Full funding with regular appropriations in the budget year also leads to tradeoffs with other capital assets and with spending for purposes other than capital assets. Full Funding increases the opportunity to use performance-based fixed price contracts, allows for more efficient work planning and management of the capital project. It also allows for the use of more efficient and cost-effective methods of working with contractors and vendors to achieve the goals of the project. When full funding is not followed and capital projects (or investments) or useful segments are funded in increments, without certainty if or when future funding will be available, the result is sometimes poor planning, acquisition of assets not fully justified. Support for the full funding policy has been periodically reaffirmed over the years by Congress, the Congress, and the White House. More efficient work planning and management of the capital project (or investment) and increases the accountability for the achievement of the baseline goals. The result is higher acquisition costs, cancellation of major investments, or inadequate funding to maintain and operate the assets. DOD budgeting and improve Congress's ability to control DOD spending. Understanding total costs and how previously appropriated funds are used are key components of Congress's oversight capability. The full funding policy is consistent with two basic laws regarding government expenditures. The Antideficiency Act of 1870, as amended, and the Adequacy of Appropriations Act of 1861 are key to DOD budgeting. The regulations governing the fullfunding policy are found in Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-11 and DOD Directive 7000.14-R. Multiyear procurement is a special contracting authority, approved by Congress on a program-by-program basis. It permits DOD to use a single contract to procure a set of end items that are scheduled to be procured across a series of up to five fiscal years. An MYP arrangement approved for the Navy's F/A-18E/F strike-fighter program, for example, permitted the Navy to use one contract for a total of 198 to 224 F/a-18e/Fs. Most Navy ships procured since the late 1950s have been funded in accordance with the full funding policy. Before then, many Navy ships were procured with incremental funding, which is discussed in the next section. These ships constitute recent exceptions to the use of full funding in the procurement of Navy ships. Congress's decision on ship funding approaches could also affect future Navy capabilities, annual Navy funding requirements, and the shipbuilding industrial base. For more information on these ships, see Appendix C of this report. a usable end item (such as a Navy ship) to be funded in the year in which the item is procured. The policy applies not just to Navy ships, but to all weapons and equipment that DOD procures through the procurement title of the annual DOD appropriations act. In general, the full funding policy means that DOD cannot contract for the construction of a new weapon or piece of equipment until funding for the entire cost of that item has been approved by Congress. Congress's intent in imposing the policy was to strengthen discipline in DOD budgeting and improve Congress's ability to control DOD spending. increment as part of its action on that year's budget. A key feature of incremental funding is that a portion of the ship's cost is provided in one or more years beyond the item's year of procurement. Under incremental funding, DOD can contract for the construction of a weapon after Congress approves only the initial increment of its cost. Under advance appropriations, Congress, following its initial decision to fund the item, would need to take a positive action to cancel or modify an annual funding increment. on DOD's ability to accurately predict the total procurement cost of items, such as ships, that take several years to build. preserve flexibility for future Congresses to stop "throwing good money after bad" by halting funding for the procurement of an item under construction that has become unnecessary or inappropriate due to unanticipated shifts in U.S. strategy or the international security environment. In spite of its potential advantages, Congress replaced incremental funding with the full funding policy in the 1950s, and has periodically reaffirmed the fullfunding policy since then. construction to start on a larger number of items in a given year within that year's amount of funding, so as to achieve better production economies of that item than would have been possible under full funding. recognize that certain DOD procurement programs, particularly those incorporating significant amounts of advanced technology, bear some resemblance to research and development activities (which can be funded in increments), even though they are intended to produce usable end items. reduce the amount of unobligated balances associated with DOD procurement Programs. implicitly recognize potential limits on DOD's ability to accurately predict the total procurement cost.  Split funding is a two-year form of incremental funding. Under split funding, a weapon's procurement cost is divided into two portions, one of which is funded in the item's year of production. Weapons under construction could be exposed to potential uneconomic start-up and stop costs that can occur when budget reductions or other unexpected developments cause one or more of the planned increments to be reduced or deferred. The cost of an item may not be known until the item has been completed or has been delivered to Congress. that could require displacing other programs from that year's budget, which can increase the costs of the displaced programs. Avoid a potential bias against the procurement of very expensive items that might result from use of full funding due to the item's large up-front procurement cost. Allow construction to start on a larger number of items in the budget. Allow the item to have a lower life cycle operation and support (O&S) costs compared to alternatives with lower up- front procurement costs. permit construction to begin on an item that has long-term benefits that do not appear in budget. nuclear-propulsion components of nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and submarines. Congress in recent years has occasionally approved AP funding for conventionally powered Navy ships, such as destroyers and amphibious ships, for which the Navy did not request any AP funding. Congress has also occasionally approvedAP funding for "advance construction" work on certain ships, which apparently refers to early shipyard activities for building the basic structure of a ship, as opposed to manufacturing long-lead components to be installed into the ship. The use of AP funds for shipyard advance construction activities is not recognized in executive branch budget regulations on the full funding policy. The law governing MYP arrangements is set forth in 10 U.S.C. § 2306b. This provision permits AP funding to be used to finance, at the outset of an MYP arrangement, the procurement of long-lead components for all of the end items to be procured under the arrangement. Congress over the years has granted MYP authority for a relatively small number of procurement programs. The Navy to procure, in total, five Virginia (SSN-774) class nuclear-powered attack submarines over the five-year period FY2004-FY2008, for example. EOQs normally take place within the context of a multiyear procurement (MYP) These ships have not been approved for MYP, and under past practice would not qualify for it under the requirements set forth in the law. MYP arrangements are permitted to cover items to be procured over a period of up to five years, while the authority granted under Section 121 would cover three ships that the Navy wants to procure over aperiod of nine years (FY2008-FY2016). In its report ( S.Rept. 109-254 of May 9, 2006) on S. 2766 , the Senate Armed Services said the authority would be used for the procurement of three ships. Long-lead items are often manufactured not at the end item's final assembly facility (such as a shipyard) but at separate supplier firms. In Navy shipbuilding, AP payments have most commonly been used to pay for nuclear-propulsion components of nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and submarines. This up-front batch procurement of long- lead items is called an economic order quantity (EOQ) because it procures (i.e., places an order for) these items in the form of a batch that can be manufactured in an efficient manner.  advance procurement (AP) "down payments" on a usable end item can be provided in one or more years prior to the item's year of procurement. AP funding may be used to pay for long-lead items that have long manufacturing lead times. This is to ensure that these items will be ready for installation into the end item at the appropriate point. AP funds may also be used for components of ausable end item that are not ready for use yet. This can be done to ensure the components are ready to be used in the appropriate way. Advance appropriations is an alternate form of full funding that is permitted under executive branch budget regulations. As a funding approach, it can be viewed as lying somewhere between traditional full funding and incremental funding. Advance appropriations have not been used in Navy ship procurement, but have been used by other executive branch agencies to fund various programs. Under advance appropriations, as undertraditional full funding, Congress makes a one-time decision. Under Advance Appropriations, asunder traditional fullfunding, Congress making a one time decision. is well understood and low risk. The Navy believes the cost and schedule risk in the DDG-1000 program is low enough to permit the twin lead ship acquisition strategy. The conferees are willing to make this one-time exception to the full funding principle because of the unique situation with the shipbuilding industrial base. The unusual procurement of twin lead ships raises the risk that future design changes or production problems will impact two ships under construction simultaneously. This could raise costs significantly compared to other lead ship programs. In Navy ship-procurement programs, the detailed design and nonrecurring engineering (DD/NRE) costs for each class of ship are included in the procurement cost of the lead ship in the class. The practice is not followed by other DOD procurement programs, such as programs for procuring aircraft, ground vehicles, and missiles. One response to the challenge of paying for lead ships whose procurement cost includes significant DD/Nre costs, would be to fund the procurement of lead ships through the Navy's research and development. Congress rejected Navy's proposal to procure the lead DDG-1000 through the Navy's research and development account. Funding the procurement of lead ships through the R&D account would permit them to be incrementally funded without violating the full funding policy. An alternative approach to the challenge of paying for lead ships whose procurement cost includes significant DD/NRE costs would be to treat DD-NRE work as the final stage of the R & D process. Under this option, the DD/ NRE costs for a ship class could be incremental funded without violate the full policy. ship class could be incrementally funded without violating the full funding policy, while the actual hands-on construction cost of the lead ship would be fully funded. Supporters of this option could argue that DD/NRE work is best viewed as the final stage of research and development and should be funded in the R&D account. This option can be viewed as an intermediate approach that is between the current practice of fully funding both DD and NRE costs, and incrementally funding both these costs as would occur under the Navy's proposal. Some observers have proposed procuring Navy ships using funding approaches. These alternative funding approaches include incremental funding, which has been used to fund a few Navy ships in recent years. The issue for Congress is whether to make greater use of incremental funding or begin using advance appropriations for procuring navy ships. Each of these is discussed below. The Navy has proposed in previous years to procure a small number of lead ships of each new class of Navy ships through the Navy's research and development account rather than the ship-procurement account. given total amount of ship-procurement funding. Congress's decision on this issue could be significant because the full funding policy relates to Congress's power of the purse. The issue can be alternately expressed as how to procure Navy ships economically while maintaining key congressional prerogatives. If Congress decides to make more use of incremental funding or to start using advance appropriations, it could temporarily reduce the number of new ships that could be procured. It could also affect future Administrations and Congresses to make rational capital budgeting decisions. The committee notes that Congress adopted the full funding policy in the 1950s in part because of a concern that incremental funding was detrimental to funding stability. During the hearings on shipbuilding, all witnesses emphasized the importance of program and funding stability as the top priority for reducing the cost of shipbuilding and sustaining the shipbuilding industrial base. Future congresses may be able to smooth out the dramatic spikes in shipbuilding funding required as a result of aircraft carrier construction every four or five years, the committee says. procuring almost all ships with full funding, procuring a small number (e.g., aircraft carriers and large-deck amphibious assault ships) with de facto or explicit incremental funding, and approving, for some ships being fully funded, advance procurement (AP) funding that the Navy did not request. Opponents of this option could argue that any use of incremental funding weakens the full funding policy, increasing the likelihood of proposals to use it for long-lead components. This option would involve reducing or eliminating the use of Incremental funding in Navy ship procurement. would have to be weighed against the risk of an increase in cost of an incrementally funded ship due to a decision in a future year to reduce or delay a funding increment. This option could involve starting to use advance appropriations for ships such as aircraft carriers or large-deck amphibious assault ships. Supporters could argue that this option, like the previous one, would take maximum advantage of opportunities for avoiding or mitigating budget spikes associated with the procurement of these ships. They could also argue that compared to the previous option, this option would create less risk. funding policy, would reduce the chance that supporters of other kinds of DOD procurement items, such as aircraft, would seek to have them funded using incremental funding. Budget spikes associated with procuring aircraft carriers or large-deck amphibious assault ships, they could argue, can be anticipated years in advance, permitting their effects to be carefully managed. They could argue that stability in Navy ship-procurement plans can be increased by encouraging the Navy and DOD to better define their thinking regarding Navy requirements. committing a portion of one or more future-year budgets to the financing of an item procured in a prior year and requiring a positive action from future Congresses to undo those commitments. Opponents could also argue that compared to full funding, advance appropriations under certain circumstances could increase ship-construction costs by causing work on a ship to stop and then be restarted. In 2001, some Navy officials advocated the use of advance appropriations for Navy ship procurement, noting at that time that this funding approach was cheaper than full funding. near-term production economies of sale, while still permitting the Navy to procure ships in future years at economic rates of production. This second scenario is dependent on realizing the expected increase in ship-procurement funding in the later years. If this increase is not realized, then the Navy could end up using a combination of the two scenarios to procure new ships in the near term and later years in the future. The Navy could also end up buying new ships at a lower average cost for the entire period in question and thereby reduce the collective cost of all the ships. multi-year procurement, economic order quantity, and other approaches help to stabilize the production path, and reduce the per unit cost of ships and increase our shipbuilding rate. The committee does not agree that creative financing methodologies that delay recognizing the true cost of shipbuilding or that provide ever-increasing amounts of funding to cover the explosion in ship costs are responsible actions. Incremental funding, advanced procurement, multiyear procurement and various creative shipyard work allocation arrangements have failed to control the cost growth of vessel classes such as the Virginia class submarine. Using incremental funding or advance appropriations could help reduce instability in Navy ship-procurement plans. This could avoid or mitigate budget spikes that can occur when traditional full funding is used to procure ships. The ships that best fit this description are aircraft carriers and "large-deck" amphibious assault ships. Accommodating budget spikes for such ships can require the Navy to move to other fiscal years or move other ships that the Navy would have preferred to procure in the spike year. Could using incremental funding increase the number of Navy ships that can be built for a given total amount of ship- procurement funding? of that year's budget is already devoted to paying for ships started in prior years with incremental funding or advance appropriations. preserving that portion of the budget so as to avoid disrupting the production schedule of those prior-year ships would mean that the budget reduction would fall more heavily on the remaining part of the ship-procurement budget. This could increase the chance that the reduction would lead to a decision to defer to a future year the procurement of a ship planned for that year. Lastly, if Congress decides to. Using incremental funding or advance appropriations would defer much of the procurement cost of the ships in question to future years. In those future years, the remainder of the cost of these ships would still have to be paid. As a result, other things held equal, the number of new ships that could be procured in future years for a given amount of ship-procurement funding will be reduced. If this increase is not realized, then using incremental funding and advance appropriations could simply trade poor production economies of scale in the near term. Using incremental funding or advance appropriations could marginally increase the number of ships that could be built for a given total amount of ship-procurement funding. By avoiding instances in which budget spikes caused ships to be moved from one year to another, using incremental funding can avoid perturbations in the production schedules for these ships. Under certain other circumstances, using  incremental funding could increase rather than reduce ship- Procurement costs. The reduction in ship- procurement costs might be sufficient, for example, to increase from 20 to 21 the total number to be paid for with a certain amount of funding.