to torture may be treated separately under regulations implementing the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Article 3 of the Torture Convention prohibits the return of any person to a country where there are "substantial grounds" for believing that he or she would be in danger of being tortured. The alien must meet the three elements necessary to establish torture: the torture must involve the infliction of severe pain or suffering, either physical or mental. must be intentionally inflicted; and 3. the torture must be committed by or at the acquiescence of a public official or person acting in an official capacity. An applicant for non-removal under Article 3 has the burden of proving that it is more likely than not that he would be tortured if removed to the proposed country. If credible, the applicant's testimony may be sufficient to sustain this burden without additional corroboration. All evidence relevant to the possibility should be considered when deciding whether to remove an applicant. in large part on the credibility of the claim and the likelihood that persecution would occur if the alien is returned home. A third dimension that overlays these concepts is the matter of "mixed motives" for persecuting the alien. The INA states that "the term credible fear of persecution means that there is a significant possibility," taking into account "credible fear" and "well-founded fear" Each of these standards are discussed below. The standards are fundamental to establishing the standards for asylum. possibility , taking into account the credibility of the statements made by the alien in support of the alien's claim and such other facts as are known to the officer, that the alien could establish eligibility for asylum. Integral to expedited removal, which is discussed below, the credible fear concept also functions as a pre-screening standard. The standards for "well-founded fear" have evolved over the years and been guided significantly by judicial decisions, including a notable U.S. Supreme Court decision. Foreign nationals arriving at a U.S. port of entry who lack proper immigration documents are placed in expedited removal. If they express a fear of persecution, they receive a "credible fear" hearing with a USCIS asylum officer. If found credible, they are referred to an EOIR immigration judge for a hearing. If the asylum officer finds that an alien does not have a credible fear, the alien may request that a judge review that finding. The number of "c credible fear" claims that USCIS has considered has steadily increased. fear" claims that USCIS has considered has steadily increased from 4,712 in FY2005 to 5,454 in FY2009. Consistent time series data on "credible fear" claims are not available before FY2005. On November 13, 2002, the former INS published a notice clarifying that certain aliens arriving by sea who are not admitted or paroled into the United States are to be placed on a waiting list. On that day, the U.S. placed more than 1,000 aliens on the list. "Credible fear" typically comes up when an alien arrives without proper documentation and is put into expedited removal proceedings. Those deemed to have a credible fear proceed to a defensive asylum hearing with EOIR. Given the ebbs and flows of asylum seekers over time that Figure 1 , Figure 2 , and Figure 3 depict, the representativeness for "credibleFear" claimants is not clear, but it is likely to be higher than for other categories of asylum seeker. More Western Hemisphere nations are among the top 10 source countries for "Credible Fear" claimants than among the U.S. asylum caseloads. or paroled into the United States are to be placed in expedited removal proceedings and detained (subject to humanitarian parole) This notice concluded that illegal mass migration by sea threatened national security because it diverts the U.S. Coast Guard and other resources from their homeland security duties. The Attorney General expanded on this rationale in his April 17, 2003, ruling that instructs EOIR immigration judges to consider "national security interests implicated by the encouragement of further unlawful mass migrations ..." in making bond determinations. migrants who arrive in "the United States by sea seeking to evade inspection." The case involved a Haitian who had come ashore in Biscayne Bay, FL, on October 29, 2002. The BIA had upheld his release, but the Attorney General vacated the BIA decision. All foreign nationals seeking asylum are subject to multiple background checks in the terrorist, immigration, and law enforcement databases. Those who enter the country legally on nonimmigrant visas are screened by the consular officers at the Department of State when they apply for a visa. DHS' Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officer must summarily exclude a foreign national arriving without proper documentation. Unless the alien expresses a fear of persecution if repatriated, the CBP officer is allowed to exclude them without placing them in removal proceedings. This procedure is known as expedited removal. According to DHS immigration policy and procedures, CBP inspectors, as well as other DHS immigration officers, are required to ask each individual who may be subject to expedite removal the following series of "protection questions" Immigration and Customs Enforcement asks the following series of "protection questions" to identify anyone who is afraid of return. If the foreign national expresses a fear of return, the alien is supposed to be detained by Immigration and Customs enforcement. The questions include: Why did you leave your home country or country of last residence? Do you have any fear or concern about being returned to your homecountry or being removed from the United States? Would you be harmed if you were returned toyour home country? DoYou have any questions or is there anything else you would like to add? Department of State when they apply for a visa, and all foreign nationals are inspected by CBP officers at ports of entry. Those who enter the country illegally are screened by the U.S. Border Patrol or the ICE agents when they are apprehended. When aliens formally request asylum, they are sent to the nearest USCIS-authorized fingerprint site. They have all 10 fingers scanned and are subject to a full background check by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Distinct from asylum law and policy, aliens claiming relief from removal due to torture may be treated separately. to the proposed country, all evidence relevant to the possibility of future torture is required to be considered. However, if a diplomatic assurance (deemed sufficiently reliable by the Attorney General or Secretary of State) that the alien will not be tortured is obtained from the government of the country to which the alien would be repatriated, the alien's claim for protection will be dropped. For many years, most foreign nationals who sought asylum in the United States were from the Western Hemisphere, notably Central America and the Caribbean. The intent of the persecutor is subjective and may stem from mixed or multiple motives. The courts have ruled that the persecution may have more than one motive. An applicant for asylum begins the process either in the United States, if he or she is already present, or at a port of entry while in the country. The asylum seeker must demonstrate in mixed motive cases that even though his/her persecutors were motivated for a non-cognizable reason, one of the central motives was the asylum seeker's race, religion, nationality or social group. In the individualized instance, if the asylum seeker demonstrates that there is a reasonable possibility of suffering such persecution as an individual if he or she were to return to that country. In the group identity instance, of persecution is deemed reasonable. Given the sheer number of asylum seekers from the PRC in FY2009, it is not particularly surprising that thePRC led in granting asylum to so many people from the country in the last few years of the last decade of the 1990s and early 2000s. guided significantly by judicial decisions, including a notable U.S. Supreme Court case. An asylum seeker has a well-founded fear of persecution if he or she is unable or unwilling to return to that country. The regulations also state that an asylum seeker "does not have aWell-foundedFear of Persecution if the applicant could avoid persecution by relocating to another part of the applicant's country" The regulations state that the asylum officer or immigration judge shall not require the alien to provide evidence that there is such a fear. not require the alien to provide evidence that there is a reasonable possibility he or she would be individually singled out for persecution if (A) The applicant establishes that there's a pattern or practice in his or her country of nationality or, if stateless, of persecution of a group of persons similarly situated to the applicant on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion; and (B) the applicant establishes his/her own inclusion in, and identification with, such group. Defensive applications for asylum are raised when a foreign national is in removal proceedings and asserts claim for asylum as a defense to his/her removal. EOIR's immigration judges and the BIA, entities in DOJ separate from the USCIS, have exclusive control over such claims. Applicants/aliens seeking asylum via the defensive application method may be detained until an immigration judge rules on their application. The applicant/alien is not detained due.the mandatory detention requirements while their applications are being adjudicated. There is broader authority under the INA to detain aliens for other grounds. Two avenues exist to seek asylum: "affirmative applications" and "defensive applications" In both processes, the burden of proof is on the asylum seeker to establish that he or she meets the refugee definition specified in the INA. An asylum seeker who is already present, or at a port of entry while seeking admission, differs from a potential refugee who begins a separate process wholly outside of the United States. The asylum officers either grant asylum to successful applicants or refer to immigration judges those applicants who fail to meet the definition. argument that greater congressional oversight might politicize the process. Because none of the studies that documented the disparities had access to the case facts and evidence, the rationale for decisions remains unknown. Immigration removal proceedings are civil in nature and, thus, do not entail the right to legal counsel that criminal proceedings do. Foreign nationals can be represented by counsel when they appear in immigration court, but according to the statute, "at no expense to the taxpayer" in the U.S. or any other country. court, but according to the statute, "at no expense to the Government" The issue of asylum seekers' access to counsel, especially during removal proceedings, has arisen in recent years. Many maintain that few can adequately represent themselves and that charitable and pro bono legal projects cannot afford to serve all asylum seekers. Many cite the GAO study, which found that asylum seekers were three times as likely to obtain asylum than non-asylum seekers. Some offer that providing legal counsel is an option for addressing the disparities in outcome. number of observers, while the immigration courts have experienced a substantial increase in caseload, EOIR has not received a commensurate increase in resources. Some are pushing for an increase in funding for immigration judges and law clerks, which they assert would improve the quality of judicial hearings. Others, however, contend that the problems related to disparities in asylum decisions lie less in the funding shortages and more in thequality of immigration judges. Some recommend higher recruitment standards for immigration Judges and more training, particularly training in the culture of asylum seekers' homelands. of asylum seekers' homelands. Establishing mechanisms to foster communication among asylum offices is offered as an option to improve consistency. A further recommendation is to consider cases in pairs or panels of three asylum offers. Despite concern over the disparate decisions, there is an argument that greater congressional oversight might politicize the process. Still others maintain that the USCIS asylum officers also display disparate outcomes among similarly situated asylum cases, and that enhanced training and research support should be available for the asylum corps and immigration judges. application form, the information received during the interview, and other information related to the specific case. If the asylum officer approves the application and the alien passes the identification and background checks, then the foreign national is granted asylum status. There has been a 79% decrease in affirmative asylum cases filed since the enactment of IIRIRA in 1996, falling from 116,877 in FY1996 to 24,550 in FY2009. The asylum officer does not technically deny asylum claims; rather, the asylum applications of aliens who are not granted asylum by asylum officers are referred to EOIR immigration judges. Defensive asylum claims started at a lower level in FY1996 (84,293) than affirmative USCIS claims (116,877) Since that time, defensive asylum claims have dropped by 53%, to 39,279 in FY2009. The number of asylum cases that EOIR judges have approved, however, has risen by 99% over this 14-year period. The applicant/alien is not detained due to their asylum claim, but rather because of the broader authority in the INA to detain aliens. Asylee adjustments comprised only 4% of the 10.3 million LPRs admitted or adjusted from FY2000 through FY2009. Unlike other facets of U.S. immigration policy, asylum issues are less about the number of foreign nationals involved and more about the qualities of the asylum seekers. The U.N. Refugee Agency is a non-profit organization based in Geneva, Switzerland. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Mexican levels of affirmative versus defensive asylum claims each yielded unique fluctuations over time. Regardless of the overall decrease in asylum cases since the enactment of IIRIRA in 1996, this data analysis suggests that conditions in the major source countries were likely the driving force behind asylum seekers. Country conditions lie at the core of the principle that the United States will not return a foreign national to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. variation was also the lowest at 4%. In contrast, the denial rates of Salvadoran asylum seekers were the highest. Some argue that given the religious, ethnic, and political violence in various countries around the world, it has become more difficult to differentiate the persecuted from the persecutors. Some express concern that U.S. sympathies for the asylum seekers caught up in the immigration system are being misused by the Obama administration, who are pushing for a change in the law to make it fairer. By the end of FY1995, there were 457,670 asylum cases in the backlog, as the INS asylum corps was unable to keep pace. Almost half of those cases, however, resulted from the 1990 settlement of the American Baptist Church (ABC) case. The Illegal Immigrant Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA, P.L. 104-208 ) of 1996 made substantial changes to the asylum process, most notably by establishing summary exclusion provisions (now known as summary exclusion clauses) asylum seekers were three times as likely to obtain asylum if they had legal representation, to emphasize the need for legal counsel. Supporters of current law maintain that the one-year rule prevents abuses of the asylum system. Some argue that lack of counsel for a bona fide asylum seeker might result in deportation to a country where the person's life and liberty are threatened. Others have observed that many asylum seekers who fail to file within one year of arrival subsequently receive withholding of removal or relief under the United Nations Convention Against Torture. asylum process, most notably by establishing summary exclusion provisions (now known as expedited removal) IIRIRA also added a provision enabling refugees or asylees to request asylum on the basis of persecution resulting from resistance to coercive population control policies. Asylum claims with the INS dropped in the years following the passage of II RIRA. The Real ID Act of 2005 ( P.L. 109-13 ) further revised the asylum process. It remains difficult to assess the extent to which the IIriRA revisions to asylum policy affected this decline. ID Act of 2005 ( P.L. 109-13 ) further revised asylum law. It established expressed standards of proof for asylum seekers, including that the applicant's race, religion, nationality, social group, or political opinion was or will be one of the central motives for his or her persecution. It also required that the asylum seeker provide evidence which corroborates otherwise credible testimony. Because "fear" is a subjective state of mind, assessing the merits of an asylum case rests in large part on the credibility of the claim. Asylum seekers are often detained with criminal aliens, a practice that many consider inappropriate and unwarranted. Opponents to the mandatory detention of asylum seekers in expedited removal usually cite the U.N. High Commissioner on Refugees. Supporters of current law say it sends a clear signal of deterrence to aliens who consider using asylum claims as a mechanism to enter illegally. Some have long been concerned that terrorists would seek asylum in the United States, hoping to remain hidden among the hundreds of thousands of pending asylum cases. concern that U.S. sympathies for the asylum seekers caught up in the current political uprisings in the Middle East, northern Africa, and South Asia could inadvertently facilitate the entry of terrorists. Others maintain that current law does not offer adequate protections for people fleeing human rights violations or gender-based abuses that occur around the world. Some assert that asylum has become an alternative pathway for immigration rather than humanitarian protection provided in extraordinary cases. At the crux of the issue is the extent to which an asylum policy forged during the Cold War is adapting to the competing priorities and turbulence of the 21 century. population growth, poverty, and political instability in the sending countries of asylum seekers, are factors over which the United States has little control. Some have warned of "the ongoing separation of asylum from any grounding in the national interest" Others have asserted that the U.S. should re-calibrate asylum policy to provide more protections for asylum seekers. These proponents have expressed a desire for the US to reaffirm its welcome to asylum seekers and to set an example for the world to follow. Critics point to asylum seekers from countries of "special concern" Some argue that national security risks should outweigh humanitarian concerns. Others point out that asylum seekers are subject to multiple national security screenings. If an asylum seeker is a suspected or known terrorist, the case should be reviewed, they say. The U.S. is home to hundreds of thousands of pending asylum cases. The asylum process can take up to two years. The Supreme Court has the power to grant or deny asylum. It has declined to grant asylum to more than 1,000 people. foreign nationals involved and more about the qualities of the policies and the efficacy of the procedures. Asylum is an adjudication of a person based upon facts, evidence, beliefs, and circumstances that might be clear at some times yet nebulous at other times. The policy tensions of asylum often pit the promotion of our humanitarian values against the prevention of fraudulent abuses. The protection of the persecuted against the security of our borders. The obligations of our moral responsibilities internationally against the commitments of our social priorities domestically. balance of these competing concerns may be shaken by a crisis in a neighboring nation or by larger world events. The U.S. Congress plays the key role in considering when and whether revision or re-calibration of asylum law and policies is warranted, says John Avlon, a professor of law at the University of California, Los Angeles. He says Congress should consider whether a change in asylum law or policies is in the best interests of the country as a whole, rather than just the asylum seekers. overview of current policy, discussing the threshold of what constitutes asylum and the procedures for obtaining it. The second portion of the report identifies the top sending countries and includes a time series analysis of six selected source countries for asylum seekers. The report rounds out with a discussion of selected legislative policy issues. In 1968, the United States became party to the 1967 United Nations Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees (hereafter referred to as the U.N. Refugee Protocol), agreeing to the principle of nonrefoulement. Nonrefoulement means that an alien will not be returned to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened. The U.N. Refugee Protocol does not require that a signatory accept refugees, but it does ensure that signatory nations afford certain rights and protections to aliens who meet the definition of refugee. Congress and the Administration thought that there was no need to amend the INA, assuming the U.S. would not accept refugees. The INA was amended in 2006. The Refugee Protection Act of 2011 would make significant revisions to asylum policy. The bill would eliminate the time limits on seeking asylum in cases of changed circumstances. It would also proscribe conditions under which an asylum seeker who was a victim of terrorist coercion would not be excluded. The Senate Committee on the Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy and House Committee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement Ranking Member Zoe Lofgren introduced the companion bills on June 15, 2011. The companion bills are S. 1202 / H.R. 2185. was a victim of terrorist coercion would not be excluded as a terrorist; provide alternatives to detention of asylum seekers; modify certain elements necessary for the asylum seeker to meet the conditions for the granting of asylum; and, allow aliens interdicted at sea the opportunity to have an asylum interview. Foreign nationals seeking asylum must demonstrate a well-founded fear that if returned home, they will be persecuted based upon one of five characteristics: race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. Foreign nationals who participated in the persecution of other people are excluded from receiving asylum. The law states other conditions for mandatory denials of asylum claims, including when the alien has been convicted of a serious crime and is a danger to the community. The INA, moreover, has specific grounds for exclusion of all aliens that include criminal and terrorist grounds. This report opens with an overview of current policy, discussing the threshold of what constitutes asylum. It then goes on to discuss what constitutes a credible threat to national security. In 1974, the former Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) issued its first asylum regulations. The Refugee Act of 1980 codified the U.N. Refugee Protocols definition of a refugee in the INA and included provisions for asylum in INA 208. The law defined asylees as aliens in the United States or at a port of entry who meet the definition of refugee. As Figure 1 illustrates, asylum claims spiked immediately after passage of the Refugee Act in 1980, when over 120,000 asylum claims were made. a desire for the U.S. to reaffirm its welcome to those who have fled persecution as well as its commitment to humanitarian efforts. They have argued that some of the statutory revisions in 1996 and 2005 created unnecessary barriers for genuine asylees. The body of research that has revealed disparities in asylum decisions has led many to call for greater congressional oversight of the immigration courts. According to a number of observers, while the immigration Courts have experienced a rise in the number of asylum seekers, they have also experienced a fall in the numbers of those granted asylum. Asylees from countries of "special concern" may be beneficial to U.S. national security. They may have useful information that assists in the war on terrorism. Opponents of limiting the asylees argue that security risks had existed before the asylum law was changed. They argue that those risks resulted more from the limits of intelligence data on terrorists in the past rather than the expansiveness of asylum policy. The law already bars alien terrorists from entering the United States, they say. The asylum law changed after the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Some argue that the law should be amended to provide an exception for people who have been forced by terrorists to provide support. Opponents of limiting the judicial review of asylum cases say it would erode two traditional values of U.S. polity. The law states that an alien who commits an act that he "knows, or reasonably should know, affords material support" to a terrorist organization is inadmissible. It makes no exception for instances where the alien has been coerced into providing support. GAO found that the grant rate for affirmative cases exceeded 50% for asylum seekers from countries such as Albania, the PRC, Ethiopia, Iran, Russia, Somalia, and the former Yugoslavia. In contrast, GAO found the grant rates was lower than 10% for Asylum seekers from El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Mexico. GAO also offered the following important caveat: Because data were not available on the facts, evidence, and testimony presented in each asylum case, we could not measure the effect of case merits on asylum cases. A study of 290 asylum officers who decided at least 100 affirmative cases from the PRC from FY1999 through FY2005 found that the approval rate of PRC claimants spanned from zero to over 90% during this period. In one regional asylum office, the grant rates for affirmative applications from thePRC varied from zero up to 68%. Sixty percent of the officers in that regional office deviated from their office's average PRC asylum approval rates by more than 50%. Nationwide, immigration judges granted asylum to 47% percent of defensive cases ofPRC claimants from January 1, 2000, through August. For one of these countries, China, the high grant rate and the low grant rate deviated by more than 50% from the national average. Colombian asylum seekers also faced major disparities. Those who appeared before the Orlando Immigration Court had a 63% grant rate, while those heard by the Atlanta Immigration Court faced a grant rate of 19%. The average national grant rate for Colombia asylum seekers is 36%. The U.S.was more than50% above the nationalAverage. The average grant rate was 36%. 20 approved affirmative and defensive asylum cases: Colombia, Haiti, Guatemala, and, of course, the PRC. For year-by-year data on the top 20 source countries for approved asylum cases, see the Appendix. Research studies of the approval rates of cases filed by asylum seekers consistently reveal disparities by USCIS regional asylum offices and EOIR immigration courts. Fredric N. Tulsky of the San Jose Mercury News was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for investigative reporting in 2001. system that grants political asylum. Stanford Law Review published "Refugee Roulette: Disparities in Asylum Adjudication" in 2007. The example of asylum seekers from the PRC offers striking differences in the percentage of cases approved across regions and jurisdictions, despite national data trends that appeared consistent. A study of 290 asylum officers who decided on asylum cases found "a surprising lack of consistency" among similarly situated asylum cases considered by EOIR from FY1994 to the early months of FY2005. GAO analyzed the disparity in asylum decisions as well and found that "significant variation existed" GAO performed multivariate statistical analyses on asylum cases from 19 immigration courts that handled almost 90% of the cases from October 1994 through April 2007. GAO identified nine factors that affected these outcomes: (1) filed affirmatively (originally with DHS at his/her own initiative) or defensively (with DOJ, if in removal proceedings); (2) applicant's nationality; (3) time period of the asylum decision; and (9) length of experience as an immigration judge. Researchers at Syracuse University's TRAC have been conducting analyses of the immigration courts for several years. They were among the earliest to identify wide variations in asylum outcomes that were dependent on the immigration judge. In the New York immigration court, for example, one judge denied only 6% of the asylum cases. The denial rates of Iraq asylum seekers were the lowest, and their variation was also the lowest at 4%. In contrast, the asylum seeker's country of origin was the highest, with denial rates ranging from 4% to 74%. cases of PRC claimants from January 1, 2000, through August 31, 2004. The immigration court in Atlanta approved 7% of defensive PRC cases; however, the court in Orlando, FL, approved 76% of defense cases. The disparity continued if the applicant lost at the Board of Immigration Appeals and petitioned for review in the U.S. Court of Appeals. From FY2003 to FY2005, the Fourth Circuit did not remand a single case from the PRC (i.e., the court never remanded the case) affirmative, defensive, and "credible fear" claims for each of these source countries from FY1997 through FY2009. PRC asylum cases peaked in FY2002 for both affirmative and defensive claims. The ebbs and flows ofPRC asylum seekers over the 13-year period, however, exhibit different patterns depending on the asylum gateway, as shown in Figure 7. The figure includes time series data on "Credible fear's" claims, which are available only since FY2005. average for defensive claims (8,581) was higher than the average for the affirmative claims. The "credible fear" claims dropped from a high of 1,711 in FY2005 to 602 in FY2008, and then rose to 962 in FY2009. Overall trends of Colombian asylum seekers from FY1997 through FY2009 are up by 48.2% and 53.6% respectively. Mexican affirmative cases evidenced a moderate surge in FY2001 and FY2002, but the overall trend line has declined by 89.8%. average for affirmative claims was 2,351, and for defensive claims it was 3,072. The "credible fear" claims have dipped by 54.6%, from 185 in FY2005 to 84 in FY2009. Affirmative asylum claims from El Salvador have steadily declined by 90.4%, from a high of 4,706 in FY1997 to 453 in FY 2009. Overall, defensive asylum claims are down by 53.2% for Salvadorans, the U.S. government says. Over 120,000 Cubans and about 25,000 Haitians set sail for Florida in 1980. In the 1980s, political violence and civil wars in Central America prompted mass migration of asylum seekers from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua. Asylum cases filed with the INS surpassed 100,000 for the first time in 1988. The Tiananmen Square massacre of Chinese protesters in 1989 symbolized events that triggered asylum seeker from China, who contributed, along with conditions in South America. The U.S. government is now home to more than 800,000 asylum seekers. The December 1991 military coup d'etat deposing Haiti's first democratically elected president, Jean Bertrand Aristide, led thousands of Haitians to flee by boat to the United States in FY1992. Asylum claims with the INS peaked at 149,566 in FY1995 ( Figure 1 ). Almost half of the asylum claims were made by Chinese. The following year, 285 Chinese came ashore in New York on the "Golden Venture" and a total of 683Chinese came ashore along the coast of California in the summer of 1993. In FY1995, more than three-fourths of asylum cases filed annually came from the Western Hemisphere. In FY1999, the People's Republic of China (PRC) moved to the top of the source countries for affirmative asylum claims, with 4,209 new cases. Somalia followed as a leading source country with 3,125 cases in FY1999. As the overall number of asylum seekers fell in the late 1990s, the shrinking numbers from Central America contributed to the decline. The PRC remained the leading sourcecountry throughout the 2000s. the top 10 source countries of asylum seekers were Western Hemisphere nations in FY2009. The PRC (18%) was still the leading source country, but El Salvador (17%) sent a comparable number of "credible fear" claimants. Iran, Iraq, Indonesia, and Pakistan were top 20 source countries for those who received asylum from FY2000 through FY2009, as were Indonesia, India, and Burma. Iraq and India were the only ones among these countries (along with Nepal) to be among the top 10 in FY 2009. Overall, defensive asylum claims are down by 53.2% for Salvadorans, despite peaking at 9,955 in FY2007. The number of "credible fear" claims during expedited removal has risen sharply from 73 in FY2005 to 945 in FY2009. Asylum seekers from Ethiopia comprise the smallest number of cases among the six source countries studied. The 13-year average was 972 for affirmative claims and 689 for defensive claims, with only modest variations from year to year. PRC asylum seekers are also benefiting from the provision enabling aliens to claim asylum on the basis of persecution resulting from resistance to coercive population control policies. The U.S. Coast Guard interdiction of Haitians has undoubtedly suppressed the number of asylum seekers from that nation. Although the continent of Africa was not home to many of the asylum seeker from the top source countries discussed above, the African nations of Nigeria and South Africa were among the top sources of asylum cases in FY2009. The portion of approved asylum cases from Haiti was consistent with its portion of asylum seeker in FY 2009.