Federal standards for internal control specify that agencies should assess the risks the agency faces. In USPTO’s 2014-2018 Strategic Plan, the agency indicated its intent to evaluate changes to the its system for evaluating if examiners are completing office actions in the time needed. In addition to providing personnel with the right incentives for the job, internal control standards note that an agency’’ success requires providing people with theright incentives for their jobs’ ’”‘‘I’m not at all confident to somewhat confident.’ We conducted this performance audit from November 2014 to June 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. USPTO’s Manual of Patent Examining Procedure is available on its website at: http://www.uspto.org/patent-examining-procedures/manual-of-patents-examiners. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.  OPQA made changes to its review processes that should allow the office to perform about 12,000 audits in 2016. In 2015, USPTO drafted a master review form that could standardize OPQa and supervisory examiner reviews with a single, consistent approach and documentation. As of March 2016,USPTO had not made a decision on the master review.unit level, according to agency officials. The agency began using a draft version of the form in November 2015, and began to pilot the form with some supervisory patent examiners in 2016, officials said. USPTO developed a human capital strategy, its 2015-2018 People Plan, which replaced its 2011-2015 Strategic Human Capital Plan. The agency also identified the role of patent examiner as a mission- critical occupation and identified the competencies needed to fulfill that role. USPTO has a workforce with the skills required to achieve organizational goals, according to the plan. The plan is expected to be implemented by the end of the year, the agency said in a press release. The 2015- 2018 People Plan will be implemented over the course of the next three years. Internal control activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and mechanisms that help ensure that actions are taken to address risks. These activities are an integral part of an agency’s planning to achieve effective results and efficiently manage government resources. Because information technology changes rapidly, the internal control standards note that controls must evolve to remain effective. These standards also highlight the importance of clearly documenting internal controls. Without a documented, periodically updated strategy to manage information technology, the agency's controls will not be effective. The U.S. Patent Classification system became outdated following budget constraints in the early 2000s. USPTO partnered with EPO to create a new system to be jointly used by both offices. CPC gives examiners greater access to foreign patent literature compared to the prior system and can be expanded more easily to include new technologies, USPto officials say. The potential benefits of adopting the new classification system may be reduced as inconsistently classified patents make it more difficult for examiners to identify relevant literature. System’s usefulness to examiners depends, in part, on the consistency with which the system is applied by its users. Inconsistently applying the classification system to applications undermines its usefulness. USPTO provided examiners and classification contractors with training on how to classify applications and how to search for references using the CPC system. The agency has not identified specific reasons that account for differences between its classifications and EPO's. However, USpTO is updating its contract for the contract with EPO. USPTO is updating its contract for initial classification services to require a higher level of expertise. The agreement between USPTO and EPO that supports the CPC system commits both offices to exchange best practices on classifications and aim for a high level of consistency. As of March 2016, EPO and USPPO had not agreed upon a measure of consistency between the offices. Establishing agreement with EPO on a target of consistency and a plan for monitoring consistency would help to implement this practice. the Department concurred with our recommendations. USPTO provided additional technical comments that we incorporated, as appropriate. We also provided a draft of this report to EPO and JPO for their views and comment. EPO indicated it had no comments on the draft; JPO provided technical comments. In its written comments, the Department concurring with our recommendation to work with EPO to identify a target level of consistency for CPC decisions and develop a plan to monitor consistency. The Department noted ongoing efforts to work to develop objective metrics. USPTO should develop and periodically update a documented strategy to identify key sources of nonpatent literature for individual technology centers. To improve its monitoring with EPO and other patent offices to develop objective metrics to measure the level of consistency. If finalized, such metrics and a plan to monitor consistency could allow USPTO to more fully benefit from adopting the new CPC system. The Department concurred and stated that US PTO’s STIC analyzes nonPatent literature sources used by examiners and assesses them for incorporation into USP TO’S search system. While we did not receive evidence of such assessments, they may be a useful step. wide array of nonpatent literature sources. As of March 2016, USPTO had not established a documented strategy to identify and assess new sources. The agency does not currently have specific plans to add additional nonpatents literature sources to its new system because of its initial focus on developing parity with the existing system. In addition, as of March 2015, the agency had not determined the most optimal means of providing access to the new Patents End-to-End system. The new system can be expanded in the future to include additionalNonpatent. wide array of nonpatent literature sources. EPO’s primary search tool allows examiners to use a single interface to search through all of EPO's internal databases as well as some external databases of prior art. The system also incorporates features that make it user-friendly, such as grouping documents to avoid examiners facing dozens of copies of the same article from different sources.EPO officials identified their search engine and the large number of indexed prior art resources available within the search engine as strengths of the office. worksharing could give offices access to search reports of unpublished applications at other offices. These search reports may include prior art relevant to similar applications filed with EPO. EPO and JPO incorporate specific nonpatent literature resources into their offices’ main search tools. Using classification systems to help examiners narrow their searches and find relevant patent literature even if the patent application uses inconsistent terms or is written in a foreign language.. JPO’s internal databases include JPO patent literature, some foreign patent USPTO examiners use two systems, the Examiner’s Automated Search Tool (EAST) and the Web-Based Examiner Search Tool. Examiners may access additional foreign patent documents through other web-based tools. STIC also provides subscriptions to various web- based sources of nonpatent literature. The time it takes examiners to search the large and increasing volume of nonPatent literature and the inefficiency of having to search many different sources individually may lead to less thorough searches. Patent literature consists of previously issued U.S. or foreign patents and published patent applications. Nonpatent literature can include product manuals, standards established by international organizations, textbooks, periodicals, or conference presentations. Both patent and nonpatent Literature may be written in a language other than English, referred to as foreign-language art. USPTO’s manual for patent examiners requires them to conduct a thorough prior art search and directs them to consider U.s. patents, foreign patents, and other documents. USPTO examiners we surveyed also reported difficulties obtaining relevant prior art. Difficulties obtaining certain types of prior art may influence how often patent examiners search for them. 8 of the 18 experts we interviewed suggested that examiners focus on searching patent literature and may not thoroughly search nonpatent literature. More examiners also find that foreign patents and foreign-language nonpatENT literature are difficult to obtain, compared to those that find U.S. patent literature difficult to get. According to most of the experts we interviews and examiners, we potentially missing relevantPrior art. surveyed reported difficulties with the amount and relevance of prior art references provided by applicants. According to information from USPTO, third parties submitted prior art for less than 1 percent of the approximately 600,000 patent applications received per year since third-party submissions began in 2012. By potentially reducing the need to search for this prior art, these submissions may address challenges related to the quantity and availability of prior Art. USPto reviewed approximately 2,500 submissions of nonpatent literature prior art it received since September 2012, and found 753 unique, English- language documents. USPTO has taken steps to allow third parties to more easily monitor published applications. The agency created a subscription service, whereby users will be notified when applications are published that contain user-chosen keywords. USPTO also considered expanding use of third-party submissions of prior art by allowing examiners to use crowdsourcing to solicit such art for specific applications or topics. However, the agency decided not to pursue this option, at least in part, because the agency is uncertain about its legal authority to do so. monitoring consistency would help to implement this practice and would establish an internal control to support the reliability and usefulness of the CPC system. Since 2012, USPTO has had authority to receive submissions from third parties that may help identify potentially relevant prior art for published patent applications. This process, sometimes described as crowdsourcing, allows experts and other interested parties to share documents that they believe will aid USPto’s examination of an application. Prior art submitted by third parties can help identify prior art that is not immediately available to examiners. using keyword searches will not identify documents that use a different term. Issues with the clarity of the application make it more difficult to complete thorough prior art searches in the time allotted. Examiners may face difficulties associated with applications that have been translated from a foreign language. Issued patents and publications containing these for specific terms or concepts from an unpublished application may put the confidentiality of theApplication at risk. Examiners also requested improvements to USPTO’s current translation capabilities. For example, “translation quality is often poor, and claims routinely contain non-standard industry terms.” subscriptions to various web-based sources of nonpatent literature. USPTO’s current search tools do not provide examiners with immediate access to computer-generated translations, known as machine translations. examiners can request human and machine translation services from STIC and three contracted translation vendors that currently cover 35 languages. As of May 2015, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office had nearly 8,300 patent examiners across the eight technology centers we reviewed (see fig. 2). USPTO anticipates that a pilot system will be available to a limited number of examiners. The new system could expand upon the capabilities of a currently available system. USPTO uses the current system to perform searches for about one-tenth of the agency’s incoming applications, whereas USPto expects to use the new system for every application. The Patent Linguistic Utility Service has been in use for 20 years and has limitations that prevent it from meeting the agency's search needs. USPTO is in the process of a major, multiyear $405 million effort to upgrade its information technology tools. The new system, called Patents End-to-End, will replace nearly 20 systems currently used to search patent applications. 52 percent of examiners expect that an automated pre-examination search would make it somewhat or much easier to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted, according to USPTO’s Strategic Information Technology Plan for fiscal years 2015 through 2018. and interviewed USPTO officials; a group of four supervisory patent examiners; officials of the examiners’ union, the Patent Office Professional Association. We also conducted semistructured interviews with subject matter experts (experts) active in the intellectual property field and knowledgeable about the subject of prior art. We selected and interviewed 18 experts to obtain views of different stakeholder communities, including four academic experts and four patent holders from the following technology fields: chemical technologies, electrical and others. patent holders from the following technology fields: chemical technologies, electrical technologies, and mechanical technologies, based on data from USPTO. Five attorneys based on their leadership (e.g., as chairs or co-chairs) of patent-related committees or sections of various bar associations. Three nongovernmental organizations we identified during background research that had activities or publications related to patents. Two patent data experts who were listed in a 2015 US PTO analysis evaluating search technologies. In addition, we conducted a web-based survey of a stratified random sample of 3,336. surveyed a generalizable stratified random sample of examiners, our results provide estimates for each technology center included in our study. See the related e-supplement, GAO-16-478SP, for the original survey language and more detailed results. In addition to the contact named above, Chris Murray (Assistant Director), Tind Shepper Ryen, Krista Breen Anderson, Hilary Benedict, Richard Burkard, John Delicath, Alice Feldesman, Armetha Liles, Rebecca Makar, Rob Marek, Eleni Orphanides, Kelly Rubin. Litigation Could Help Improve Patent Quality. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office: Hiring Efforts Are Not Sufficient to Reduce the Patent Application Backlog. USPTO Has Made Progress in Hiring Examiners, but Challenges to Retention Remain. US PTO: Improvements Needed to Better Manage Patent Office Automation and Address Workforce Needing to Better. Manage patent office Automation. GAO-05-1008T. Washington, D.C.: September 8, 2005. will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of Commerce, the Director of the USPTO, the Commissioner for Patents, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or neumannj@GAo. Department of Commerce. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Examiners at the GS-14 level or above (44 percent of the examiners in the technology centers we reviewed, as shown in fig. 3) are generally primary examiners. Primary examiners may accept or reject a patent application without additional review. This level of authority is in contrast to junior examiners, whose work must first be reviewed by a primary examiner before an office action can be sent to the applicant. Some examiners are in the process of becoming primary examiner. Supervisory patent examiners are at the GS-15 level and are responsible for the day-to-day management of examiners. In addition to applying for a patent from USPTO, an inventor may also seek patent protection in other countries for the same invention by filing in multiple patent offices. Such interrelated patent applications are described as a patent family. The World Intellectual Property Organization has estimated that approximately half of all applications worldwide are repetitive filings in a patentfamily. The rest are initial filings. 2.2 million applications were filed with patent offices in the United States, China, Japan, South Korea, and Europe in 2014. EPO issues patents that cover 42 countries, most of which are member countries that are party to the European Patent Convention. Applicants may apply to national patent offices or apply through EPO for coverage in some or all of these countries. These five offices, including EPO and JPO, each receive hundreds of thousands of patent applications each year.are initial filings. According to the World Intellectual Property Organization, around 2.7 million patent applications were filing worldwide in 2014, of which 2.1 million were filed in the U.S. through EPO for coverage in some or all of these 42 countries. EPO has three official languages, one of which must be used for processing an application. These three languages are English (about 80 percent of applications), French (about 5 percent), and German (about 15 percent) EPO and JPO have about one-half and one-fifth as many examiners as USPTO, respectively. According to JPO officials, there is a limit on the number of federal employees JPO can have. EPO and JPO classify applications and patents into groups that describe specific components of the invention. Examiners may then look at other applications and patent within the same group to find similar inventions. A system that has more groups allows for finer distinctions, and prior art searches within a class will produce fewer, more focused results. According to EPO officials, this can be particularly helpful for finding documents in Asian languages that are otherwise difficult for EPO examiners to search. It facilitates searches that are less dependent on the examiner’s choice of keywords. EPO and JPO have systems to share search and examination results. The exchange of prior art searches or patent examination results among patent offices is known as worksharing. Worksharing is the main tool for addressing an increasing number of patent applications, according to foreign officials. About half of all patent applications worldwide are part of patent families filed in a multilateral forum of the five largest patent offices, the report says. The EPO says worksh sharing could give offices access to search reports of unpublished patent literature. examination policies, search tools, and human capital management. In some cases, these actions are coordinated with, similar to, or could be informed by approaches taken by EPO or JPO. USPTO is collaborating with foreign patent offices to give examiners access to examination files from those offices. By allowing examiners to review prior art that examiners from other offices found useful in examining patent applications, these systems may help address the challenges related to managing the large quantity of patent applications. The agency is working with EPO on a new patent classification system. We reviewed information identifying the world’s five largest patent offices. From the list of the other four offices similar in size to USPTO, we selected the European Patent Office and the Japan Patent Office. We performed these tests on responses overall as well as conditional on the examiners’ technology center. We conducted site visits with EPO and JPO, during which we interviewed officials from these offices and reviewed documents they produced. The study was published in the online edition of the journal Science.literature. patent applications worldwide are part of patent families filed in multiple offices. To gain patent protection in multiple countries, inventors may file applications for the same invention in several different offices. Because the underlying invention is the same, the search and examination results at one office may be useful to examiners in another office. Worksharing can ameliorate the challenges posed by the quantity of potential prior art that examiners must search and the time pressure examiners face by allowing patent offices to leverage others’ work and knowledge. results from foreign patent offices available to examiners and the public. One system, the Common Citation Document, provides bibliographic information of patent and nonpatent prior art citations. Another system, Global Dossier, provides access to the examination history of applications, such as office actions and other correspondence. USPTO examiners gained access to Global D dossier in 2015, and have been using it since 2011, officials say. The system is free and available to the public, with no annual fee. USPTO has entered into two pilot programs to jointly examine certain applications. Applicants who file related patent applications with USPTO and either JPO or the Korean Intellectual Property Office may request to enter the pilot. These collaborative efforts could improve searches for patent and nonpatent literature in foreign languages, as examiners from multiple countries will perform searches in their native languages and share the results. The pilot programs were designed and implemented in collaboration with EPO, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. that share published information among patent offices; (2) engaged in pilot programs to collaborate with other offices during search and examination of related patent applications; and (3) adopted a new, joint classification system with EPO. These efforts may help address several of the challenges relating to prior art and applications, including the large quantity of art available and the availability of prior art, particularly foreign patents and art written in foreign languages. According to USPTO officials, the U.S. Patent Classification system allows examiners to conduct prior art searches independent of an application's language and wording. neither completed the survey nor told us that they were no longer examiners. To adjust the sampling weight for potential nonresponse bias, we used standard weighting class adjustments based on the sampling strata and the examiners’ years of experience at USPTO. The weighted response rate was also 80 percent. In this report and in the related e-supplement, we present the survey results using the nonresponse adjusted version of the survey. We also analyzed nonresponse biases to assess whether any factors were associated with examiners' propensity to respond. e-supplement, we present the survey results using the nonresponse adjusted weights, which are generalizable to the eligible population of examiners. We analyzed the responses to the survey for all examiners, as well as responses by technology center and by the General Schedule (GS) level of the examiner. We selected three categories of GS levels because examiners at these levels have different responsibilities and authorities when examining patent applications. Most examiners below the GS-14 level or above generally may grant a patent or reject a patent application without additional review. To minimize nonresponse error, we made a variety of contacts with the sample of examiners during the survey. We used survey software in our analyses to produce appropriate estimates and confidence intervals. The programs we used to process and analyze the survey data were independently verified to ensure the accuracy of this work. In addition, from October 20 through 23, 2015, we attempted to follow up via telephone calls to all 1,102 examiners who had neither completed the survey nor told us that they were. totaling 7,825 eligible examiners. From this list, we drew our stratified random sample of 3,336 eligible USPTO patent examiners for an 80 percent response rate. Because we used a probability procedure based on random selections, our sample is only one of a large number of samples that we might have drawn. Since each sample could have provided different estimates, we quantified the sampling error and express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample’s results at a 95 percent confidence interval. In developing the survey, we worked with our survey professionals to draft questions that were clear and unbiased. Using a web-based survey provided several advantages, including allowing examiners to enter their responses into an electronic instrument that created an automatic record for each respondent. This eliminated the potential for errors that could have resulted if we had used a manual process to enter respondents’ data from paper surveys. In addition, to account for the complex sample design, we used a separate GAO survey methodologist. technology center 2100 has a 95 percent confidence interval of within +/- 18 percent of the estimate itself. For some other survey questions, we also reviewed examiners’ open- ended responses on selected topics. We selected those topics based on our interviews with experts and USPTO officials. We also selected the questions for which examiners' responses most frequently included keywords we identified for each topic.. An analyst conducted a keyword search of all responses to the selected open-ended questions. A second analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. the keywords. A second analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. Examiners’ responses to open-ended questions are not generalizable to other examiners. Because we did not conduct a systematic review, we do not report the exact number of examiners who provided responses on the topics we reviewed. In addition, we conducted statistical tests of association on the results of certain survey questions; all tests were independently verified to ensure their accuracy. All tests of associations were carried out. provide a range, such as “5 to 10,’ while others provided a single number for hours spent per application on prior art searches. Some examiners also provided responses that did not clearly indicate the approximate hours per application spent on priorArt searches in the past quarter. Where possible, we coded responses to reflect a range of numbers by assigning a low and a high value. A second analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. We checked the sensitivity of the answers. analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. We checked the sensitivity of results overall, within strata, and within GS level categories. Results were not statistically different when using the low value, midpoint (average between low and high values), or high value of a range. As a result, we present results for question 3 based on the midpoint. The 95 percent confidence intervals for these results are within +/- 10 percent of the estimates themselves, except for the estimate for technology center 2100 (Computer Architecture, Software, and Information Security) is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples we could have drawn. Within each stratum and overall, the confidence intervals for survey results for percentages are generally within +/- 5 percentage points. The only estimates for which the confidence interval exceed 5percentage points are certain results for the business methods stratum. In these instances, theconfidence intervals are from 5 to 6percent points. In this report, our figures containing survey results show the upper and lower bounds for estimates at the 95 percent confidence interval. the 95 percent confidence interval. For other estimates in the report, we have not provided the upper and lower bounds in the text or tables. Details for all survey results are available in the e- supplement related to this report. The quality of survey data can also be affected by nonsampling error. This includes variations in how respondents interpret questions, respondents’ willingness to offer accurate responses, nonresponse errors, and data collection and processing errors. We took several steps in developing the survey and in collecting and analyzing survey data. ensure their accuracy. All tests of association were carried out at the 5 percent level of significance and were Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel (CMH) Chi- square tests of general association. The testing was carried out in SUDAAN, which is statistical software appropriate for the analysis of survey data. The null hypothesis was that there is no association between the two tested variables. When the association between two variables, conditional on a third variable, is of interest, this is referred to as the stratum-adjusted CMH test. JPO officials reported taking steps to ensure that the patents it issues are of high quality. These steps include a director quality check, consultations with other examiners, and quality audits of a sample of examinations. USPTO has taken or begun planning various actions that may help address challenges in identifying relevant prior art, but some of these actions have limitations that may have limitations. According to JPO officials, the office has randomly selected applications. The number of audits is not large enough to allow tracking of individual examiner performance. at least a master’s degree and almost all JPO examiners join the office after graduate school. At EPO, examiners must also meet a requirement that they understand English, German, and French. EPO examiners spend their first 2 years in training, alternating periods of classroom training with periods of on-the-job training. JPO officials identified the longevity of examiners as a strength, stating that examiners are well trained and have experience that may enhance the quality of patent application examinations. examiner may not have initially considered. Another EPO tool provides examiners with the results of an automated search based on the concepts and words drawn from the claims in applications. The results are in the form of a ranked list of potentially related documents, which provides a starting point for examiners before they begin a manual search. EPO and JPO have procedures to review examiners’ work before issuing or denying a patent. At EPO, applications are examined by a panel of three examiners: a first examiner, second examiner, and chair. EPO and JPO examiners use classification and keyword searches instead of more complex search tools. EPO uses some automated tools that assist in keyword-based searches or provide automated search results. One EPO tool provides recommended search terms in its three official languages to examiners, based on a database of examiners’ past searches. This tool can improve search efficiency by providing additional search terms, such as synonyms or translations, that the examiner may not have initially considered. Another EPOtool provides additional search term suggestions based on the examiner’s previous searches. USPTO does not have a process to assess and measure each technology center’s progress toward closing any gaps in examiners’ technical knowledge and skills. USPTO officials told on closing competency/skill gaps for mission-critical occupations. Without monitoring and examiners, the agency cannot ensure that it has appropriate strategies, such as training or other efforts, to close any gaps, the authors say. The 2015-2018 People Plan, however, does not include measures for monitoring progress in closing gaps. as a mission- critical occupation and identified the competencies needed for this occupation. These competencies include technical work experience/education and technical competence. USPTO defines technical competence as the ability to analyze and interpret written technical materials, rules, regulations, instructions, and reports. Specific technical competencies vary depending on the technology examined by each technology center and art unit, according to USPTA officials. The agency has further documented specific technical competency for examiners in a series of “job analysis worksheets,” which describe the knowledge, skills, and abilities needed for examiner positions. Technology center ranging from an estimated 10 percent to 34 percent of examiners. EPO and JPO use several approaches that may help their examiners address challenges in identifying prior art. These approaches include worksharing, creating and abilities needed for examiner positions. Agency officials said these were based on the hiring needs derived from a hiring model created by senior management. The extent to which examiners participated in this technical training program varied by technology center, from a low of 48 percent to a high of 74 percent. following 3 technology centers: We excluded the Designs technology center because these examiners work on design patents instead of utility patents. We excluded examiners who perform “reexamination’ work and not initial patent examinations. We then defined nine strata by technology center, with one technology center separated into two. We included examiners employed at USPTO for less than 1 year and those in a 12-month training program. We exclude examiners in the patent training academy because they are recent hires. one technology center or art unit to another during their careers. According to USPTO officials, there are also times when patent examiners are ultimately assigned to a different technology center upon completion of their initial training than the assignment given to them when they were hired. In addition, examiner attrition has increased over the past 5 years. Historically, attrition has been highest amongst examiners at USPto for less than 5 years, according to the agency’s 2015-2018 People Plan. The agency�s ability to retain experienced and high-performing employees may prove difficult with continued improvements to the economy. art search in the time allotted for applications with a subject matter in which they have knowledge of existing prior art based on their education or previous work experience. As of May 2015, approximately 39 percent of all examiners in the technology centers we reviewed had been at the agency for less than 5 years. USPTO officials told us that the agency has aimed to match new hires’ previous work experiences and educational backgrounds to technology centers. The training examiners receive may also affect their ability to maintain the technical competence they need to identify relevant prior art. As of May 2016, USPTO had not clarified the extent to which this evaluation will specifically consider the time needed for a thorough prior art search for different technologies. Without this information, the agency does not know if it is allotting examiners appropriate amounts of time to complete their work. Based on our survey, most examiners find that they do not have sufficient time for thorough prior. art searches, and many were not confident in their ability to identify the most relevant prior art without working voluntary overtime. The time allotted for each individual technology was determined when the examiner performance and production system was first created in the 1970s or when subsequent art units were added. USPTO adjusted the time allotted to examiners between fiscal years 2010 and 2012 and gave all patent examiners a total of 2.5 additional hours per application. The agency has not identified plans to assess the amount of time examiners in different technologies need to perform thorough prior art searches. The time pressures created by the system for determining allotted examination time have important evaluating if examiners are completing office actions. be allotted about 32 hours for an application related to data processing, such as database and file management. Examiners have minimum production goals, based on the time allotted, for the number of office actions they must complete. USPTO uses several different information technology systems to assist examiners in conducting prior art searches. For example, to search U.S. patent literature, examiners use two systems, the Examiner’s Automated Search and the Patent Search Engine (PSE) search in some technologies. We continue to believe that the agency should review the time allotted for all technologies, and not only those identified through feedback related to CPC. The Department concurred with our recommendation to assess whether the technical competence of examiners in each technology center matches those necessary and develop strategies to address gaps if identified. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary. In analyzing our survey results, we found that how often examiners searched for foreign patent literature, scientific articles or presentations, or foreign-language nonpatent literature was statistically associated with their description of the sufficiency of time they had to complete a thorough prior art search. Further, we asked examiners about overtime worked to meet their minimum production goals. A majority of examiners (an estimated 72 percent) worked voluntary/uncompensated overtime in the past 6 months to met their goals. past 6 months to meet their goals, as shown in figure 6. An estimated 30 percent of examiners worked an average of more than 10 hours of voluntary/uncompensated overtime per biweekly period. However, on the basis of our survey, an estimated 56 percent of Examiners experience no pressure to work overtime. In a 2007 report on USPTO’s efforts to hire and retain an adequate workforce, we found that an estimated 70 percent of examsiners worked voluntary/Uncompensate overtime in the previous year. Less than half of the examiners were moderately or very confident that they found the most relevant prior art during the time allotted. When they included their additional voluntary overtime, the number of examiners who were moderately and very confident increased to an estimated 69 percent. Even with the inclusion of their overtime, an estimated 23 percent remained not at all confident to somewhat confident. Federal standards for prior art search could have important implications for examiners' prior art searches. For more information, visit the U.S. National Gallery of Art. Examiners are expected to complete their examination of an application in a certain number of hours. The time allotted varies depending on factors such as the technology and the seniority of the examiner. An estimated 80 percent of examiners spent, on average, from 6 to 20 hours initially examining patent applications and completing a first office action. If examiners feel pressure to finish their examinations quickly rather than thoroughly, it could have important implications. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office is a not-for-profit organization. patent application without additional review. Most examiners below the GS-14 level must have their actions reviewed by a more senior examiner. Examiners provided a variety of open-ended responses. Some respondents chose to provide a range, such as “5 to 10,” while others others said “10 to 15.” Some respondents are in the process of becoming GS-13 examiners. The survey asked examiners approximately how many hours they spent per application on prior art searches in the past quarter. other GS levels. Tables 8 through 15 provide information related to the effects of the quantity of prior art, how often examiners search for certain types of prior. art and how difficult they find it to obtain relevant art from certain types. Tables 9 and 10 show the sufficiency of examiners’ time to complete a thorough prior art search, average time examiners spent on prior art searching and each First Action on the Merits. Tables 11 and 12 show the number of times examiners encountered misclassified patent applications, and continuing education provided by USPTO. Misclassification occurs when an application is not classified into the group most closely associated with the invention. This can result in applications being routed to the wrong USPTO technology center or art unit for examination. An estimated 75 percent of examiners encountered misclassified applications sometimes, often, or always in the past quarter, and an estimated 76 percent find that the misclassification of patent applications makes it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted, according to our survey. The effect of unclear applications may be exacerbated by USPTO’s practice that examiners should attempt to identify all applicable grounds for rejecting a claim or claims during their first review. The practice aims to avoid unnecessary delays. In our patent quality report (GAO-16-490), we provide additional information on how the clarity of applications affects patent quality. “Issued patents and publications containing these non-standard terms also make searching in foreign collections exceptionally challenging because it is not possible to anticipate which synonyms to use.”  compact prosecution may discourage examiners from resolving any issues of clarity or ambiguity before conducting their initial searches for relevant prior art. In order to follow the compact prosecution practice, an examiner must guess what unclear claims mean in order to search for prior art related to the claims. If examiners do not have a clear understanding of the scope of the claims, they may not be able to conduct a proper search for the prior art that is relevant to the claim. Such delays could be caused by examiners waiting to continue examining an application until previously identified issues are resolved. Excessive references make it more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search. Excessive references can be particularly challenging for examiners. Applicants are generally not required to explain the relevance of the references or to point examiners to the particular portions of references that are relevant. One examiner recalled often receiving information disclosure statements from applicants with numerous prior art references, of which only a handful were relevant, according to the survey. The survey found that 88 percent of examiners sometimes, often, or always encountered applications with irrelevant references. examiners in identifying relevant prior art. Expert: Large volume of prior art available from multiple sources makes searching for relevant priorArt challenging. Expert said certain general types of prior Art are more difficult to obtain. Some relevant prior Art may require a fee to access, may not be in a text- searchable format, or may otherwise be difficult to access. The amount of patents, publications, and other nonpatent literature has grown exponentially, making it harder to find relevantPriorArt in time allotted. certain general types of prior art are more difficult to find, such as nonpatent literature overall and software-related prior art (most experts) and foreign-language prior art. Prior art related to computer technologies has also been difficult to finding, according to one expert we interviewed. Specific types of nonpatents literature that experts identified as hard to find include product documentation and summaries, product databases, and user manuals; offers for sale and public use; and information from standards-setting organizations. to most of the experts we interviewed and examiners we surveyed, the clarity of applications can pose a challenge to finding relevant prior art. For example, as one expert noted, there often are no standard terms to describe technologies. Inconsistent terminology can make it more difficult for examiners to findrelevant prior art because searching for one term using keyword searches is one common method of searching for prior art, experts say. According to four of theExperts we interviewed, the absence of standard terms is particularly a challenge for software-related applications. our survey. On the basis of survey responses from our random probability sample of examiners, we found that some examiners find that the CPC classifications make it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. In response to an open- ended survey question, one examiner described their difficulty, saying that proper classification of prior art is essential to quality and efficiency of examination. Many CPC categories still contain large amounts of prior Art despite having more detailed classification methods. commonly known in this field but may not be found by searching a public database. One expert suggested that prior art from before the mid-1970s is difficult to find because patents issued before then have not been fully digitized. This is a particularly challenging issue for examiners in the mechanical technology centers because those examiners tend to use older art more often than other examiners. USPTO examiners we surveyed also reported difficulties obtaining prior art in the 1990s and early 2000s. to subsequently use as prior art in later examinations. This is because misclassified applications may be difficult to find when examiners search for patent literature using technology-specific patent classification categories. Ensuring examiners’ technical competence. According to most experts we interviewed, ensuring that examiners have sufficient and appropriate technical backgrounds, knowledge, or skills for conducting thorough prior art searches is also a challenge. The role of patent examiner is a difficult one that can take years to learn, and examiners with less education or work experience, or who are not abreast of advances in a particular technology area. 45 percent of all examiners in the eight technology centers we reviewed find that the large quantity of art makes it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. Fewer examiners—34 percent—find that the quantity makes it slightly or much easier. responses varied among technology centers, as shown in appendix III. Examiners we surveyed reported difficulties with the amount and relevance of prior art.art in theTime allotted. Amount and relevanceof prior art cited by applicants. Time pressures may reduce examiners’ ability to conduct thorough prior art searches. USPTO’s system for allotting an expected amount of time for examiners to complete an examination. One expert noted that the time examiners are allotted decreases as they become more experienced. As figure 5 shows, we estimate on the basis of our survey that 67 percent of examiners find they have somewhat or much less time than needed to complete thoroughPrior art searches given a typical workload. Our survey also found that examiners' perception of the sufficiency of time varies by technology center. by technology center, with one technology center separated into two strata, as described in table 6. Transportation, Construction, Electronic Commerce, Agriculture, National Security and License and Review technology center includes a diverse set of technologies. In our review, we separated the art units—subunits of a technology center—focused on electronic commerce and business methods. This resulted in nine strata with a target survey population totaling 7,825 eligible examiners. From this list, we drew our technology center. Experts we interviewed and examiners we surveyed had mixed opinions on USPTO’s search tools. Of the 18 experts, 10 agreed that the search tools and capabilities available to examiners create challenges to conducting thorough prior art searches. Expert suggested that US PTO needs more comprehensive databases of prior art. We estimate that 82 percent of examiners find it somewhat or much easier to complete a thorough priorArt search in the time allotted for applications with a definition of what constitutes a thoroughPriorArt search. make prior art searches somewhat or much easier, including a search engine that can automatically search for concepts and synonyms related to the search terms entered by the examiner. In addition, a group of four supervisory patent examiners we interviewed said that it would be more efficient to search for prior art in one tool, with a single search method that covered multiple sources of prior art, including the internet. We interviewed patent examiner who said they would like to see a tool that could search for multiple sources, without keyword entry. The Department said it would ensure adequate search data are collected to assess the quality of searches at the technology center level. The Department would investigate using audits and reviews to monitor the thoroughness of examiners’ prior art searches over time. USPTO’s recent effort to improve the consistency of these reviews is an important step to address this issue, the Department said in its written comments to the Department of the Treasury. It added that a great deal of information on examiners' prior art searched is potentially available from records and reviews. examiner’s search. If a reviewer finds that the examiner should have made a rejection but did not, the form asks the reviewer to identify the source of prior art needed for the missed rejection. The March 2016 draft of the form does not include, as an October 2015 draft we reviewed did, questions assessing if search queries were likely to result in identification of the inventor. The form asks if the examiner (1) searched for prior art associated with the inventor's name, (2) searched with classification results for the application, and (3) recorded his or her search strategy. USPTO has not documented technology-specific guidance on what constitutes a thorough prior art search. As of March 2016, USPTO’s draft of the new master review form did not require OPQA or supervisory examiners to evaluate the thoroughness of an examiners’ search. Instead, the form asks if the examiner (1) should consider nonpatent literature as well as the sources of prior art the examiner should consider. In regard to our recommendations to ensure that reviews of examiner’ prior art searches collect sufficient information, we adjusted our report to acknowledge the information USPto provides on these suggested search areas. prior art searches specific to individual technology centers and monitor search thoroughness over time. USPTO uses two methods to review examinations, which may help the agency monitor the effects of the challenges described above as well as the thoroughness of searches. In recent years, the number and consistency of OPQA staff and supervisory patent examiners’ reviews of examiners' prior art searches have not been sufficient to examine trends at the technology center or art unit level, the agency says. Limits to USPTO’s ability to monitor examiners’ prior art searches at a technology center or art unit level may hinder the agency's ability to identify and address issues. Federal standards for internal control state that agencies’ monitoring of their internal controls should assess the quality of performance over time. Without greater clarity on what constitutes a thorough prior art search, the agency cannot address issues that are more prevalent in certain technology centers or art areas. Without consistently collecting the information needed to assess the thoroughness of priorArt searches and monitoring at a Technology Center or Art Unit level, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office may not be able to identify issues. Examiners face a number of challenges in their efforts to search for prior art. USPTO should assess whether the technical competencies of examiners in each technology center match those necessary. The Department of Commerce concurred with our recommendations. We provided a draft of this report to the Department of commerce for its review and comment, reproduced in appendix IV, the Department concurred in the report's recommendations and provided additional technical assistance. The report was published on October 31, 2013. It is published by request of the US Patent and Trademark Office. field of search, the appropriate tools, and a search strategy. It also requires examiners to consider U.S. patents, foreign patents, and nonpatent literature. While USPTO has taken steps to improve the quality of prior art searches, the agency has not yet established performance goals and indicators for improving priorArt searches. To improve its monitoring of prior Art searches, USPPO should take the following three actions: Develop written guidance on what constitutes a thorough prior art search within each technology field, technology center, art area, or art unit. USPTO is taking steps to strengthen monitoring of examiners’ work. These efforts may not provide USPTO with adequate data to identify and address shortcomings. Without a documented, periodically updated strategy to evaluate new sources of prior art to include in the Patents End-to-End system, USPPO will not have the assurance that it is taking full advantage of its information technology investment. Developing and periodically updating such a strategy could help USpTO take full advantage. of its new information technology tools to address some of the challenges examiners face. greater clarity on what constitutes a thorough prior art search in different technologies. USPTO plans to evaluate changes to the agency’s system for determining the number of applications a patent examiner is expected to review. Use the audits and supervisory reviews to monitor the thoroughness of examiners’ prior art searches and improvements over time, the authors say. It is essential that examiners have sufficient time to perform high-quality work, they say. The Department concurred and stated that USPto intends to further investigate the time needed. USPTO examiners face a variety of challenges in identifying relevant prior art during patent examination. USPTO’s actions span the following areas: leveraging the work of foreign patent offices, encouraging submission of prior art from third parties, improving prior art search tools, monitoring examiners’ prior art searches, and strengthening the technical competence of the examiner corps. These actions may help address challenges related to prior art and applications, but some of these actions have limitations that may hinder their effectiveness. A web-based survey of a stratified random sample of 3,336 eligible USPTO patent examiners from across 8 of the 11 technology-based subject matter groups (referred to as technology centers) The survey was designed to collect information on challenges UPTO faces in finding relevant prior art. The extent of the challenges may vary by technology center or examiners’ GS level (see app. III). We excluded the Designs technology center, the examiner workforce, human capital management efforts, training practices, and international cooperation. The focus of patent examination is to determine whether the invention in a patent application satisfies the legal requirements for a patent, including that the invention be novel and not obvious. USPTO’s manual for patent examiners establishes certain requirements and processes that examiners must follow in examining patent applications. There are generally two types of prior art—patent literature or provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Based on our survey results, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office examiners in some technology centers or at some General Schedule (GS) levels face certain challenges in identifying relevant prior art. USPTO requested information on a search system that uses the claims and specification within a patent application to search for patent and nonpatent literature automatically, without human involvement. Such a system could improve the search tools available to examiners and help address the the time available toSearch for relevant prior art, among others. USPTO has not developed a strategy to assess incorporating new sources of art into these tools over time. Some of these challenges may reinforce one another or affect examiners in some technology centers more than others. enhance accurate and consistent results in examination quality. USPTO’s goals for patent quality in the strategic plan and for the quality initiative do not currently include goals or indicators assessing the thoroughness of prior art searches. We have previously reported that establishing program goals and associated indicators constitutes a leading practice for planning within federal agencies. Among other things, the Government Performance and Results Act Modernization Act of 2010 is aimed at improving the quality of federal government programs and services. It is not required to establish goals for improving prior art search quality.