account's investment decisions and does not have an interest in the account's profits and losses except as permitted by regulatory guidance. Certain Asset-Backed Securitizations. Covered Bonds Vehicles. Funds holding a pool of loans or loans or interest rate derivatives, subject to various terms and conditions. Certain asset-backed Commercial Paper Conduits. Issuers of an asset- backed commercial paper conduit "that issues only securities comprised of a residual interest and securities with a legal maturity of 397 days or less" development companies regulated by the SEC as business development companies and seeding vehicles intending to be registered investment companies. FDIC Conservatorship or Receivership. Issuers organized "to facilitate the disposal of assets acquired in the FDIC's capacity as a conservator or receiver [of a depository institution or non-bank financial institution supervised by the FRB]." Other Investments. Any issuer that the federal financial regulators jointly determine to be excluded from the definition of "covered fund" The Rule expressly exempts certain activities that otherwise would fall under the general prohibition against sponsoring or. Covered Bonds Vehicles. Funds holding a pool of loans or certain other permissible assets "for the benefit of holders of covered bonds," which are issued or guaranteed by a foreign banking organization. Small business investment companies and similar companies organized "to make investments [d]esigned primarily to promote the public welfare" or investments in certain qualified historic tax credit programs. Registered Investment Companies and Business Development Companies (BDCs). Issuers registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940. Business development companies regulated by the SEC as business development companies. A banking entity's ownership interest in a covered fund will be considered an "other similar interest" if the banking entity has any of the following: 1. any control over the removal or hiring of acovered fund's managers, directors, or investment advisors; 2. a right to share in a cover fund's "income, gains, or profits"; 3. aRight, other than rights as a creditor upon a default or acceleration trigger, to a covered Fund's assets.or other similar interest. "after all other interests have been redeemed and/or paid in full"; 4. a "right to receive all or a portion of excess spread" of a covered fund; 5. a duty to pay acovered fund for the ownership interest that could be reduced based on lower interest rates owed on such ownership interest or as a result of a loss in value of the fund's assets. 6. any earnings of pass-through income from the covered fund or of income that varies in accordance with the value. of the covered Fund's assets; or 7. "any synthetic right to have, receive, or. services"; (2) "the fund is organized and offered only in connection with bona fide trust, fiduciary, or investment advisory services"; (3) the banking entity retains only a de minimis interest in the funds; (4) the Banking entity and its affiliates engage in no transaction with the fund that would be designated as a "covered transaction" under Federal Reserve Act (FRA) Section 23A; (5) the covered fund does not have the word "bank" in its name or share a name with the banking entities. as if the banking entity were a member bank and the fund an affiliate of that bank. The banking entity does not guaranty the obligations of the covered fund. The covered fund does not have the word "bank" in its name or share a name with the banking entities. No director or employee of the banking. entity, other than those directly engaged in providing investment advisory or other services to the covered. fund, acquires an interest in the fund. Although not explicitly excepted by the statute, pursuant to the regulations, banking entities generally may engage in underwriting and market making activities for covered funds. The total ownership interests in covered funds by a banking entity and its affiliates "may not exceed 3 percent of the tier 1 capital of the banking entity" Banking entities are permitted to make initial seed investments to establish covered funds and help make them become attractive investments for unaffiliated third parties. But to do so they must: actively work to replace their investments with that of unaffiliatedThird parties; comply with the aggregate de minimis investment requirements; and generally within one year of the establishment of the covered fund, be in compliance. for the purposes of the de minimis seed investment limits if the banking entity (1) Does not own, control, or hold with the power to vote 25 percent or more of the voting shares of the company or fund; and (2) Provides investment advisory, commodity trading advisory, administrative, and other services. " The Volcker Rule authorizes banking entities to acquire ownership interests in, sponsor, organize, and offer covered funds to the extent that they provide "bona fide trust, fiduciary, or investment advisory services" A de minimis investment made by a banking entity and its affiliates must "not exceed 3 percent of the total number or value of the outstanding ownership interests of the fund" A banking entity, in the context of investing in an asset-backed securities issuer, is required to acquire a greater percentage to comply with the credit risk retention requirements of Section 15G(a)(3) of the Exchange Act. The Rule establishes various methods for calculating per fund de minimi investment caps based on the type of investment.which are subject to both per fund and aggregate caps. fund, be in compliance with the per fund de minimis investment cap. Upon an application by a banking entity, the FRB may provide up to two additional years to conform with the cap. SEC-registered business development companies, investment companies, and foreign public funds are excluded from the definition of "covered fund" for the purposes of the de minimi seed investment limits. The FRB can provide an extension if such an extension "would be consistent with safety and soundness and not detrimental to the public interest" Volcker Rule prohibits "banking entities" from engaging in "proprietary trading" The Rule carves out numerous exclusions and designates myriad activities as permissible so long as various terms and conditions are met. The Volcker Rule allows banking entities to act as a securitizer or, in accordance with the credit risk retention requirements of Section 15G(a)(3) of the Exchange Act, to hold investments in a covered fund that is an issuer of asset-backed securities. as well as the scope, complexity, and types of trading and investment activities. Banking entities with total assets below $10 billion may fold Volcker Rule compliance measures into existing compliance programs. The standard compliance requirements, which are set forth in Appendix A to the regulations, apply to banking entities with assets of $10 million or more. They apply to banks with no proprietary trading activity (other than trading of federal, agency, or state and local obligations) and having no investments in covered funds. They are not required to develop aVolcker Rule-specific compliance program but must do so if they begin to conduct such activities. documentation of all covered funds sponsored or organized by components of the organization. identification of the lines of authority with respect to such funds. explanations of monitoring for and prohibition of material conflicts of interest, threats to safety and soundness, or exposure to high-risk assets or trading strategies. documentation of plans for seeking unaffiliated investors to meet investment limits. board of director and senior management involvement; and CEO attestation. The regulations require any banking entity engaging in any activity or making an investment in violation of the Volcker Rule to terminate the activity and divest the investment promptly. FRA Section 619 requires financial regulators to issue regulations to "insure compliance with [Section 619]." In response, the final regulations require banking entities to develop and maintain compliance programs, internal controls, and recordkeeping systems. Compliance requirements vary in accordance with the size of the banking entity, as well as the scope, complexity, and types of trading. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. purpose of that law; commodity pools that have an exempt status under CFTC Rule 4.7; CFTC-registered commodity pools, whose participation units are substantially owned by and only offered to certain "qualified eligible persons" in accordance with CFTC regulations. Foreign-based funds that raise money to sell or invest in securities and whose ownership interests are offered and sold exclusively outside the U.S., that either are sponsored by a banking entity or have ownership interests held by the banking entity. Such funds could qualify for an exemption, other than exemptions under Section 3(c)(1) or Section 3 (c)(7), from the Investment Company. under Section 3(c)(1), from the Investment Company Act of 1940 if such funds were subject to U.S. securities laws. The rule explicitly excludes a number of activities and products from the "covered fund" definition. These exclusions include the following: Foreign Public Funds. Issuers that are not organized or established in the United States that "issue ownership interests to retail investors in [their] home jurisdiction" and such interests are sold "predominantly through one or more public offerings" The Volcker Rule prohibits banking entities from buying an ownership interest in a covered fund as principal for its own account, rather for a customer. Banking entities that are organized in a foreign country and are not controlled, either directly or indirectly, by a U.S.-based banking entity may be exempt from the rule's restrictions on investments in covered funds. The prohibition does not apply if the interest is acquired by a banking entity while "acting solely as agent, broker, banking entities must have written internal programs in place to ensure that hedges comply" Banking entities are prohibited from entering into a transaction that would be considered a "covered transaction" for the purposes of FRA Section 23A with the covered fund. Banking entities and their affiliates that provide advisory or investment management services to or hold a permissible interest in a covered fund are also prohibited. The Volcker Rule applies to all banking entities that sponsor or invest in covered funds, unless they meet one of the permissible exceptions described below. A banking entity could still be barred if it results in "a material conflict of interest" or "a threat to the safety and soundness" of the banking entity. Insurance companies and their affiliates may sponsor or acquire ownership interests in covered funds if those interests are retained solely for the insurance company's or its affiliate's own account. All associated activities with and investments in the covered fund are conducted outside of the U.S., and generally the majority of the banking entity's overall business takes place in a foreign country. Unless the federal banking regulators jointly determined that the state law permitting such investments "is insufficient to protect the public interest," such investments can be made. the regulations, apply to banking entities with assets of $10 billion or more and for those banking entities that otherwise are required to do so by the financial regulators. The standard compliance program includes requirements for (1) written policies and procedures documenting compliance and verifying exemptions, (2) internal control systems, (3) management frameworks, (4) independent testing and review, (5) personnel training, and (6) recordkeeping. The Enhanced Minimum Standards include instructions as to the specific ingredients of the entity's policies. and review, (5) personnel training, and (6) recordkeeping. For banking entities subject to the standard compliance program, the final regulations also require and establish methods of calculating quantitative measurements that banking entities must furnish. Appendix A sets forth non-exclusive recordkeeping and reporting requirements, including quantitative metrics, for banking entities with "significant trading assets and liabilities," the regulations say. The regulations say the requirements apply to all banking entities in the U.S., Canada, Australia and New Zealand. instructions as to the specific ingredients of the entity's policies and procedures applicable to its trading desks and to its covered fund activities or investments. For the trading desks of banking entities that are subject to the heightened compliance program, there are specific requirements regarding how the trading desk "identif[ies], authoriz[es], and document[s] financial instruments to be purchased or sold" "types and amounts of risks allocated" to each trading desk; how those risks will be measured; why those risks are appropriate; "the process for setting new or revised limits" process for identifying, documenting and approving new products, trading strategies, and hedging strategies"; types of permissible customers and counterparties; and compensation arrangements. There are also provisions on describing the firm's risks and risk management process. For covered fund activities or investments, the Enhanced Minimum Standards requirements include management involvement in reviewing and testing the identification and documentation of all covered funds sponsored or organized by components of the firm. It also includes the specifics of its analytical policies and procedures and quantitative measurements; as well as how it will remediate violations. "market making-related activities" provided there are "clearly defined, verifiable, and monitored risk parameters" The regulation's requirements include that "[t]he amount, types, and risks of the financial instruments ... are designed not to exceed, on an ongoing basis, the reasonably expected near term demands of clients, customers, or counterparties" The banking entity "routinely stands ready to purchase and sell ... financial instruments" in commercially reasonable amounts and on a basis appropriate for the liquidity, maturity, and depth of the market. Regulators may impose additional capital and quantitative limits as "appropriate to protect the safety and soundness of banking entities engaged in such activities" Subject to those conditions, the exceptions or permitted activities are: Underwriting Activities. Market Making Activities. The exemption for underwriting and market making-activities ... by its terms, is a statutorily permitted activity and exemption from the prohibitions in [12 U.S.C. §1851(a)], whether on proprietary trading or on covered fund activities. its market making positions must be "designed not to exceed the reasonably expected near term demands of clients, customers, or counterparties"; and the banking entity must have an internal compliance program. Any ownership interest acquired by a banking entity conducting underwriting or market making activities with a covered fund must be included in both the per fund and aggregate de minimis investment cap calculations. The limitation to "specific, identifiable risk[s]" appears to prohibit portfolio hedging akin to the JPMorgan London Whale trades discussed in the Proprietary Trading section above. The final rule seeks to make it clear that portfolio hedging will not be permitted. Banking entities will be required to document any investment undertaken as a hedge by linking it to the specific risks or exposures being offset. This provision is aimed at preventing incidents like the $6 billion loss that JPMorgan & Co. suffered in 2012 as a result of derivatives trades, designed to reduce risks. The regulations track the language of the statute and permit "risk-mitigating hedging activities" that are "positions, contracts, or other holdings of the banking entity" suffered in 2012 as a result of derivatives trades, designed to hedge against risks of the entire financial conglomerate. The statute authorizes the purchase and sale of U.S. obligations; obligations of federal agencies, Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, the Federal Home Loan Banks, Farmer Mac, and Farm Credit System institutions. Under the regulations, banking entities may purchase and sell "any municipal security" and "any state or political subdivision of a state" in the same way. The regulation also includes various other restrictions. Proprietary Trading by Foreign Companies Conducted Outside the United States. Other Investments. The statute provides the agencies with discretion to permit proprietary trading for any other activity that they "determine, by rule, ... would permit promote and protect the safety soundness of the banking entity and the financial stability of the U.S.of the United states" The regulation alsoincludes various other Restrictions. The regulations are expected to go into effect on January 1, 2015. The Volcker Rule establishes an outright prohibition on proprietary trading by a "banking entity" But banking entities may purchase and sell "any municipal security" and other domestic government obligations without running afoul of the prohibition against proprietary trading. The ban on proprietary Trading does not apply to a banking entity's fiduciary activities that are conducted on behalf a customer and other customers. Under certain circumstances, foreign banks and foreign affiliates of U.S. banks under certain circumstances will be permitted to trade foreign government obligations. fiduciary activities that are conducted on behalf a customer and where the banking entity does not acquire a beneficial interest in the associated financial instruments. Riskless principal transactions, where a banking entity buys or sells a financial product "to offset a contemporaneous sale or purchase" of a customer, are exempt from the Volcker Rule's ban on proprietary trading. Insurance Company Portfolio Investments. The statute permits trading by insurance companies for their general accounts. Under the regulation, a banking entities that is an insurance company or an affiliate of an insuranceCompany is permitted to buy or sell. of an insurance company is permitted to buy or sell financial instruments for its own account if the transaction "is conducted in compliance with, and subject to, the insurance company investments laws" of the applicable state. The relevant federal banking regulators, in consultation with the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) and relevant state or foreign insurance regulators, may jointly proscribe otherwise permissible insurance company investment activities. State regulation of those activities "is insufficient to protect the safety and soundness of the banking entity or the financial stability of the United States" The regulation focuses on restricting short-term trades. It establishes a rebuttable presumption that any financial instrument held for fewer than 60 days is a banned proprietary trade. Certain activities are not included in the definition of "proprietary trading," including the following: acquisitions or sales of financial products pursuant to a repurchase and reverse repurchase agreement. Foreign exchange or currency, but not loans, are excluded from the rule. The rule also covers trades by banking entities that are securities dealers and swap or swap-based securities dealers—both in the United States and abroad. "Proprietary trading" covers buying and selling of "financial instruments" by banking entities as "principal" for their "trading accounts" "Financial instruments" include securities, derivatives, and contracts for future sale or for options on any commodity other than foreign exchange or currency, but not loans. The Rule identifies exceptions to the blanket prohibition of proprietary trades by listing permitted activities and setting conditions under which those activities may be conducted. However, it excludes from permitted activities any transaction or class of activities, otherwise permitted, that that is otherwise permitted. reverse repurchase agreement; acquisitions or sales of financial products pursuant to a securities lending agreement; and "highly liquid" securities as part of a valid liquidity management plan. "The banking entity does not reasonably expect to give rise to appreciable profits or losses as a result of short-term price movements"; various derivative clearing activities. "Financial products for the satisfaction of delivery obligations, such as in connection with a judicial or administrative proceeding"; and "by a banking entity acting solely as agent, broker, or custodian" The Volcker Rule broadly defines "ownership interest" to mean "any equity, partnership, or other similar interest" The provision involving the control to hire or remove advisors, managers, and directors has caused some consternation among banking entities. The regulations state that, under certain circumstances, "restricted profit interests" held by a banking entity or one of its current or former employees are not considered an ownership interest for the purposes of the Volcker rule. For example, as a result of the rule, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission may be able to require banks to disclose more information about their clients. savings and loan or thrift holding companies. Foreign-based companies that are treated like bank holding companies pursuant to the International Banking Act of 1978. An affiliate is "any company that controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with [a company described in categories 1-3]." This includes foreign-based banks that are permitted to operate branches in the U.S. or that own certain other domestic lending companies. In short, an affiliate is a subsidiary of a company that is controlled or controlled by another company. ownership interests in the issuer are sold predominately to persons other than such sponsoring banking entity. Wholly Owned Subsidiaries. Entities that are directly or indirectly owned entirely by the banking entity or one of its affiliates. Joint Ventures. Joint ventures between a banking entity and up to ten unaffiliated entities. Merger and Acquisition Vehicles. Issuers established for the sole purpose of effectuating "a bona fide merger or acquisition" Foreign Retirement and Pension Funds. Foreign Pension Funds, as long as they are not raising money primarily by investing or trading in securities. bona fide merger or acquisition." Foreign Retirement and Pension Funds. Retirement or pension funds that are organized in, subject to regulation in, and provide benefits to residents or citizens of a foreign jurisdiction. Separate Insurance Accounts. "A separate account, provided that no banking entity other than the insurance company participates in the account's profits and losses." Separate Life Insurance accounts. A separate account established for a banking entity (or multiple banking entities) to acquire life insurance policies for its benefit so long as the banking entity does not control the accounts' investment decisions. "Banking entity" is defined as FDIC-insured depository institutions. Such companies are typically organized as bank holding companies (BHCs) The Volcker Rule generally applies to hundreds of depository and non-depository affiliates and subsidiaries of these FHCs. However, the regulations provide certain exceptions to the definition of "banking entity," as discussed below. The applicability of certain exemptions, recordkeeping and reporting requirements, and other aspects of the Rule vary to some degree according to the organization or typical activities. a variety of regulatory regimes and separate regulators, foreign and domestic. It applies to community and global banks, every variety of insurance firm, securities firms, and foreign banking institutions operating in the United States, among others. The federal financial regulators have been tasked with diverse objectives, among which are the following: promoting safety and soundness of the entities covered by the Rule. It also protects taxpayers and consumers; limiting inappropriate transfers of the FDIC deposit insurance; reducing conflicts of interests between the entities and their clients. risky activities by these entities; "appropriately" accommodating the business of insurance; and " appropriately" timing divestiture of illiquid assets affected by the Rule. The statutory language requires the regulators to explicate such critical terms as "banking entity," "covered fund," and "illiquid fund" It includes a broad explicit delegation of discretion to exclude from the basic prohibitions of the statute "[s]uch other activity as the appropriate [federal financial regulators] determine, by rule ... would promote and protect the safety and soundness of the banking entity" activities, while also carving out specific exclusions from the scope of the two categories. The report concludes by addressing other aspects of the Rule that apply generally to banking entities. It provides standards by which the regulators may set further limits or conditions on these activities and includes authority for the regulators to add to the list of permitted activities. The regulators may impose additional capital and quantitative limits as "appropriate," the report says. It adds that the report is not intended to be a comprehensive guide to all banking activities. soundness of [the] banking entity ... or to the financial stability of the United States" The Rule also provides standards by which the regulators may set further limits or conditions on these permissible activities. The regulators may impose additional capital and quantitative limits as "appropriate to protect the safety and soundness of banking entities engaged in such activities" Banking entities, subject to certain limitations, are permitted to make and retain de minimis investments in covered funds, which are subject to both per fund and aggregate caps. permissible so long as various terms and conditions are met. The statutory language provides only general outlines of prohibited activities and exceptions. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (FRB), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the SEC, and CFTC (together, the federal financial regulators or the Agencies) can issue coordinated rulemakings to fill in the details. The difficult task of crafting regulations to distinguish prohibited activities from activities considered essential to the safety and soundness of banking institutions. Some collateralized debt obligations (CDO) backed by trust preferred securities (TruPS) generally was a prohibited investment under the original Volcker Rule regulations. The American Bankers Association and several community banking organizations promptly filed a lawsuit challenging this aspect of the financial regulators' interpretation of the Volcker rule. The financial regulators responded by issuing an interim final rule on January 14, 2014. Shortly after the regulators issued the interim final rules, the plaintiffs withdrew their lawsuit. Similar issues likely exist regarding the applicability of theVolcker Rule to securities, issued and held by community banks. On December 10, 2013, more than two years after the statutorily mandated deadline, five federal financial regulators published final regulations. The regulations are implementing Section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Together these are known as the Volcker Rule, which is designed to prohibit banks and their affiliates from engaging in risky, short-term, speculative trading. These are practices long condemned by the Rule's namesake, former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul A. Volcker. The Federal Reserve Board set the date when conformance with the Rule is required as July 21, 2015. That date could be extended an additional two years, and banking institutions and their affiliates are under an obligation to undertake good faith efforts to meet that date with full compliance. The Volcker Rule is at odds with conventional banking principles and potential risks to overall financial stability that could trigger the need for future bailouts, according to an analysis by one of the authors of the report. Former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul A. Volcker is the author of the study. Congress has delegated extensive discretion to the federal financial regulators to craft the Volcker Rule. The basic framework of the Rule is to broadly prohibit banking entities from engaging in two broad categories of activities. The Volcker rule is not likely to remain static over time. Rather, regulators likely will modify and clarify the requirements through regulations and guidance to address unforeseen complexities, the report says. It says the regulators have already issued an interim final rule that makes changes to the regulations as originally issued on December 10, 2013. The Volcker Rule applies broadly to all depository institutions and to most companies that are owned by or have a common ownership interest with a depository. As a result, the Volcker rule applies to the approximately 10,000 "community banks" scattered across the country. The rule also generally applies to global financial conglomerates like Bank of America, Citigroup, JPMorgan, Wells Fargo, and Goldman Sachs, which are organized as FHCs and thus control at least one FDIC-insured depository institution. recent extension, the conformance date is July 21, 2015. This means that a company that was a banking. entity or a subsidiary or affiliate of a banking entity on July. 21, 2010, must bring its activities into conformance before July 21. 2015. A company becoming a banking entities on July 21,. 2015, thus, would have two years, untilJuly 21, 2017, to conform its activities and investments. Banking entities are expected to engage in good faith efforts to be in compliance with the rules. to terminate the activity and divest the investment promptly. The statute generally requires divestiture of nonconforming activities within two years of the Rule becoming effective. The FRB has authority to extend this two-year period one year at a time, not to exceed an aggregate of three years. Under the FRB's recent extension, the conformance date is July 21, 2015. This subject to the data reporting and recordkeeping requirements of the rule that are discussed in the previous section of this report. five years; at the end of which divestiture would be required either at the. end of the five years or on the contractual date—whichever is earlier. The deal is expected to be completed in the first half of 2015 or in the second half of the year, depending on when the deal is concluded. The price for the deal would be in the region of $2.5 billion to $3.5billion, according to a report by the International Chamber of Commerce in New York.