Rebate amount is based on the PPACA MLR rebate formula, as shown in figure 2. Insurers can choose to provide rebates in the form of a lump-sum payment or as a premium credit for the following MLR year. In general, insurers in the individual market must providing rebates to their enrollees while insurers in group market plans can choose not to pay rebates. A higher MLR standard if specified by law in the state in which the a Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)-approved, adjusted MLRstandard for a particular state’s individual market. Insurers paid about $1.1 billion in total rebates to enrollees and policyholders in 2011. These amounts would each have decreased by about 75 percent had agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions been excluded from the MLR and rebate calculations. All eight insurers that we interviewed reported that they increased their premium rates since 2011 due to a variety of factors, and most (five of the eight) reported that the factors were largely unrelated to PPACA MLR requirements. Two of the insurers we interviewed told us that the PPACAMLR requirements have not affected where they do business. The 2013 PPACA MLR calculation is based on a 3-year period including 2013 and the prior 2 years. One insurer, who paid rebates in 2011, noted that it would not have owed rebates had the MLR formula been based on 3 years of insurers’ experience. In comparison, another insurer told us that it will likely owe rebates for 2013. We provided a draft of this product to HHS for comment. HHS responded that it had no general or technical comments. have fallen from $520 million to about $135 million. There was variation in the impact of the recalculated MLRs across the three markets. In both years, the differences between the actual and recalculated rebate amounts were greater, on a percentage basis, in the small group market compared to the individual market. These rebate calculations are based on the assumption that insurers did not make other changes during this time that would have affected their MLRs. If the formula had been different, insurers might have made different business decisions in those years. address the unreliability associated with calculating an MLR based on a small number of enrollees. All insurers will calculate their MLRs for their experience in 2013 and subsequent years based on data from a 3-year period. insurers will add their data for the year for which the MLR is being calculated to their. Credibility adjustments are provided to increase, the insurer’s MLR.their MLRs. These adjustments are referred to as credibility adjustments, and they are added to, and thus Two of the eight insurers we interviewed stated that they exited certain insurance markets since the PPACA MLR requirements began. None of the insurers reported that the PP ACA MLR requirement has generally influenced their spending on QI activities since 2011. All eight insurers reported other influencing factors, such as customer and employer demand for QI programs, competition among insurers, and the goal of improving enrollees’ health outcomes, which in turn could lower the use and costs of health care services. The 2013 PPACAMLR calculation, which is based on 2013 enrollees, was also cited as a factor. annually on the various components that are used to calculate their PPACA MLRs. Each of these components must be reported by state and by market. Private insurers first reported this information in 2012, based on their 2011 experience. The markets include large group, small group, and individual. Large and small group employers are defined by the number of their employees. Prior to PPACA, a small employer was defined in federal law as having a maximum of 50 employees. From the time PPACA was passed in 2010 until 2016, states have the option of continuing to define a small. The individual market includes policies sold by insurers directly to individuals. Insurers report their MLR data to CMS by entering information on a standardized form. The data that insurers report to CMS include the following components, as required by law. Medical claims. These include claims paid and incurred for clinical services and supplies. Small group employers. States can continue to define a small group employer as having 50 or fewer employees, but starting in 2016, they must define small employers as having from 1 to 100 employees. Insurers’ spending on enrollees’ medical claims and non-claims costs as a percentage of premiums varied across insurance markets in 2011 and 2012. Most insurers met or exceeded the PPACA MLR standards established for the markets and state in which they operated. Group market insurers were more likely to meet or exceed the standards than individual In 2011, about 76 percent of insurers meeting or exceeded market insurers. In 2012, 79 percent of insurer met or exceed standards. The median for the large group market was higher than that of the small group and individual markets. competition with other insurers, the PPACA requirements that insurers offer their plans on a guaranteed-issue basis as well as provide essential health benefits in their plans, and the per- capita fees associated with PPACA’s reinsurance program. Three of the eight insurers reported that the PP ACA MLR requirements were one factor among a variety of factors that influenced their decisions regarding premium rates. Two of these insurers told us that theMLR requirements have generally moderated their premium increases. For example, one insurer that has increased premiums in the individual market since 2011 stated that its increased premiums were due in part to the increased costs that the insurer told us was associated with it. Under the PPACA MLR requirements, private insurers must report annually to CMS their MLRs by each state and insurance market in which they operate. Agents and brokers sell insurers’ plans to individuals and employers. Insurers must pay rebates when their MLR do not meet or exceed the minimum applicable PPACAMLR standards. More than three quarters of insurers met or exceeded the minimum MLR standards in 2011 and in 2012, the median MLR for all insurers was about 88 percent in each year. Claims costs, will be referred to as the insurer’s “premium surplus” in this report. Premium surplus includes profit and other reserved capital. Some insurers, such as those with a small number of enrollees, are permitted certain adjustments to their MLRs. These adjustments are known as credibility adjustments, or “credibility adjustments.” The PPACA MLR is generally calculated by dividing (a) the sum of an insurers’ medical claims and expenses for QI activities (the formula numerator) by (b) the insurer's premiums. for 2011 (see table 6) and for 2012 (see tables 7 and 8) This appendix presents information on insurers’ spending as a percent of their net premiums, by state for all markets combined for 2011 and 2012. This appendix gives information on the total amount of PPACA medical loss ratio rebates that insurers paid to enrollees and policyholders who paid premiums, for 2011 (See table 10) and 2012 ( see table 11). This appendix shows the amount of rebates insurers would have paid, compared to the actual amounts they paid. Services and other interested parties. The report is available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7114 or DickenJ@gao,gov. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. This appendix presents information on insurers’ median PPACA medical loss ratios by state and insurance market for 2011 (see table 6) and for 2012. 2011, insurers in the large group market paid 37 percent of this total, or $405 million in rebates. Of the $520 million in total rebates that insurers paid in 2012, insurers paid the largest amount inrebates (about $207 million) We calculated the average rebate amount by dividing the total amount of rebates insurers paid by the total number of individuals (including dependents) enrolled in their plans. (See table 4.) However, these two years of data may not reflect future rebate patterns. market must provide rebates to their enrollees while insurers in the small and large group markets may meet this obligation. In turn, group policyholders are responsible for allocating the amount of rebate that is proportionate to the total amount of premium paid by enrollees. Agents and brokers sell plans for insurers and perform a variety of functions on behalf of individuals and employers. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, in 2012 there were approximately approximately 1.3 million Americans who were insured through a health insurance company. Bureau of Labor Statistics: In 2012 there were approximately 337,000 jobs held by insurance sales agents. Agents and brokers provide assistance to individuals and employers in choosing and enrolling in plans. They may assess an individual’s insurance needs and describe the characteristics of different plans that best meet those needs. They can also provide assistance after an individual or employee has enrolled in a plan, for example, by helping enrollees communicate with health plans in trying to resolve problems with their plans. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Insurers’ spending on non-claims costs as a percent of their net premiums varied by insurance market. Insurers in the individual and small group markets spent more than insurers in the large group market. With regard to premium surplus, our analysis showed that there was also variation across the insurance markets in 2011 and in 2012. An insurer’s premium surplus includes profit and other reserved capital but does not account for any PPACA MLR rebates the insurer may have to pay to enrollees. Three of the six non-claims cost categories generally comprised the largest share of insurers’ spending. There was some variation across the markets in spending on each of these three categories. Insurers in the small group market spent a higher share on agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions than insurers in the individual and large group markets. In 2012 small group insurers spent about 42 percent of their total non- Claims costs on agents' and brokers' fees and commission compared to 23 percent for large group insurers. In 2011 and 2012, the percentage of net premiums that insurers spent on their enrollees’ medical claims varied across insurance markets. In 2012 insurers in the large group market spent about 89 percent of their net premiums on medical claims compared to the 85 percent that individual market insurers spent and the 84 percent that small group market insurers spend. Our analysis of the data showed that in both years, insurers in this market spent a higher percent of the net premiums than those in the small group and individual markets. Non-claims costs include expenses beyond medical claims, expenses for QI activities, and federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees. Federal income taxes on investment income and capital gains are excluded. CMS defines non- claims costs for the following categories: agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions, cost containment expenses, office maintenance and supplies costs, not classified as claims adjustment expenses. The costs of these expenses are not related to an activity to improve health care quality, CMS says. supplies costs, not classified as cost containment expenses; (4) salaries and benefits that insurers pay to their employees who sell their plans; (5) other taxes that may not be excluded from premium revenue; (6) other general and administrative expenses, such as salaries and advertising; and (7) community benefit expenditures. The remaining amount of premiums that an insurer does not spend on the components of medical claims, QI activities, taxes and fees, and non- claims costs, will be referred to as the insurer’s “premium” to include expenses for health information technology required to accomplish these activities as well as a percentage of their expenses for converting disease classification codes. Premiums. These include the sum of all funds paid by an enrollee and employer, if applicable, as a condition of receiving coverage from the insurer. These also include any fees or other contributions associated with the health plan. Federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees. This includes federal income taxes, assessments, state insurance, premium and other taxes, and regulatory authority licenses and fees. Federal income taxes on investment income and capital gains are include claims paid and incurred for clinical services and supplies provided to enrollees by physicians and other clinical providers. Expenses for quality improvement (QI) activities. These include expenses for activities that are designed to increase the likelihood of desired health outcomes in ways that can be objectively measured. The activities must be primarily designed to (1) improve health outcomes; (2) prevent hospital readmissions; (3) improve patient safety, reduce medical errors, and lower infection and mortality rates; or (4) implement, promote and increase wellness and health activities.