Not since the creation of the Department of Defense (DOD) more than 50 years ago has the government sought an integration and transformation of this magnitude. In DOD’s case, the effective transformation took many years to achieve, and even today, the department continues to face enduring management challenges and high- risk areas that are, in part, legacies of its unfinished integration. Effectively implementing and transforming DHS may be an even more daunting challenge. DOD was formed almost entirely from agencies whose The magnitude of the responsibilities, combined with the challenge and complexity of the transformation, underscores the perseverance and dedication that will be required of all DHS’s leaders, employees, and stakeholders to achieve success. Mergers of this magnitude in the public and private sector carry significant risks, including lost productivity and inefficiencies. Generally, successful transformations of large organizations, even those undertaking less strenuous reorganizations, can take from 5 to 7 years to achieve. Necessary management capacity and oversight mechanisms must be established. The new department is also being formed from components with a wide array of existing major management challenges and program risks. For instance, one DHS directorate’s responsibility includes the protection of critical information systems that we already consider a high risk. Many of the major components merging into the new department, including the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), FEMA and the U.S. Coast Guard, face at least one major problem, such as strategic human capital risks, critical information technology challenges, or financial management vulnerabilities. of challenges and risks to program operations. TSA has had considerable challenges in meeting deadlines for screening baggage. The Coast Guard faces the challenges inherent in a massive fleet modernization. DHS’s national security mission is of such importance that the failure to address its management challenges and programs risks could have serious consequences on our intergovernmental system, our citizens’ health and safety, and our economy. Overall, our designation of the implementation and transformation of DHS as a national security agency is a significant step in the right direction. DHS was formed almost entirely from agencies whose principal mission was national defense. DHS will combine 22 agencies specializing in various disciplines: law enforcement, border security, biological research, disaster mitigation, and computer security, for instance. The magnitude of the responsibilities, combined with the challenge and.daunting challenge, is the reason for the creation of the new agency, according to the White House. It is hoped that the integration of these agencies will help provide better security against terrorism, the Whitehouse said. implementation and transformation of DHS is an enormous undertaking that will take time to achieve in an effective and efficient manner. Failure to effectively carry out its mission would expose the nation to potentially very serious consequences. In the aftermath of September 11, invigorating the nation’s homeland security missions has become one of the federal government's most significant challenges. DHS, with an anticipated budget of almost $40 billion and an estimated $40 million in annual operating costs, faces a wide array of existing challenges. mechanisms must be established. Critical aspects of DHS’s success will depend on well-functioning relationships with third parties. Creating and maintaining a structure that can leverage partners and stakeholders will be necessary to effectively implement the national homeland security strategy. The new department is also being formed from components with homeland security responsibilities, such as the Department of State, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, DOD, and the Dept. of Health and Human Services. It will take time to establish and maintain. the first plan that will become even more problematic in the future as the magnitude and complexity of the system acquisition increases. responsibility for implementing U.S. VISIT now resides in the Border and Transportation Security directorate. We are currently reviewing the fiscal year 2003 expenditure plan and will ascertain whether these problems were addressed. We designated implementation and transformation of the new Department of Homeland Security as high risk based on three factors. First, the implementation and transformed of DHS is an enormous undertaking that will take years to complete. our designation of the implementation and transformation of DHS as a high-risk area stems from the importance of its mission. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony included Seto J. Bagdoyan, Michael P. Dino, Darryl W. Dutton, Barbara Guffy, E. Anne Laffoon, and others. I would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other Members of the Subcommittee may have. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Richard M. Stana at (202) 512-8777. with the areas that had the largest influx of illegal aliens. The strategy postulated that as resources were applied in one area, the flow of illegal alien traffic would shift to other locations where resources had yet to be applied. The Border Patrol currently has about 9,500 agents deployed along the southwest border. It is still about 2,200 agents short of the minimum number, 11,700, the Border Patrol said it needed to fully implement the Southwest border strategy. Currently, the border patrol has 567 agents along the northern border. border strategy. We reported that it would take at least 5 more years (until 2006) to reach the minimum number of agents the Border Patrol believed it needed along the Southwest border. This estimate was made before the September 11, 2001, attacks and the subsequent concerns regarding the need for additional resources to deter illegal entry along the northern border. BCBP continues to face hiring challenges to meet its estimated needs. The Border Patrol remains committed to protecting the U.S. from illegal immigration and drug trafficking. negative effects the increased traffic had on the community. When apprehensions surged in communities into which the illegal alien traffic was reportedly pushed, officials and residents in one community reported experiencing loss of business, destruction of private property, and environmental degradation. Concerns have been raised over the environmental impact of current plans to build additional fencing along the border in Arizona. Some local residents in the border area southwest of Tucson, Arizona, are patrolling the border to report illegal crossings raising the concern of law enforcement officials. The Border Patrol has realized its goal of shifting illegal alien traffic away from urban areas into more remote areas. However, rather than being deterred from attempting illegal entry, many aliens have instead risked injury and death by trying to cross mountains, deserts, and rivers. This prompted the Border Patrol to implement a Border Safety Initiative consisting of, among other things, a media campaign to warn aliens about the dangers of crossing illegally. We further reported in August 2001 that although alien apprehensions had shifted along the border as expected, overall apprehensions were down. alien apprehensions had shifted along the border as expected. Overall apprehensions along the southwest border had continued to increase to over 1.6 million in fiscal year 2000. The Border Patrol has developed a plan designed to evaluate the impacts of its southwest border strategy. However, the evaluation has yet to be completed and may have many reasons for the decline in apprehensions, the authors say. They conclude that the strategy's effect on overall illegal entry along the Southwest border has not been fully evaluated. The report was published by the Center for Immigration Studies. implement its strategy, some of which still appear to be problematic. For example, it had taken the Border Patrol longer to implement the strategy than originally planned. The Border Patrol experienced difficulties hiring agents and delays in obtaining approvals needed to deploy technology and build fences. It also recognized the need to make outreach efforts to communities because its initial failure to warn some communities about anticipated increases in illegal alien traffic caught community officials by surprise and angered some residents due to the negative effects the increased traffic had on the community. face an array of challenges in ensuring that its border inspectors are adequately trained. For example, former INS and Customs inspectors are still being trained at separate basic training academies using two different curricula. A unified curriculum and training approach will need to be developed and implemented. The training challenges will continue beyond the academy—BCBP will also need to ensure that a field training program is established that meets the needs of the newest as well as experienced inspectors at the ports. Our ongoing work at land border ports suggests that neither the former INS nor Customs agencies had a standard on-the-job training program for their inspectors working at landborder ports. its strategy while simultaneously addressing emerging concerns over illegal entry along the northern border. BCBP inspectors continue to face challenges that those from their predecessor agencies also faced in balancing the need to identify violators of immigration and other laws while facilitating the movement of lawful travelers. Today, I will touch on several issues relating to the inspection of entry documents, inspector training, intelligence information needs of the field, and BCBP plans for implementing the U.S. Visitor and Immigrant Status Indication Technology system. Model. Customs has made progress in implementing some, but not all, of our recommendations. Customs is in the early stages of acquiring ACE, many challenging tasks remain before Customs will have implemented full ACE capability. To prevent illegal entry of individuals into the United States between the ports of entry, BCBP has deployed significant resources but estimates significantly more are needed. Continued implementation of the southwest border strategy faces a range of challenges, including meeting hiring goals and obtaining needed approvals to deploy fencing and technology to implement its strategy. implement a system to track the entry and exit of all aliens. Deterring illegal entry between the nation’s ports of entry will continue to be a challenge for BCBP. Since 1994, the Border Patrol has been implementing a phased strategy to increase deterrence to illegal entry beginning, first, with the areas that had the largest influx of illegal entry. In previous work, we reported that the Border patrol had estimated that significantly more resources would be needed to fully implement its border control strategy. The former INS recognized the need for more intelligence support in the field. In 1997, an INS-contracted study reported the lack of an intelligence capability at all INS locations, including districts and ports. More recent studies suggest needs in this area persist. Although some steps have been taken to bring the intelligence function to the field level, additional steps remain if the intelligence needs of the field are to be met. These steps must be taken by the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection (CBP) in the coming years. intelligence needs of the field are to be met. These challenges include, but are not limited, to decisions related to staffing and training, as well as merging intelligence positions from the former Customs and INS. One of the most significant challenges facing DHS at ports of entry is the implementation of the U.S. VISIT system. This significant undertaking is intended to capture both entry and exit data on travelers. It will also have many implications for operations at U.s. ports ofentry, including expenditures, staffing, inspection procedures and infrastructure. Visitor and Immigrant Status Indication Technology system, known as the U.S. VISIT system. At land border ports of entry, inspectors must quickly make decisions about whether to admit a traveler into the United States or refer travelers for more intensive inspection. Two of the factors that challenge inspectors’ ability to verify the travelers’ identity and admissibility are that some travelers may enter the US without having to present a travel document and travelers can present a variety of documents to gain entry. reviewed INS’s fiscal year 2002 expenditure plan and associated system acquisition documentation and system plans. We found that the initial plan did not provide sufficient information about INS commitments for the system. We concluded that this lack of detail is a material limitation in the first plan that will become even more problematic in the second plan. The report was published in the online edition of this magazine, which is published by arrangement with the Center for American Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. entry into the United States, some of which can be easily counterfeited. U.S. and certain Canadian citizens are exempt from having to present any document upon entry. According to immigration data, inspectors at land ports intercepted nearly 60,000 fraudulent documents in fiscal year 2002. A wide variety of documents can be presented for inspection, including more than 8,000 state and local offices issue birth certificates, driver’s licenses, and other documents, any of which could potentially be counterfeit. in fiscal year 2002, including over 10,000 U.S. citizenship-related documents. Earlier this year, we testified on how our investigators entered the country from Canada, Mexico, and Jamaica through land, air, and sea ports of entry using fictitious names, and counterfeit driver’s licenses and birth certificates. INS and Customs Service inspectors never questioned the authenticity of the counterfeit documents, and our investigators encountered no difficulty in entering the country using them. BCBP will also face an array of challenges in ensuring that its border is secure. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. BCBP has undertaken efforts to focus its enforcement on selecting and inspecting the highest-risk incoming cargo. It has a number of initiatives underway aimed at improving its ability to identify potentially risky cargo for inspection. BCBP relies on the use of threat assessments and actionable intelligence, and the ability of inspectors to quickly discover or sense an unlawful cargo. Information is key to identifying high-risk cargo, but unreliable information can adversely impact BCBP’s ability to target and inspect the highest risk cargoes. destruction. Automated Targeting System, which is used by the National Targeting Center and field targeting units in the United States and overseas. Separating high-risk cargo from low- or no- risk cargo is extremely important to BCBP because searching each and every cargo and traveler that enters the U.S. would cripple the flow of legitimate trade and travel and would require a huge resource. We have work underway to review most of these initiatives and will make our results available to the Subcommittee as soon as the work is completed. and how such cargo is inspected at ports. In this regard, we are reviewing how BCBP developed the model used in targeting. Since this work is ongoing, and involves information that BCBP also considers to be law enforcement sensitive, we're precluded from discussing specific aspects of this matter. However, in the broadest terms, our work to date shows thatBCBP’s targeting efforts face a range of challenges relating to threat assessments, actionable intelligence, and other issues that need to be addressed. BCBP's priority mission is to prevent terrorists and terrorist weapons from entering the United States. BCBP has a number of initiatives underway aimed at improving security, including the Container Security Initiative. Non-Intrusive Inspection technology increases the ability to detect conventional explosives, nuclear weapons, radioactive components, and other weapons of mass destruction. The National Automated Targeting System, which is used by the National Customs-Trade Partnership Against Terrorism, is designed to increase supply chain security and expedite the clearance of legitimate trade. BCBP has made some progress in implementing initiatives that are designed to improve the efficiency of its regulation of commercial activities. Additional challenges remain, particularly in view of the new and heightened emphasis on terrorism. These challenges include (1) continuing to improve its evolving trade compliance program and (2) acquiring a new trade processing system. Although tempered recently by the global economic slowdown, growth in the volume and value of imports continues to create profound challenges for BCBP. The volume of trade is expected to surpass $2 trillion in the year. BCBP has worked with importers on concerns such as where their goods originated, the physical security and integrity of their overseas plants and those of their foreign suppliers. BCBP has reaffirmed to importers the importance of knowing their customers and has examined the security practices of their freight forwarders and the routes their shipments travel. Although BCBP have made some progress in implementing initiatives that are. of legitimate international commerce and travel, they say they are still in the early stages of implementation. The agency says it is committed to ensuring the safety and security of the nation's citizens. receives cargo manifest information. The database is intended to allow Customs to analyze incoming package information and make more informed decisions about what packages to inspect. Large-scale x-ray and gamma–ray imaging systems, portal radiation monitors, and portable and hand-held radiation detection devices can reduce the need for costly, intensive inspections and save inspection time and resources. As important as the use of technology is, there are certain limitations and challenges that need to be considered. For example, we reviewed Customs’ acquisition and deployment of radiation. For example, we reviewed Customs’ acquisition and deployment of radiation detection equipment. Experts we contacted did not view pagers as search instruments but rather as personal safety devices. In trying to achieve the commercial-security balance, BCBP is challenged to ensure that antiterrorism efforts do not slow the flow of legitimate international commerce and travel. According to BCBP, it says it is working on a plan to reduce the number of radiation pagers being used by the Customs service to a maximum of 1,000. a range of challenges relating to threat assessments, actionable intelligence, and nonintrusive inspection technology. Having sufficient numbers of well-trained and motivated staff is also key to identifying high-risk cargo. Inspectors and canine officers are trained to detect unusual or abnormal behaviors or circumstances that suggest a potential threat or unlawful activity. Many have developed a ‘sixth sense’ in that they pick up on latent clues and unconnected information. Nevertheless, these inspectors are challenged by the tight timeframes and pressures they work under to move legitimate cargo through the ports. Recent work on the inspection of international mail showed that relying on inspectors alone can increase the risk that contraband enters the country. The inspection of incoming foreign mail remains largely a manual process that relies primarily on physical examination. One courier was working with the former Customs Service to pilot test an advance manifest system. The database is intended to allow for a computerized database that receives cargo manifest information. The results were law enforcement sensitive, so we are not discussing them here. We found several challenges relating to this process, but BCBP’s determination that our results were Law enforcement sensitive precludes our discussing them. Trade is expected to surpass $2 trillion in the year 2006. BCBP’s predecessor, Customs, developed an “informed compliance strategy. Customs’ ongoing effort to acquire a new trade processing system is key to modernizing how Customs tracks, controls, and processes all commercial goods imported into and exported out of the U.S. The study indicated that the strategy improves compliance, but the impact on overall compliance rates is much of an enforced compliance process, and it was discontinued. improves compliance, but the impact on overall compliance rates is small. For example, one initiative, the Company Enforced Compliance Process (CECP), was to address large importers’ noncompliance. The study concluded that CECP was not much of an enforced compliance process, and it was discontinued. According to the study, Customs was to punish noncomplying companies by imposing “confirmed risk” designations. But the confirmed risk status was only used six times, and loss of privileges and referral for penalties were never used. than 15 years, to a system integrator responsible for developing and deploying ACE. Successfully managing a project as large and complex as ACE is a challenging undertaking. Over the last 4 years, we have reported on ACE and recommended steps Customs needed to take to minimize project risks. To its credit, Customs has taken action to implement our recommendations, as follows: We recommended Customs incrementally justify the ACE investment. Customs defined and committed to implement process controls for justifying and making ACE investment decisions incrementally. human capital management strategy for the Customs modernization office, which is responsible for managing the ACE acquisition. We recommended Customs develop rigorous and analytically verifiable cost estimating. Customs has made progress in implementing some, but not all, of our recommendations. We continue to make progress and have plans to establish effective software acquisition process controls, as embodied primarily in the second level of SEI’s Software Acquisition Capability Maturity Model. We recommend Customs employ effectiveSoftware Engineering Institute (SEI) processes. The Automated Commercial Environment (ACE) is expected to cost about $1.7 billion. ACE is to replace Customs’ antiquated system. Expected benefits from ACE include speeding the flow of legitimate commerce into and out of the United States. ACE will identify and targeting high-risk commerce requiring greater scrutiny, and provide a single interface between the trade community and the federal government for trade data. In April 2001, Customs awarded a 5-year contract, with options to extend the contract to not more than 15 years, to a system integrator.