In fiscal years 2012 and 2013, the Comptroller’s office set targets for each component based on their respective budgeted amounts for contract services. In fiscal year 2014, the office obtained additional input from the Army to justify an increase in the Army's target. The Comptroller received three waiver requests totaling $607 million for fiscalyear 2014. For example, the Navy submitted a waiver request in June 2014 requesting $263 million in additional target allocation to account for additional costs during the year. This new process allowed the comptroller to approve adjustments related to specific requests and allocate portions of the reserved amount. adjustments during the year. The Army and Navy exceeded the Comptroller-provided targets due, in part, to a lack of accurate budget and obligation data for contract services. The Air Force did not. The Comptroller’s office took steps in fiscal year 2014 to improve management of the contract services spending limit. The actual limit should be reduced from $55.8 billion to $54.9 billion, as shown in figure 1. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2014/01/30/military/defense/contract-services-spending-limit. 2010 levels to account for (1) funding increases associated with contract services that were transferred from overseas contingency operations to the base budget and (2) the cost of additional civilian personnel positions over fiscal year 2010 levels. DOD identified an aggregate spending limit of $55.75 billion for fiscal year 2014. The spending limit identified in the act applies to DOD in its entirety; therefore, individual components may exceed their individual targets. DOD would still be in compliance with the law if total obligations for contract services across the entire department were less than the aggregate limit. For example, in both fiscal years 2012 and 2013, the Comptroller included approximately $248 million in research and development budgeted amounts in the spending limit. The Comptroller office’s calculation of the civilian workforce adjustment was not consistently applied, further overstating the limit. DOD concurred with this recommendation and has taken steps to address it for fiscal year 2015, as discussed later in this report. The actual limit should be reduced from $55.8 billion to $54.9 billion. In December 2014, we reported on DOD’s implementation of the section 808 limitations in fiscal years 2012 and 2013. We found DOD exceeded the spending limit in fiscal year 2012 and adhered to the limit in Fiscal Year 2013. However, we also identified issues with the DOD Comptroller office's calculation of the limit which resulted in an overstated limit. After adjusting for these errors, we found that DOD obligated $1.72 billion more than the limit. The Air Force and Navy adhere to their targets. The Army still exceeded its target by more than $2 billion. The Air Force obligated $1.45 billion less than its fiscal year 2014 target provided by the Comptroller. The Army obligated $254 million more than its adjusted Comptroller target. After exceeding its targets, the Air Force did not have to make adjustments to command’s obligation targets for fiscal year2014, as each command was able to manage to their respective target. The Air Force Financial Management and Comptroller (FMC) office monitored monthly obligations levels and communicated with commands to ensure that they adhered to their targets. In fiscal year 2014, the Navy obligated $1.07 billion more than its adjusted Comptroller target. The Army obligated $10.4 billion on contract services for the operations and maintenance account. Navy FMC officials said they do not set command spending targets for contract services, but expect commands to stay within their respective budgeted amounts for contract Services. The Navy F MC office began monthly monitoring of contract services obligations for fiscal year 2015 to help identify potential overages as they occur instead of only at the end of the fiscal year. potential overages as they occur instead of only at the mid-year and end-of-year execution reviews. Second, Navy FMC officials attributed the remaining $600 million of the $1.07 billion it obligated over its target to a coding error in its financial system. The financial system does not allow for coding of progress payments on items, such as ships or aircraft. To make progress payments for these types of items, these payments are coded as contract services to work around the system limitation. coded as contract services to work around the system limitation. Navy financial management officials said they manually corrected these coding errors in the past, but decided to forego the manual corrections in fiscal year 2014 in preparation for audit readiness in 2016. The Navy FMC office requested updates to its financial system in August 2013 to correct this coding issue, but the change has not yet been approved or implemented. All of the military departments achieved funding reductions greater than 20 percent for closely associated with inherently governmental and staff. After exceeding its contract services targets by more than $2 billion in both fiscal years 2012 and 2013, the Army took additional steps to manage and monitor the contract services spending limit for fiscal year 2014. Army budget officials attributed a portion of the obligations over its target to coding errors in its financial system. These coding errors include obligations for contract services from overseas contingency operations that are not subject to the spending limit but were inadvertently included in the billion over its 2013 level. To address this issue, an Army budget official said they monitored contract services obligations during the year. In fiscal years 2012 and 2013 the Comptroller set the Army’s spending target based solely on its enacted budget amounts for contract services. Army budget officials said these budget estimates did not accurately capture the extent to which funds were allocated to contract services because Army commands do not separately identify contract services budget estimates in their annual budget inputs to the Army Budget Office for inclusion in the President's budget. For example, in fiscal year 2013, the Army obligated $2.7 billion more than estimated forcontract services. still exceeded its target by more than $2 billion in fiscal year 2013. For fiscal year 2014, the military departments continued to improve their management of contract services obligations, but experienced varied success in adhering to their targets. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government call for effective control activities that enforce guidance to help ensure stewardship of government resources. The Army and Navy exceeded their spending targets. The Air Force obligated $1.45 billion. The Navy obligated $2.2 billion. We reviewed the Comptroller’s methodology for calculating the spending limit. We compared the PRCP obligation data to contract services obligations reported in the Federal Procurement Data System-Next Generation from fiscal years 2010 through 2014. We found that both sources showed a similar downward trend in contract Services obligations. To assess the extent to. DOD to implement fiscal controls, we limited our analysis to implementation efforts by the military departments, which account for over 70 percent of DOD’S contract services. obligations. in fiscal year 2016. The review should also ensure that to the maximum extent practicable, the activities do not include any closely associated with inherently governmental functions. These are those that may be at risk of becoming inherently governmental due to the manner in which the contractor performs the work, among other things. Upon completion of this review, DOD guidance instructs the secretaries of the military departments and heads of the defense agencies to submit an inventory review certification letter to the Office of Personnel and Readiness that outlines the results of the review. for Operations, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), concurred with the findings of our report. The report is available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-4841 or makm@gao,gov. Contact points for our Office of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In addition to the contact named above, W. William Russell (Assistant Director); Beth Reed Fritts; and Suzanne Sterling made significant contributions to this review. In also, Pete Anderson, Virginia Chanley, John Krump, and Roxanna Sun made key contributions to the report. The report was compiled by the Office of the Inspector General. The Air Force and Navy achieved reductions in advisory and assistance service obligations greater than 30 percent from fiscal years 2010 through 2013. The Army achieved a 9 percent reduction by fiscal year 2013, but achieved a 32 percent reduction in fiscal year 2014. The DOD Comptroller intends to measure a 30 percent reduction from 2010 levels based on former Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld’s recommendations. The Comptroller plans to enforce the reduction by making adjustments to component funding levels for the fiscal year 2017 budget submissions. additional insight into the steps taken to implement the reductions. Based on updated guidance from the Comptroller, issued in May 2015, instructing components to rely on the advisory and assistance services budget category. We analyzed each military department’s obligations for this budget category from fiscal years 2010 through 2014 to determine if reductions had been achieved by the military departments. We conducted this performance audit from January 2015 through September 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to Congress extended the time period for DOD to implement the full 20 percent reduction through fiscal year 2015. The reductions are expected to take place at each component, rather than an aggregate reduction across the department. Fiscal years 2014 and 2015 are also referred to as carryover years—meaning that whatever required reductions that DOD did not achieve in fiscal year 2014 will be implemented in 2015, the agency says. The cuts are directed to those closely associated with inherently governmental functions and staff augmentation, the department says. from 2010 levels based on former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates’ Efficiencies Initiative which called for DOD to reduce service support contractors by 10 percent each year from fiscal year 2011 through 2013. If components are not in compliance with the full 30 percent reduction by fiscal year 2015, a Comptroller official said it plans to also include the additional 10 percent reduction for fiscalyear 2011 called for by Secretary Gates. While section 808 calls for a total of 20 percent in reductions in fiscal years 2012 and 2013, the Comptroller said it also plans to include the full reduction. aggregate spending limit of $55.75 billion for fiscal year 2014. Section 813 of the NDAA for fiscalyear 2015 extended the aggregate spending limit through fiscal year 2015. Congress has also enacted legislation to improve the availability of information on DOD’s acquisition of services and to help the department make more strategic decisions about the appropriate workforce mix of military, civilian, and contractor personnel. In fiscal year 2002, Congress enacted section 2330a of title 10 of the U.S. Code, which required the Secretary of Defense to establish a data collection system. system to provide management information on each purchase of services by a military department or defense agency. In 2008, Congress amended section 2330a of title 10 of the U.S. Code to require the Secretary of Defense to submit an annual inventory of contracted services performed for or on behalf of DOD during the preceding fiscal year. This annual inventory submission is to include, among other things, the number of contractor full time equivalents and the associated direct labor cost for these positions. More recently, section 955 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2013 required the Secretary for Defense to ensure the information was available. Section 808 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2012 limited DOD’s total obligations for contract services in fiscal years 2012 through 2014. The limit does not apply to contract services for military construction, research and development, and services funded for overseas contingency operations. DOD may adjust spending above 2010 levels to account for (1) funding increases associated with last page of this report. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. The objectives for this review were to determine the extent to which the Department of Defense (DOD) implemented the requirements of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) To determine the extent to which DOD implemented the contract services spending limit in fiscal years 2014, we reviewed relevant laws and DOD guidance. We analyzed budget and obligation data from the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense Comptroller for fiscal years 2010 and 2014 from the program resource collection process (PRCP) system. We interviewed DOD and military department budget officials. to determine steps taken by the Comptroller’s office to implement the limit. The additional guidance issued by the Assistant Secretary of defense for Readiness and Force Management in May 2014 instructed each component to report in their fiscal year 2013 inventory review certification letters specific actions taken and supporting documentation. fiscal year 2013 required the Secretary of Defense to ensure that the civilian and service contractor workforces are appropriately sized to support and execute the National Military Strategy. Section 955 further requires that the efficiencies plan ensures that the total funding reductions are commensurate with reductions in military end strength. We have on-going work assessing DOD’s compliance with section 2330a as well as DOD's implementation of section 955 and plan to report the final results in fiscal year 2016. Following the submission of the inventory, Section 808 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2012 further reinforced those provisions by requiring DOD to issue guidance instructing components to reduce funding by 10 percent. These functions may include personal services or other positions that may put the government at risk of contractors inappropriately influencing government decisions. Unlike the aggregate DOD spending limit, the statutory requirement for guidance on reductions in funding for closely of contractor services that are considered closely associated with inherently governmental and staff augmentation functions. As a result, we recommended that DOD identify additional data sources beyond the inventory of contracted services to help ensure that funding reductions called for in the law are implemented. improved implementation of fiscal controls as discussed later in this report. We also have ongoing work that will further examine DOD’s planning, programming and budgeting process for contracted services and plan to report the final results in 2016. DOD obligated $54.6 billion, or $280 million less than the limit on contract services in fiscal year 2014. We analyzed certification letters submitted by 35 DOD components for the fiscal year 2013 inventory review to determine what steps and supporting documentation each component provided to demonstrate compliance with the required funding reductions. used to determine if the reduction was achieved. DOD updated its inventory guidance in May 2014, instructing components to identify the steps taken to demonstrate compliance with the required reductions. We found that the supplemental guidance did not provide components with any additional clarification in how to measure the reductions given the lack of data collected through past inventories. We also found that one measure that could be used to determine compliance was the advisory and assistance services budget category which includes many of the types of contractor services that are considered closely associated with inherently.