Of the 7 KPPs not met, 3 pertain to the NSC’s cutter boat operations. The Coast Guard and COTF have different interpretations of the cutter boat K PPs. According to Coast Guard officials, the September 2012 requirements document should have been written more clearly to convey the sea state expectation for cutter boat launch and recovery operations. In January 2016, the Coast Guard conducted IOT&E to determine if the three KPPS involving cutter boats were not fully met since the boats are unable to operate through all sea state 5 conditions. COTF found the NSC to be operationally effective and suitable, but with 10 major deficiencies. None of the major deficiencies were rated as severe, which would preclude NSC from accomplishing its mission. Five of the 10major deficiencies pertained to NSC’s weapon systems and cutter boats. The reliability and operational availability issues of the weapon systems—the CIWS, NULKA, and the cutter boats—were cited as a major concern by DOT&E in its assessment of IOT&E. The CIWS, NULKA launcher, and air search radar were all repaired following IOT&E. Post-operational reports indicate that problems persist with these systems as they were often unavailable during operations. Despite these findings, as noted above, COTF found the NSC to be operationally effective and suitable. While COIs and deficiencies factor into a system’s operational effectiveness and suitability rating, KPPs are measures of the capabilities considered essential to mission accomplishment. are measures of the capabilities considered essential to mission accomplishment. In our January 2016 report, we found that during IOT&E and other test events, the NSC fully met 12 of its 19 KPPs. The Coast Guard is not able to demonstrate that it is providing the capabilities that it intended to field. For instance, the Coast Guard has not yet demonstrated that it can achieve a hard and soft kill against a subsonic cruise missile as required, or fully meet interoperability requirements with the Department of Defense, DHS and other government agencies. suitability, and, according to Coast Guard acquisition guidance, occur prior to a full-rate production decision. The test event concludes with a rating of operationally effective or not effective, operationally suitable or not suitable. Follow-on operational test and evaluation (FOT&E) focuses on refining the conclusions that were made during previous operational test events. It also validates any incomplete or deferred requirements and verifies the correction of deficiencies identified during IOT &E. The event is conducted after an asset’s full rate production decision and focuses on evaluating production changes and reevaluating the system. COTF writes a test report that focuses on the resolution of the asset’s COIs and any deficiencies that were identified during testing. FOT&E concludes with an operational effectiveness and suitability rating similar to that of IOT &E. We have previously found that delaying critical test events can have a negative effect on the reliability of the NSCs. As we reported in January 2016, Iot&E took place about 2 years later than planned and after 7 of the 8 planned N SCs were under contract, with 3 operational. The ADM also directed the Coast Guard to verify the correction of all deficiencies, including the 7 unmet KPPs. According to Coast Guard officials, they have corrected 4 of the 10 major deficiencies from IOT&E that involved equipment failures. Other testing events are expected to occur through 2017 and possibly beyond, the ADM said. The Coast Guard may not correct 2 deficiencies due to the cost of making fleet-wide changes, and because of the nature of the equipment failures, officials said. The 8 NSCs are planned to be fully operational by 2020. The Coast Guard is phasing out the legacy 378-foot High Endurance Cutters. During testing, the NSC successfully demonstrated 18 of its 19 COIs. One COI, cybersecurity, was deferred to the DHS Director of Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E) This deferral was due to the testing of the N SC’s cybersecurity capabilities until a more robust test was conducted. The 8 N SCs will enter operations in 2020. major acquisition programs for proper management, oversight, accountability, and alignment with DHS’s strategic functions. The resulting acquisition decision memorandum (ADM) from October 2014 directed the Coast Guard to conduct FOT&E and complete three action items. The cybersecurity COI is planned to be tested in 2016, which, if successful, will address the first and third requirements of the ADM. Other testing events are expected to be held in 2016 and 2017, but other testing events also are planned. DHS and Coast Guard acquisition guidelines require operational test and evaluation by an independent test agency. The Coast Guard uses the U.S. Navy’s COTF to conduct operational tests and other evaluations for its major acquisition programs. For operational effectiveness, testers determine whether or not an asset can meet its missions. For for operational suitability, testers assess an asset's operational effectiveness and suitability to perform its duties as a Coast Guard vessel or aircraft carrier. For full-rate production, testers must confirm that the production configured system meet all requirements before approval.  Operational testing can occur over many test events. Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&E): This event is meant to gather the data necessary to resolve COIs, determine an asset’s operational effectiveness and suitability, and, according to Coast Guard acquisition guidance, occur prior to acquisition.into an asset's overall operational effectiveness, suitability rating. Key performance parameters (KPP) are the capabilities considered essential for mission accomplishment. KPPs are listed by threshold values, which are the minimum acceptable level of performance. critical operational issues (COI) are one metric used to determine an asset’s operational effectiveness and suitability. Unmet COIs are often the result of related deficiencies, which are identified during testing. Deficiencies are scored based on the severity of the problem and its impact on the asset's ability to accomplish its mission. COTF assessed the NSC's COIs, for example, by comparing the outcome of the test event against the full scope of the COI. delivered on schedule. We will continue to assess the progress of the FRC and OPC acquisitions going forward. If you or your staff have any questions about this statement, please contact Michele Mackin at (202) 512-4841 or mackinm@gao.gov. In addition, contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this statement. Individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include Katherine Trimble, Assistant Director; John Crawford; This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately.to this testimony include Katherine Trimble, Assistant Director; John Crawford; Lindsey Cross; and Peter W. Anderson. The full transcript of this testimony is available on the GAO website. Coast Guard conducted a full and open competition to select three contractors to perform preliminary and contract design work. In May 2009, we reported on best practices that commercial shipbuilders use to ensure that ships are delivered on time and within budget. We found that before a contract is signed, a full understanding of the effort needed to design and construct the ship is reached, enabling commercial buyers and shipbuilders to sign a contract that fixes the price, delivery date, and ship performance parameters. to minimize risk. The Coast Guard’s fiscal year 2016 Capital Investment Plan reflects $1.5 billion in funding for the OPC. After the first 3 of the planned fleet of 25 OPCs are built, the Coast Guard plans to increase its purchase to 2 O PCs per year until the fleet is complete.and deliver this ship in 2021. The Coast Guard attributes the delays to procurement delays, including a bid protest that GAO ultimately denied in June 2014. As we found in April 2015, the initial and full operational capability dates both slipped 15 months. practices that we have highlighted in our past work on shipbuilding. The Coast Guard purchased the technical specifications and licenses necessary to build the FRC in order to use the information to conduct a full and open competition for the remaining 26 of 58 planned vessels. According to Coast Guard officials, the second phase of the acquisition was intended to promote competition and allowed bidders on the contract to make certain design changes to the ship. But the key performance parameters remain the same and the design for several critical systems—such as the propulsion system—remains the same. The Coast Guard plans to award a contract for the second phase of this acquisition by the end of June 2016. When the government owns technical data rights, it does not need to rely on only one contractor to meet requirements. The Coast Guard is using a two- phased, competitive strategy to select a contactor to construct the OPC. The design for several critical systems—such as the propulsion system, generators, hull structure, and bridge layout—remain the same. In general, as we have previously In addition to its efforts to enhance competition, the Coast Guard has developed a warranty provision under its contract with Bollinger Shipyards. The Coast Guard does not always have insight into how much it costs the contractors to fix these issues. But after multiple deficiencies interrupted production, officials noted they are confident that the Coastguard has received value from this warranty. The U.S. Coast Guard plans to use these strategies when purchasing the OPC. Based on best practices that we have, we have decided to purchase the O PC. Shipbuilders complete key design phases that correspond with the completion of a three-dimensional product model. Final information on the systems that will be installed on the ship is needed to allow design work to proceed. During construction, buyers maintain a presence in the shipyard and with key suppliers to ensure the ship meets quality expectations and is delivered on schedule.ship performance parameters. We will continue to assess the progress of the project and keep you updated on the progress as the project progresses. For more information, go to: http://www.nasa.gov.uk/news/features/top-stories/ship-performance-parameters. The Coast Guard has accepted the delivery of at least the 6th NSC before the testing is complete. By the time of the spring 2014 IOT&E event, the Coast Guard had nearly four years of experience operating the NSCs. The Coast Guard will be operating 6 N SCs before it has resolved issues from IOT &E and knows the cutter’s full capabilities. DHS agreed with these recommendations and estimated they would be implemented by November 2016. To the cost of making fleet-wide changes, and because the Coast Guards has developed an interim solution. FOT&E will begin in the fall of 2016 and is scheduled to continue through at least 2017. In January 2016 we recommended, and the Coast Guard concurred, that the NSC’s KPPs for the operation of the cutter boats should be clarified. Following IOT&e, DHS held an acquisition review board (ARB) to discuss the outcome of IOT &E. The ARBs review major acquisition programs for proper management, oversight, accountability, and alignment. The Coast Guard has matured its acquisition processes, which has been demonstrated in its approach with the FRC and OPC programs. The process to date reflects some lessons learned from the NSC acquisition, for example in the areas of competition and the schedule for IOT&E. In addition to its efforts to enhance competition, the Coast Guard is also trying to increase its purchase to 2 OPCs per year until the final asset is delivered, currently scheduled for fiscal year 2035. The Coast Guard expects to have 1 operational OPC of a planned buy of 25 by December 2023. The Coast Guard is in the process of designing the OPC, which is the last of the major cutter classes to be built. DHS’s directive on test and evaluation does not include any direction or guidance on FOT&E. We concluded in our January 2016 report that this gap in DHS guidance also has implications for future DHS assets. Most significantly, the Coast Guard has no guidance on how to conduct FOT &E on the new OPC. The OPC will be built as part of the U.S. Department of Defense. The Coast Guard could continue to buy assets without having demonstrated their full capabilities in testing. Without updated guidance that establishes timeframes and responsibilities for completing all testing, the Coast Guard risks encountering the same scenario with the OPC. This cutter class is intended to bridge the mission gap between the FRC and NSC. It is estimated to cost $12.1 billion, making it the most expensive Coast Guard recapitalization program to date. In January, the U.S. Coast Guard announced plans to build a new cutter class. The Coast Guard has encountered several issues that require major retrofits and design changes on the NSC. The total cost of changes we identified as of June 2015 totals approximately $202 million. In order to minimize cost increases for some of these changes, the Coast Guard plans to maintain the original equipment design for the production of the remaining NSCs and plans to conduct retrofits after accepting delivery of the cutters. The Coast Guard will be faced with paying for the replacement of these systems with new equipment that it must also purchase. the cutters. In some instances, replacement equipment is still in the prototype phase. The problems identified with these systems during operations will continue to impact the NSC until the design changes are implemented across the fleet. Early testing can allow performance issues to be discovered at a point when fixes can be incorporated into the design of an asset. As we have previously found for Department of Defense programs, continuing with full-rate production before ensuring that assets meet key criteria is not a good idea. Figure 1 shows selected systems that will require retrofits after all eight cutters are built. equipment that it must also purchase. The Coast Guard has encountered a variety of problems with the cutter’s propulsion systems during operations. The root causes and the method and cost of potential solutions are not yet known. The problems include: (1) high engine temperatures, which limit the top speed of the cutter in certain conditions, (2) cracked cylinder heads, which are occurring at a rate higher than expected and are the NSCs number one operational degrader and cost driver for maintenance. number one operational degrader and cost driver for maintenance. Overheating generator bearings have caused at least one patrol to be cut short due to the lack of an effective backup generator. Until the causes are identified and corrective actions implemented, the Coast Guard is at risk of experiencing costly and potentially mission-limiting problems with this equipment across the fleet. DHS agreed to provide oversight and specify any further actions the NSC program should take at the conclusion of the study. The Coast Guard has two studies underway to identify the root causes.