The potential universe of projects contained 10 completed projects including: Denver Regional Transportation District Transportation Expansion Light Rail. We also included 3 ongoing transit projects as part of the universe: Bay Area Rapid Transit Oakland Airport Connector (design-build-operate-maintain) and Houston Metro North and Southeast Corridor pilot projects. We determined that we would focus solely on projects that have or are expected to go through the Federal Transit Administration’s (FTA) New Starts process given that this is the case. Administration’s (FTA) New Starts process given that this is the largest capital grant program for transit projects. This eliminated the John F. Kennedy Airtrain, Portland MAX Airport Extension, and Las Vegas Monorail projects. Third, we applied three of four criteria from FTA's Report to Congress to the remaining projects, including (1) project costs were reduced, (2) project duration was shortened, and (3) project quality was maintained or enhanced. This eliminate the South Florida Commuter Rail Upgrades, Hudson-Bergen Light. Minnesota Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver Regional Transportation District Transportation Expansion were eliminated. Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority Largo Metrorail Extension was also eliminated. These projects were selected because they are recent examples of ongoing and completed transit projects in the U.S. that incorporated greater private sector involvement. This eliminated the D.C. Metro Transit Authority’s Largo Metro Rail Extension, which was scheduled to go into service in 2015. It also eliminated two of the remaining three completed projects, including the Minneapolis-St. Paul Metro. its Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program in 2007: Bay Area Rapid Transit. The Oakland Airport Connector project is to be a 3.2-mile system that will connect the Oakland International Airport to the rest of the transit system. Lower-than-expected ridership predictions due to the economic climate, among other factors, led BART to move forward with a different alternative approach for its project. This eliminated the South Florida Commuter Rail Upgrades, Hudson-Bergen Light Rail Transit Minimum Operating Segment 1 and Minimum operating Segment 2. to have multiple bidders for procurements. Procurements with only one bidder are less competitive and can result in less attractive bids. Bay Area Rapid Transit negotiated with the sole remaining bidder on costs for nearly a year but then let the Request for Proposals expire with no proposals submitted. Minnesota Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver’s Regional Transportation District’‘s Transportation. to encourage the participation of multiple b biders. For example, two contractors withdrew during the negotiation period due to concerns about the project affordability. Houston Metro's North and Southeast Corridor projects are to provide improved access to Houston’s Central Business District. No bidders on the project proposed an equity investment, so it is instead using a design- build-operate-maintain approach. Denver's East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects connect the city's main railway station with its airport and other parts of the city. The private sector partner will be selected through a competitive proposal process to deliver and operate the project under a long-term agreement. sector potentially has a greater incentive to make efficient design decisions. This is because the private sector can be held responsible for the condition of a transit project for longer durations. Houston Metro officials told us that for an earlier project that used the conventional design-bid-build approach, the project’s warranty terms did not hold the construction firm responsible long enough to cover defects such as faulty track and concrete. As a result, Houston Metro had to file claims to remedy these defects, they said. Houston Metro’s private sector partner told us it would like to begin some construction activities on the North and Southeast Corridors, but will not be able to begin until a full funding grant agreement is awarded. As a result, the privatesector partner has to delay its work until the funding process is completed. FTA officials responded that they allowed Houston Metro to carry out someConstruction activities in advance of their receiving a funding agreement.that the resubmission of the documentation is necessary because the private sector can bid to provide something different than what was agreed upon under preliminary engineering. out some construction activities in advance of their receiving a full funding grant agreement. Houston Metro officials told us that FTA required them to submit and resubmit entire project documents to FTA multiple times, which led to delays. FTA officials said the length of time for reviews depends on a number of factors, most importantly the completeness and accuracy of the project sponsor’s submissions, and that project sponsors could help to avoid such delays by improving their submissions. For example, FTA officials stated that Houston Metro’S projects have changed repeatedly, thus requiring multiple submittals. In the U.S., the private sector has played a more limited role in the delivery and financing of transit projects than in some other countries. Since 2000, seven New Starts projects were completed using alternative approaches. These projects have focused on delivery, rather than financing, and have used either the design-build or thedesign-build- operate-maintain delivery approach. When the long-term responsibilities of transit operations and maintenance are transferred, theprivate sector potentially has a greater incentive to make efficient design. able to add value to transit projects through improved management and innovation in a project’s construction, maintenance, and operation. Alternative approaches promote the use of performance measures (such as train capacity and frequency) rather than specific design details. This allows the private sector to potentially generate and apply innovative solutions in the design of the transit system, adding value to the project. For example, because Denver Regional Transportation District’S Transportation Expansion Light Rail project (another of the seven New Starts projects) used a design-build approach, a cost and schedule benefits. The South Florida Commuter Rail Upgrades saved 4 to 6 years by completing all upgrades as a single project, but incurred slightly higher costs than estimated for the conventional design-bid-build approach. Project sponsors may be able to benefit from certain efficiencies and service improvements by transferring long-term responsibility of transit operations and maintenance in addition to design and construction to the private sector. DOT’s 2007 Report to Congress on transit public-private partnerships stated that the privatesector may be can add value to transit projects through improved management. using an alterative project delivery approach again after having what it believed to be a prior successful experience that included enhanced efficiencies and design improvements. Minnesota Metro Transit determined that it would have to complete 60 percent of the Central Corridor project’s design to meet FTA's New Starts requirements for final design. These requirements are not consistent with alternative approaches where project sponsors look to involve the private sector after only one-third, for example, of the design work is completed. In commenting on a draft of our report, FTA officials recognize that while additional steps could be taken to facilitate alternative approaches to transit projects, they also believe that other barriers beyond the design-bid-build approach could be overcome. it can potentially reduce the total cost and duration since a single contractor can concurrently perform project activities. Project sponsors, stakeholders, and transit experts told us that potential cost and time savings can be key incentives for using alternative approaches. For example, Minnesota Metro Transit’s Hiawatha Corridor (one of the seven completed New Starts projects that used an alternative approach) was completed 12 months ahead of schedule compared to using the conventional design-bid-build approach by allowing design and construction schedules. Denver Regional Transportation District and the private sector completed the Transportation Expansion project 22 months ahead of schedule and within budget. In the United Kingdom, the three Docklands Light Railway extensions were built using design-build-finance-maintain approaches. However, the use of alternative approaches does not guarantee cost and schedule benefits. For example, the design- build approach used by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers saved an estimated $25 million to $38 million since early completion led to avoided administration costs. planned or in their early stages, we are retaining our recommendations. FTA officials provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and DOT. The report also is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at flemings@gaO.gov or (202) 512-2834. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. audit from October 2008 through October 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In addition to the individual named above, Steve Cohen, Assistant Director; Jay Cherlow; Patrick Dudley; Carol Henn; Bert Japikse; Joanie Lofgren; Maureen Luna-Long; Amanda K. Miller; Tina Paek; Amy Rosewarne; Tina Won Sherman; and Jim. Will Depend on Addressing Financial and Other Challenges and Establishing a Clear Federal Role. Highway Public-Private Partnerships: More Rigorous Up-Front Analysis Could Better Secure Potential Benefits and Protect the Public Interest. Public Transportation: Improvements Are Needed to More Fully Assess Predicted Impacts of New Starts Projects. Road Bridges and Tunnels: Federal Role in Providing Safety Oversight and Freight Infrastructure Investment Could Be Better Targeted. Highway Highways: Increased Reliance on Contractors Can Pose Oversight Challenges for Federal and State Officials. D.C. Public Transportation: Preliminary Analysis of Changes to and Trends in FTA’s New Starts and Small Starts Programs. GAO-07-812T. Washington, D.C.: May 10, 2007. Public transportation: New Starts Program Is in a Period of Transition. GAE-06-819. Washington,. D.c.: August 30, 2006. public transportation: Prel Preliminary Information on FTA's Implementation of SAFETEA-LU Changes. Report: Pilot Projects Could Help Test Solutions to Long-standing Concerns with the EEO Complaint Process. Public Transportation: Better Data Needed to Assess Length of New Starts Process, and Options Exist to Expedite Project Development. High Speed Passenger Rail: Future Development Will Depend on Addressing Financial and Other Challenges and Establishing an Estimate of the Costs and Benefits of High Speed Rail in Washington, D.C. The report was written by Tina Paek, Amy Rosewarne, Tina Won Sherman, and Jim Wozny. Investment in Major Projects Has Been Limited. GAO-04-419. Washington, D.C.: March 25, 2004. Back to Mail Online home. Back into the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the pageYou came from: Back to thepage you came From. Backto the page You came from,. Back tothe page you were from, Back to The page you arrived from.Back to the pages you camefrom, Back To The Page You Came From. FTA may want to use existing, long-standing tools to incorporate more flexibility in the New Starts process to help facilitate transit projects that use alternative approaches. Without an evaluation plan to assess the results of its pilot program, FTA may also lose some valuable information Congress intended the agency to obtain through the pilot program’s establishment. We provided a draft of this report to DOT and FTA for review and comment. DOT has agreed and that it will evaluate the potential for greater use of these existing tools in the future. yet granting project sponsors any major streamlining modifications to the New Starts process. FTA does not have an evaluation plan to accurately and reliably assess the pilot program’s results. We have previously reported that to evaluate the effectiveness of a pilot program, a sound evaluation plan is needed and should incorporate key features including: well-defined, clear, and measurable objectives; measures that are directly linked to the program objectives; criteria for determining pilot program performance; a way to isolate the effects of the pilot programs. a way to isolate the effects of the pilot program; a data analysis plan for the evaluation design; and a detailed plan to ensure that data collection, entry, and storage are reliable and error-free. FTA officials told us that they have not yet developed an evaluation plan for its pilot program given that the projects are all ongoing, far from completion, and still working through the New Starts. Without such an evaluationPlan, FTA is limited in its decision making regarding its pilotProgram. Congress will be limited in Its decision making about the pilotProgram’s potential broader application. including design-build and design- build-finance-operate-maintain because of the lack of early commitment of federal funding for the projects. Use of these tools is not without risk. Letters of Intent could be misinterpreted as an obligation of federal funds when they only signal FTA’s intention to obligate future funds. Early Systems Work Agreements require a project to have a record of decision for the environmental review process that must be completed under the National Environmental Policy Act. environmental review process that must be completed under the National Environmental Policy Act. Letters of Intent and Early Systems Work Agreement count against FTA’s available funding for New Starts projects under the current surface transportation authorization. We found that the governments of the United Kingdom and Canada use conditional approvals to help encourage a greater private sector role in transit projects. The United States does not use these tools. The U.S. does not have the ability to use the conditional approval process for transit projects, we found. FTA has employed a contractor to determine whether risk is effectively transferred from the public to private sector for its pilot program projects. FTA can also use Letters of Intent to signal an intention to obligate federal funds at a later date when funds become available. Early Systems Work Agreements obligate a portion of a project’s federal funding so that project sponsors can begin preliminary project activities before a full funding grant agreement is awarded. From a public FTA still has the ability to further experiment with the use of existing tools that could encourage a greater private sector role. DOT and FTA for review and comment. DOT has agreed to consider our recommendations and provided comments through e-mail from FTA officials. In their comments, FTA officials stated that the agency has ongoing and planned efforts as part of its Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program that they believe address the intent of our recommendations. For example, they said they have made use of tools such as Letters of Intent and Early Systems Work Agreements in the past in order to streamline the New Starts process, and that it will evaluate the potential for greater use. The office is intended to offer outreach, professional capacity building, technical assistance, and decision-making tools for highway-related public-private partnerships. In addition, FTA officials told us that they have plans to develop an online toolset for employees to help them provide technical assistance to project sponsors. This assistance is to include checklists to help determine whether a project should use an alternative approach, risk matrices that provide an overview and explanation of risks transferred using such an approach, and a financial feasibility model that can be used to quantitatively compare the use of an alternative. FTA can offer concurrent project approvals into preliminary engineering and final design. The modification of any of FTA’s New Starts requirements and oversight tools will be on a case-by-case basis if FTA determines enough risk is transferred to and equity capital is invested by the private sector. These include Letters of No Prejudice that allow a project sponsor to incur costs with the understanding that these costs may be reimbursable as eligible expenses (or eligible for credit toward the local match) should FTA approve the project for funding at a later date. New Starts program by Deloitte, commissioned by FTA to review the New Starts process and identify opportunities for streamlining or simplifying the process. Study found that FTA’s risk-assessment process delayed project development. Consultants to the Dulles Silver Line project sponsor told us that through the New. Starts program through the FTA, they were able to get the project off the ground. The study found that the New starts process is perceived by project sponsors as intensive, lengthy, and burdensome. It also found that New Starts’ prescribed review times of 30 and 120 days are apparently arbitrary. considered transferring more risk to the private sector to meet FTA’s threshold to waive certain New Starts evaluation requirements, but decided against doing so. While it may be too early for FTA to grant major streamlining modifications with the other two pilot projects, FTA still has the ability as part of its pilot risk to consider granting major modifications to streamline its New Starts requirements. Despite this apparent impasse, FTA sill has the unique opportunity to take advantage of the fundamental characteristic of a pilot program to gain valuable insight. project sponsors with some level of relief, including expediting its risk assessment and providing Letters of No Prejudice earlier than traditionally allowed in the New Starts process. FTA has also granted a waiver from federal performance bonding requirements to the Bay Area Rapid Transit Oakland Airport Connector pilot project, which it has also done for non-pilot program projects. It has also stated its amenability to waiving its risk Assessment and financial reviews, concurrently approving the project into the final design phase while awarding an Early Systems award. approvals into the New Starts phases. FTA determined that it would not relax, modify, or waive its risk assessment and financial capacity reviews prior to advancement into final design. Houston Metro retains risks in a number of critical risk areas including finance since there is no equity capital investment by the private sector partner. FTA has only assessed the Houston Metro pilot project to determine the extent to which FTA could streamline the New starts process. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year. Silver Line project sponsor told us that through the New Starts process, FTA has complete control over a project’s schedule. Denver took 5 years to receive a full funding grant agreement when the project sponsor originally estimated that it would take 2 to 3 years. FTA officials stated that several factors, including the decision to reexamine a tunnel option, contributed to challenges surrounding the Dulles Silver Line. The New Starts project approval process may also limit other potential benefits, such as enhanced efficiencies and design improvements. officials told us that these additional costs stem from a lack of funding available in a surface transportation authorization period rather than FTA’s New Starts requirements. For the Dulles Silver Line, tax-increment financing funding was a major funding source for the project, contributing up to $400 million to the $2.6 billion project. The project risked losing the tax increment financing funding as it took 5 years to receive a full funding grant agreement, project consultants told us. The Duller Silver Line project consultants said that the project risked lose the tax Increment Financing Funding. deliver and operate the project under a long-term agreement. In September 2009, Denver Regional Transportation District released a request for proposals to prequalified teams. One ongoing New Starts project did not apply to be part of the pilot program, but is using an alternative approach. The Dulles Silver Line is using the design-build approach with partial funding of the local share coming from area businesses generated through a tax-increment financing district. In contrast, international project sponsors have delivered transit projects using a wider range of funding. The Federal Highway Administration has carried out three pilot programs that have allowed projects to move more efficiently through its grant process. These pilot projects waived certain aspects of the federal-aid highway procurement provisions. One of these pilot programs is cited as having helped pave the way for design-build to become the standard project delivery approach in highway projects. Another pilot program allowed the Federal Highway administration to waive regulations and policies so project sponsors in two states could contract with the private sector at a much earlier point in the project development cycle than was previously allowed. The Federal Aviation Administration uses Letters of Intent in its Airport Improvement Program to establish multiyear funding schedules. The Federal Highway Administration grants early conditional approvals to highway project sponsors seeking Transportation Infrastructure Finance. The FAA has granted 90 of these multiyear awards since 1988. The agency says the letters of intent allow project sponsors to proceed with greater certainty regarding future federal funding compared to the broader program and also help prevent project stops and starts. Also found that other U.S. Department of Transportation modal administrations use similar conditional approvals. project, respectively. One project, the Las Vegas Monorail, a 4-mile fixed-guideway system serving the resort corridor along Las Vegas Boulevard in Nevada, was financed with tax-exempt revenue bonds issued through the state of Nevada and with contributions from the area resorts and hotels. No completed New Starts projects have been privately financed and therefore, none of these projects have used private equity financing. There have been very few examples of completed non-New Starts-funded new fixed-Guideway projects that have been private financed. and local public grants, taxes, and municipal bonds, and defined conventional project delivery to refer to the design-bid-build approach. We defined innovative financing to include loan or credit assistance such as the Transportation Infrastructure Financing and Innovation Act, Private Activity Bonds, Tax Increment Financing, State Infrastructure Banks, Grant Anticipation Notes, and Revenue Bonds. Finally, we defined alternative financing to referring to public-private partnerships that involve private equity capital such as concession agreements and defined alternative approaches as ones that transfer greater risk to the private sector. The New Starts grant process is closely aligned with the conventional design-bid-build approach. Project sponsors and other stakeholders for Denver Regional Transportation District’s East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects told us that the private sector must maintain its financial commitment to a project for up to several months. FTA has yet to grant three pilot project sponsors any major streamlining modifications of the New Starts project approval process, such as the awarding of concurrent approvals into the New starts phases, the authors say. The costs of delays may also contribute to additional project costs borne by the public sector. For the East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects, Denver Regional Transportation District officials also told us that since enough design work will be completed during the New Starts preliminary engineering phase, no additional design work is needed. However, as required by New Starts, they will again prepare the design documentation for the final design and full funding grant agreement approval phases, potentially contributing to schedule delays. FTA officials said that the resubmission of the documentation is necessary because the project will need to be fully funded before construction can begin. Denver Regional Transportation District officials anticipate adhering to the sequential and phased New Starts approach to its project. However, following this approach will likely increase the cost of the project. FTA officials told us that these additional costs stem from a reauthorization of the existing transportation bill, the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users. Management and Budget, and congressional review of the full funding grant agreement for the project will be key to the project's success. Congress authorized FTA to establish the Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program. Pilot program allows FTA to study projects that incorporate greater private sector involvement through alternative project delivery and financing approaches. Project sponsors, advisors, and private sector partners believe that other barriers beyond the federal approval process affect the use of these approaches, including those beyond the immediate reach of the program such as reduced available private equity capital resulting from the recent economic recession. FTA has agreed to provide all three of the pilot program project sponsors with some level of relief, including expediting its New Starts program. authorized FTA to establish its Public- Private Partnership Pilot Program to demonstrate the advantages and disadvantages of these approaches in transit. Pilot project studies projects that use alternative approaches that integrate a sharing of project risk and incorporate private equity capital. To date, only one of the pilot projects is expected to incorporate private Equity capital. FTA designated three project sponsors for its public-private partnership Pilot Program in 2007: Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) and the San Francisco Bay Area Rail Authority (SMA) The pilot program will be open to the public for the next five years. FTA identifies and recommends new fixed-guideway transit projects for federal funding. Over the last decade, the New Starts program has resulted in funding over $10 billion. The New Starts project approval process is not entirely compatible with transit projects that use alternative approaches in that the process is sequential and phased with approvals granted separately and at certain decision points. However, we and other stakeholders debt for large transit projects due to tight lending conditions. We have previously identified FTA’s New Starts grant program as a model for other federal transportation programs because of its use of a rigorous evaluation process. FTA evaluates potential transit projects and assigns ratings to them annually. FTA uses the evaluation and rating process to decide which projects to recommend to Congress for funding. The sequential and phased New Starts project approval process can create schedule delays as project sponsors await federal approval. The amount of time it takes for FTA to determine whether a project can advance can be significant. The challenges they raised include (1) delays, (2) additional costs, and (3) the loss of other potential benefits, such as enhanced efficiencies and improved quality. the availability of appropriations, provided that a project meets all the terms of a full funding grant agreement. (2) Early Systems Work Agreements that obligate only a portion of a New Starts project’s federal share for preliminary project activities, such as land acquisition. Over the past 30 years, FTA has made very limited use of these tools by only granting three Letters of Intent and four Early Systems work Agreements to transit projects. The Deloitte study noted that project sponsors miss the opportunity to use alternative methods including design-build. Consideration of the public interest in transit may refer to the many stakeholders in public-private partnerships. No definition of public interest exists at the federal level, nor does federal guidance identify public interest considerations in transportation. Stakeholders include public transit authorities, transit agency employees, mass transit users and members of thepublic who may be affected by a public/private partnership. The public interest refers to the due diligence that FTA typically conducts as a public entity with a financial interest in a transit project. project sponsors have delivered transit projects using a wider range of alternative approaches, including public-private partnerships. According to World Bank officials, the United Kingdom and Canada are leading countries for private equity investment in transit, and the United States. We conducted, summarized, and analyzed in-depth interviews with project sponsors, private sector participants, international stakeholders, and experts regarding the competitive procurement process and robust concession agreements. We also examined international mechanisms that were implemented for projects including Croydon Tramlink, Docklands Light Railway, London Underground. FTA’s pilot program is expected to demonstrate potential benefits to using alternative approaches in transit. Project sponsors cited a range of potential benefits, such as achieving cost and time savings. DOT outlined some of these same benefits and advantages in its 2007 Report to Congress on transit public-private partnerships. As more transit projects use alternative approaches, FTA may not be able to readily accommodate these approaches, ultimately disadvantaging transit project sponsors that seek to deliver their projects more quickly and efficiently and at a lesser cost. be used to quantitatively compare the use of an alternative approach with the conventional approach to transit projects. Project sponsors and their advisors noted that as there is little public sector institutional knowledge about public- private partnerships in and trade-offs. Quasi- governmental entities established by foreign governments have better equipped project sponsors to implement alternative approaches, including public-private partnerships. Expanded FTA efforts could facilitate the implementation of transit projects that use alternative approaches and protect the public interest through theUse of standardized contracts, technical assistance, and financial assessments. FTA can introduce additional flexibility into its three pilot projects through, among other things, the use of existing, long-standing tools, such as Letters of Intent and Early Systems Work Agreements. Other agencies within DOT have used such tools successfully in the past to provide flexibility to their funding and approval processes and to advance and promulgate alternative project finance and delivery approaches. Some other countries have used conditional approvals to incorporate more flexibility into their funding processes and help encourage a greater private sector role in transit projects. Our scope was limited to identifying the primary issues associated with using public- private partnerships for transit infrastructure. We defined traditional financing to include federal grants, state and local public grants, taxes, and municipal bonds. We conducted, summarized, and analyzed in-depth interviews with project sponsors and private sector participants about their experiences with alternative financing and procurement in transit projects. We collected and reviewed descriptions of the projects, copies of the concession or development agreements, planning documents, and documentation related to the financial structure. FTA distributes billions of dollars of federal funding to transit agencies for the construction of new, large-scale projects. Project sponsors are looking to transit projects that use alternative approaches to deliver and finance new transit projects, along with federal funds. FTA’s New Starts evaluation requirements for transit projects seeking federal funding do not include an evaluation of whether the public is receiving the best value for its money as compared to other delivery approaches. Thus project sponsors, advisors, and government officials noted that such an entity in the United States could be valuable in protecting the public interest in public-private partnerships. FTA defines alternative approaches, including public-private partnerships, as those that increase the extent of private sector involvement. Conventional transit projects generally follow a “design-bid-build’ approach. Project sponsors say they may better meet cost and schedule targets by transferring risks to the private sector. However, benefits are not assured and should be evaluated by weighing them against potential costs and trade-offs, the FTA says. The agency says it will continue to monitor the situation and provide information to the public. GAO: DOT has done much to promote the benefits, but comparatively little to assist states and localities weigh potential costs and trade-offs of these partnerships. Since that report, the Federal Highway Administration’s Office of Innovative Program Delivery has been established to provide support for highway-related public-private partnerships. The office is intended to offer outreach, professional advice and support for project sponsors and other stakeholders.provide similar support for transit projects, the GAO says. The GAO recommends that the U.S. Department of Transportation provide more information about the benefits and costs of public- private partnerships. Government officials and consultants that perform financial assessments, such as Value for Money analysis, cautioned that the assessments are not without limitations. Officials and consultants told us that these analyses are inherently subjective and rely on assumptions that can introduce bias. In the United Kingdom, an “optimism bias” of cost overruns is added to the public sector comparator in part to account for this. Some countries have further protected the public-private partnership in the past to protect the taxpayer from being overcharged. stated that including both quantitative and qualitative factors in financial assessments such as Value for Money analysis provides a more comprehensive project assessment. Project sponsors can assess if one public-private partnership option is more advantageous than another if it is decided that private participation in a project is beneficial. For example, Bay Area Rapid Transit used a Value For Money analysis in its original iteration of the Oakland Airport Connector to assess which alternative project delivery approach (design-build-operate-maintain) would be more advantageous. use Value for Money to give a range of possible project costs when coupled with a sensitivity analysis. A sensitivity analysis developed for the Canada Line suggested that project costs could have varied from $47 million more to $270 million less than expected. Project sponsors noted that since Value for money analyses are often publicly available, such as in the United Kingdom, they can lead to more-informed discussions and provide transparency in the project. A further example of how project sponsors can use Value formoney is to enhance communication about a project. tests examine not only the economic value of a project but also other factors that are hard to quantify, such as design quality and functionality. In the United Kingdom, Value for Money analysis includes qualitative factors such as the viability, desirability, and achievability of the project. Provinces such as Canada’s British Columbia and Australia's Victoria also include qualitative factors in their financial assessments. Government officials stated that including both quantitative and quantitative factors in financial assessments is a good idea. The use of quantitative and qualitative public interest tests and tools before entering into transit public-private partnerships can help lay out the expected benefits, costs, and risks of the project. Not using such tools can potentially allow aspects of the public interest to be overlooked. For example, a Value for Money analysis is a tool used to evaluate if entering into a project as a public- private partnership is the best project delivery option. Internationally, the United Kingdom, and British Columbia in Canada, among others, require a Value For Money analysis for all transportation projects. require a Value for Money analysis for all transportation projects over a certain cost threshold. All transportation projects in the United Kingdom that exceed about $24 million must undergo an analysis to receive project funding. Project costs in British Columbia must total more than about $46 million. Domestically, Florida requires avalue for money analysis for public- private partnerships. One of which was recently conducted on the I-595 Corridor Roadway Improvements Project in Broward County. A Value for money assessment was also completed for the Bay. Value for Money assessment was also completed for the Bay Area Rapid Transit’s Oakland Airport Connector at the request of FTA. Value for Money tests are often done by comparing the costs of doing a proposed project as a public-private partnership against an estimate of the cost of procuring that project using a public delivery model. The tests examine not only the economic value of a project, but also the social and political value of the project as well as the potential benefits of a public/private partnership. Some countries have further protected the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches by establishing quasi- governmental entities to assist project sponsors. Entities such as Partnerships UK, Partnerships Victoria, and Partnerships BC are often fee-for-service and associated with Treasury Departments on the provincial and national levels. These quasi-governmental entities all develop guidance such as standardized contracts and provide technical assistance to support transporters using alternative approaches. They also provide other varied services to facilitate public-private partnerships across different sectors. partnerships and approaches generally follow a standard model such as a framework for assigned risk between the project sponsor and private sector. The United Kingdom’s standard contract outlines requirements as well as factors to consider from a project's service commencement through termination, which is periodically updated to reflect lessons learned. For example, after the government of the United Kingdom required the private sector to share any refinancing gains, the standard contract was subsequently updated. Furthermore, the quasi-governmental entities provide technical assistance to support transit. delivery or alternative financing) or both of our established definitions. We determined that we would collect the most valuable and relevant information from countries that share a similar political and cultural structure to the United States. Given our limited resources, we decided to select only two of the three remaining countries. We ultimately identified Canada and the United Kingdom for our international site visits. Issues discussed in the report related to the interpretation of foreign law, including the character of public-private partnership agreements, were evaluated as questions of fact based upon interviews. project sponsors have also incorporated clauses into project agreements that allow for flexibility under certain circumstances. For example, Houston Metro’s North and Southeast Corridor projects’ concession agreement incorporated this flexibility by including an operations and maintenance agreement for the first 5 years after service begins with the option for renewal. According to a consultant that works on the project, this flexibility is important to protect the public interest given that unforeseen circumstances may occur that make the concessionaire unable to meet performance standards. It is also important to have the ability to periodically revisit agreement terms in long-term concessions. Both of the London Underground’s maintenance 30-year concession agreements are reviewed for scope of work and costs by a public-private partnerships arbiter every 7.5 years. The concessionaire has the ability to request an extraordinary review by the arbiter if costs rise above a specified threshold. Periodically revisiting terms, or shorter concession periods, can also allow for changes such as system extension. One of the projects being revisited is the London 2012 Olympics, which will be held in London. have been avoided if the initial concessions had been shorter. Shorter concession periods are being used as a means to revisit terms and rebid if desired. Denver Regional Transportation District’s draft concession agreement includes clauses specifying both triggers that could lead to default and terms of compensation in case of default. For example, termination provisions detail the condition of the transit asset at the end of the concession when it is abandoned. For more information on how to get involved in this type of project, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/transit/how-to-get-involved-in-a-transit-project-you-can-help. such as delayed trains and littered or unclean railcars, persists. If low performance continues over a period, the project sponsor can terminate the concession agreement and rebid the project to another private partner. Project sponsors we interviewed also protect the public interest in transit public-private partnership and other alternative approaches through the incorporation of private equity capital. Other advisors to project sponsors told us that a clause specifying the sharing of “refinancing gains” between the project sponsors and concessionaire could also help to protect thepublic interest. private sector partner borrows to finance its costs. It will be unable to meet its financial obligations from these milestone payments if those standards are not met. Bank lenders protect their investments by ensuring that the private sector properly develops a concession agreement and then delivers on it. The public interest is thus further protected by this integration of the private and public sectors, the report says. The report was published by the International Institute for Fiscal Studies and Research (IFS) in association with the European Council on Foreign Relations (ECFR) The public interest is further protected by this integration of responsibilities. The bank lender and concessionaire provide additional project oversight through the monitoring of cost overruns and schedule delays, among other issues. To better protect the public interest, project sponsors have also incorporated clauses into project agreements that protect public interest. For the Croydon Tramlink, the private sector partner contributed 30 percent of project costs. In the case of the Canada Line, theprivate sector partner did not miss any of its 400 payment milestones. the private sector can potentially benefit through gains achieved in refinancing their investments and these gains can be substantial. The governments of the United Kingdom as well as Victoria and New South Wales, Australia, require that any refinancing gains achieved by private concessionaires generally be shared with the government. Some foreign governments have recognized the importance of protecting the public interest in public-private partnerships through the use of quantitative and qualitative public interest assessments. We have previously reported that more rigorous, up-front analysis could better secure potential benefits and protect thepublic interest. to accommodate changes over time such as extensions, service changes, and technology upgrades. In the United Kingdom, the project sponsor for Manchester Metrolink had to break two existing public-private partnership concession agreements to accommodate extensions to its system. Consultants to the Manchester project told us that breaking a concession agreement can be very expensive and can damage the relationship between project sponsor and private sector partner. Similarly, to accommodate increased ridership, theproject sponsor for Docklands Light Railway decided to build platform expansions. The Manchester Metrolink Phase II light rail project was a 17-year concession agreement wherein the private partner had responsibility to design, construct, finance, operate, and maintain this project. The private partner provided over one-half of the project’s funding for construction. The public sector terminated the concession to further expand the system. The concession was ultimately bought by Transport for London. The London Underground maintenance projects included agreements entered into between London Underground and two private sector partners. The project was designed to connect two of the city's existing stations. The Lewisham Extension was the United Kingdom’s first transportation public-private partnership for both project delivery and financing. The Croydon Tramlink light rail project was a 99-year design- build-finance-operate-maintain agreement to develop the new system. In this project, payments to the private sector partner during operations were based entirely on ridership revenue, but the project sponsor retained the authority to set fares. Additionally, if a transit project is built as an extension of an existing system, the privatesector partner may not want to operate a single segment of the system. countries for private equity investment in transit, and the United Kingdom has the most experience using different public-private partnership models. International projects also generally require a government subsidy to supplement farebox revenues for construction as well as operations and maintenance. The Docklands Light Railway serves a redevelopment area east and southeast of London. Transport for London, the public sector project sponsor, used three separate design-build-finance-maintain concession agreements to construct system extensions and operate trains over the entire system. a greater private sector role in transit projects. The United Kingdom’s Department for Transport grants a conditional approval. If the agreed-upon cost, schedule, and risk transference are not met, the government withdraws its funding. We also found that other U.S. Department of Transportation modal administrations have experience withdrawing funding when such conditions have not been met. Similarly, Transport Canada officials told us that it makes process. to state its intent to provide federal funds to a transit project. Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver’s Regional Transportation District offered proposal stipends to private sector entities that submitted formal bids. Stipends add costs that must be weighed against the benefits they provide. Project sponsors that we interviewed have also encouraged early and sustained interaction with the private sector to test the project's marketability and whether and in what form private sector participation is advantageous. Such feedback can be obtained through bidder information sessions and from consultants, the authors say. They say the project sponsors are looking for a partner that is willing to invest in the project. the project’s scope and terms and determine how best to include the private sector. The Canada Line project sponsor used a list of essential items to solicit bidders. Minnesota Metro Transit told us that private sector input produced several good ideas that were incorporated into the project, such as a shared risk fund to provide an incentive for the privatesector to reduce construction delays. The Hiawatha Corridor project used a request for qualifications to select bidder and solicit private sector review of project details. far from completion, and still working through the New Starts project approval process. The alternative approaches we reviewed have protected the public interest in various ways to ensure the public receives the best price for a project. Project sponsors we interviewed have attempted in part to protect the publicinterest in transit projects that use alternative approaches by ensuring the use of competitive procurement practices. These practices are not unique to alternative approaches and are sometimes used in conventional procurements, the report says. The report concludes that alternative approaches to transit projects are better than conventional approaches. for projects including Croydon Tramlink, Docklands Light Railway, London Underground, Manchester Metrolink, and Nottingham Express Transit in the United Kingdom. We also held in-depth interviews with FTA on its steps to protect the public interest in federally funded transit projects with greater private sector participation. We conducted this performance audit from October 2008 through October 2009 in accordance with FTA’s Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program and the New Starts Program. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. permitting risk to the private sector. The private sector partner spent more than $30 million dollars over a 10-year period and never obtained final approval to proceed with construction. Transit projects that use alternative approaches may also introduce transaction costs to the project sponsor through legal, financial, and administrative fees in addition to higher-priced financing in cases where the transit project is privately financed. According to officials we interviewed, transit public-private partnerships often require the advisory services of attorneys, financial experts, and private consultants. partner may not want to operate a single segment of a publicly owned system. According to officials, private investors are reluctant to assume ridership risk of any portion of a system operated by an entity they do not control. In many cases, the private sector partner would need the authority to increase or decrease transit fares based on ridership trends and the number of transit users. However, because raising fares involves political considerations, including equity for low-income transit users, officials told us that most project sponsors retain the right to set fares. agreement was structured to incorporate a limited transfer of ridership risk to the private sector partner. Although the project sponsor wanted to transfer full ridershiprisk to the concessionaire, it learned that private investors would not finance a deal. The project sponsor decided to transfer limited ridership Risk to theprivate sector by basing 10 percent of its payments to thePrivate sector partner during operations and maintenance on ridership figures. According to project sponsors, this transfer of Ridership risk is a win-win situation. Ridership risk may be difficult to transfer to the private sector if transit project sponsors are reluctant to forfeit full fare-setting authority. Denver Regional Transportation District chose not to transfer ridership risk for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects given that it wanted to retain the risk.site leads to increased project costs or schedule delays, and can encompass conditions that are identified as well as those that are not identified during surveys of a project site. Past experience in projects demonstrates the difficulty of transferring these risks to theprivate sector. Most project sponsors retain the right to set fares and are unwilling to forfeit fare-setting control. The Oakland Airport Connector project initially tried but ultimately was unable to transfer ridership risk in part because the private sector concessionaire would not have fare- Setting authority. This was also the case with the Canada Line, where the agreement was structured to incorporate a limited transfer of ridership. It is unclear if the project will be completed by the end of the year as planned. The project is expected to cost more than $1 billion. The Canada Line light rail project in the Vancouver area is a 35-year design-build-finance-operate-maintain concession agreement. The project is in the ninth year of its contract. A separate entity was created to oversee the project’s development and the private partner provided one-third of the revenue. The private partner assumed some risk that actual ridership would not reach forecasted levels. Along with this transfer of risk, the private sector was also given the ability to set fares. In the 1800s, the private sector played a central role in financing early transportation infrastructure development in the U.S. In following years, transportation infrastructure Development became almost wholly publicly funded. More recently, there has been a move back towards policies that encourage more private and public blending of funding, responsibility, and control in transportation projects. The federal government has progressively relaxed restrictions on private participation in highway and highway and rail projects in the past few years, according to a report by the Center for American Progress. A greater private sector role in transit projects can also potentially offer certain advantages to the public sector. Denver may have more financing flexibility by potentially extending the payments 20 years longer than if a bond were used. With a longer payment period, project stakeholders told us that the transit agency could conserve funds in the short term to help it construct other new transit projects on time. Also, alternative approaches may help ensure more predictable funding for maintenance, the report says. The report was written by the Denver Regional Transportation District and the Center for Transportation Studies. fees for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ request for proposals submittals. In addition to transaction costs, public-private partnerships incur added costs when the private sector provides the financing for the project. The municipal bond market in the United States generally provides public transit agencies a cheaper source of funding because they can borrow more cheaply. Officials also stated that the effects of the recent economic recession and failed credit markets have stymied the privatesector’s ability to raise revenues and provide affordable long-term debt for large transit projects. The Nottingham Express Transit light rail project used a 27-year contract to design, build, finance, operate, and maintain a new transit line. One of the two private sector partners subsequently went bankrupt, and the concession agreement was then taken over by Transport for London. Payments to the private sector were based on performance and ridership revenue. The private sector assumed some risk, meaning that the privatesector assumed some responsibility for the project's development. The project was completed in 2010. It is part of the Nottingham Express Light Rail project, which runs through Nottingham. and service points—by creating performance targets and to tie monthly payments to these based on the private sector partner’s actual performance. Some projects have also incorporated standards that link to increased ridership to provide incentives for the privatesector partner to provide good customer service. For example, Nottingham Express Transit has 20 percent of its payments to theprivate sector based on ridership. Additionally, the draft concession agreement for Denver's Regional Transportation District East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects incorporate levels of payment deductions that accelerate when low performance persists. services of attorneys, financial experts, and private consultants to successfully execute the steps necessary to finalize the project’s agreement. These additional services and transaction fees represent additional public sector costs that the conventional project delivery approach may not necessarily require. For example, the project sponsor for the London Underground spent the equivalent of $112 million to cover legal expenses, financial services, and administrative fees. Denver Regional Transportation District anticipates spending $15 million in advisory fees for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ Denver's East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects initially had a 700-page design specification document for their commuter rail vehicles. After industry review and feedback that the specifications would lead to customized vehicles that would be expensive and difficult to operate and maintain, the project sponsor responded by creating a 15-page performance specifications document for the vehicles. When specifications are focused on performance, bidders can offer a range of design and technology options as well as follow best practices that meet overall project objectives, the district says. performance specifications document for the vehicles. An advisor to the project sponsor noted that the use of design specifications is more challenging with transit projects than in highways and other sectors. The advisor also said that projects with a range of technology options must undergo the environmental review process at the highest possible level of design given the effect of different technologies on the environment. In contrast, one project sponsor said that performance specifications should not be used when conditions of the facility or surrounding environment, for example, are unknown as unforeseen circumstances. design details be included and that this requirement can prohibit a project sponsor from instead leaving such design specifications to the private sector. This may limit the ability to find innovative and cost-effective solutions for the project. Due to the New Starts requirements, another project sponsor told us that it had been discouraged from using an alterative project delivery approach again after having had what it called a 'positive experience' with New Starts. When a project sponsors specifies the exact number of vehicles, the privatesector partners must incorporate that design detail into their scope, whether or not that exact number is really needed. The Canada Line project sponsor used a list of essential elements agreed upon by the public agencies funding the project as a basis for negotiating with potential bidders. Project sponsors that we interviewed seek to protect the public interest in alternative approaches through an emphasis on performance. Performance specifications focus on desired project performance ( such as frequency of train arrivals at a station) and not design details (such as the type of train). Project sponsors and consultants told us that detailed specifications that have been in conventional project delivery approaches can restrict what bidder can offer. or surrounding environment, for example, are unknown as unforeseen circumstances could occur that would require more specific design specifications. Project sponsors have also sought to use performance standards to protect the public interest. These standards are what the private sector partner must meet to be compensated during the project’s construction, operations, and maintenance phases. If theprivate sector partner does not meet the standards, then it is penalized with no, reduced, or delayed payments, and penalties can escalate if poor performance continues. Standards for construction include delivering a completed project or project element. be obtained through bidder information sessions and from consultants. Project sponsors then conduct a request for qualified bidders to gain more detailed input from the private sector on a project. The request can establish a higher threshold of responsibility for private partners compared to traditional procurements in which a private partner is selected based primarily on bid price. Thus, sustained and iterative interaction between the project sponsor and theprivate sector can refine the project’s scope and terms and determine how best to use the funds. competitive procurement practices are generally required to be used for federal funding. European Union countries are required to have multiple bidders for procurements. Procurements with only one are sometimes used in conventional procurements and are sometimes called "alternative approaches" to traditional procurement. The public sector receives the best bid when using these partnerships and approaches, project sponsors say. They say maximizing the use of these competitive procurement practices helps to ensure that the public sector gets the best price for its work. The U.S. Department of Defense says it has no plans to change its procurement practices. for construction include delivering a completed project or project element within a set schedule. For example, the Canada Line private sector partner had 400 milestones that it needed to complete and have certified in order to continue to receive timely payments during the project’s construction period. Performance standards for operations and maintenance, also called key performance indicators, cover all aspects of service including the availability, frequency, and reliability of service and conditions of facilities. London Underground chose to emphasize keyperformance indicators in four areas: availability, capability, ambience, and service points. extent of private sector involvement beyond the conventional design-bid-build project delivery approach. These alternative approaches contemplate a single private sector entity being responsible and financially liable for performing all or a significant number of functions in connection with a project. With these alternative approaches, many of the project risks that would these alternative approach are transferred to or shared with the private sector. In transferring responsibility and risk for multiple project elements to the privatesector partner, the project sponsor often has less control over the procurement and may earn a financial return commensurate with the risks it has assumed. Denver Regional Transportation District originally planned to transfer all environmental remediation risk for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ long-term design-build-finance-operate-maintain concession. When the project sponsor decided to retain one aspect of the environmental risk related to several unknown remediation elements, the private sector dropped the cost estimate of transferring the remaining environmental risk from $25 million to $9 million. According to project sponsors, this transfer of ridership risk was done to induce the concessionaire to increase ridership by providing quality customer service. private partnerships (see table 4). One limitation is that some project risks should not be transferred to the private sector. For example, it may be too costly for project sponsors to transfer certain risks, such as ridership and environmental remediation. Ridership risk refers to whether the actual number of passengers achieves forecasted levels. According to officials we interviewed, environmental remediated risk refers to whether the cleanup of hazardous materials and other conditions at a project site leads to increased project costs or schedule delays. requirements and other environmental risks may become too time-consuming and costly for the private sector to address. The public sector may best be retained by the public sector given its stewardship role within the government. According to officials we interviewed, although the Canada Line’s concession agreement transferred all key construction risks (i.e., cost overruns) to theprivate sector, the public authority retained risks associated with permitting. Further, for one early highway public- private partnership in California, the project sponsor attempted to transfer environmental permitting risk to the privatesector.