Army Guard members enlist for 8 years and are entitled to a number of benefits while serving in the Army Guard. Nonfederalized Army Guard members’ pay and allowances are paid with state funds while federalized Army Guards pay is paid with federal funds. After their enlistment periods, former Army Guards are eligible for veterans’ benefits, such as health care and burial benefits. The Army Guard is required to attend one drill weekend each month and one annual training period (usually 2 weeks) each month and one annual training period (usually 2 weeks in the summer) each year. The Army Guard has armories and training facilities in more than 2,800 communities. The Guard is a partner with the active Army and the Army Reserves in fulfilling its mission to protect and defend the U.S. Constitution and the nation's sovereignty. It is a volunteer organization that is part of the Army National Guard system. It was formed in 1863 and has been in existence ever since. It has its own headquarters in Fort Leavenworth. We focused on 14 basic types of pays and allowances applicable to Army Guard units we selected for case studies. We categorized these 14 pay and allowance types into two groups: (1) pays, including basic pay, special duty assignment pay, parachute jumping and foreign language proficiency skill-based pays, and location-based hostile fire and hardship duty pays. (2) allowances, including allowances for housing, subsistence, family separation, and cost of living for the continental United States. In this case study, we focused on the basic pay and allowances. Army Guard soldiers may be eligible for tax advantages associated with their mobilization to active duty. mobilized Army Guard soldiers assigned to or working in a combat zone are entitled to exclude from taxable income certain military pay that would otherwise be taxable. As shown in figure 1, there are three key phases associated with starting and stopping relevant pays and allowances for mobilized Army Guards. These include initial mobilization (primarily through the Soldier Readiness Processing), deployment, and carrying out assigned mission operations while on duty.and cost of living for the continental United States. Army Guard soldiers earn various statutorily authorized pays and allowances while on active duty. The types of pay and allowances Army Guard soldiers are eligible to receive vary depending upon rank and length of service, dependency status, skills and certifications acquired, duty location, and the difficulty of the assignment. The Army Guard also supported federal peacekeeping operations in Southwest Asia with Operation Desert Spring and in Kosovo with Operation Joint Guardian under various other military operations. While Army GuardSoldiers mobilized to active duty may be eligible for certain types of allowances. Each adjutant general reports to the governor of the state, or in the case of the District of Columbia, the mayor. The Army Guard’s state mission is perhaps the most visible and well known. Army Guard units battle fires or help communities deal with floods, tornadoes, hurricanes, snowstorms, or other emergency situations. In times of civil unrest, the citizens of a state can call up members of the Army Guard in times of domestic emergency or need. For more information, visit the U.S. Army National Guard website. During national emergencies, the President has the authority to mobilize the Army Guard. While federalized, the units answer to the Combatant Commander of the theatre in which they are operating and, ultimately, to the President. The Army Guard has a federal mission to maintain properly trained and equipped units, available for prompt mobilization for war, national emergency, or as otherwise needed. Nonfederalized Army Guard members’ pay and allowances are paid, and the Guard is funded through state and local sources. The Army Guard is the oldest component of any of the uniformed services. It traces its roots to the colonial militia, and claims a “birth”of 1636. Today, the Army Guard exists in 54 locations that include all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and three territories: Guam, the Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico. During peacetime, Army Guard units report to the adjutant generals of their states or territories, or in the case of the District, to the Commanding General. The National Guard Bureau (NGB) assists the Army Guard in this partnership. NGB is a joint bureau of the Departments of the Army and the Air Force and is charged with overseeing the federal functions of theArmy Guard and Air Guard. All Army forces are integrated under DOD’s “total Army forces’ ‘total Army’ policy. N GB also acts as a liaison between the Department of the. Army and Air Force, and the states. It helps the Army. Guard and the. Air Guard procure funding and administer policies. The Mississippi Army National Guard’s 114th Military Police Company was called to active duty in support of Operation Noble Eagle on December 27, 2001. The unit mobilized in Clinton, Mississippi, and departed for Fort Campbell, Kentucky, on January 6, 2002. On June 10, 2002, the unit deployed to Guantanamo pay records and reported the error. Following his discharge, this soldier continued to receive active duty pay until August 31, resulting in an overpayment. The majority of soldiers from the company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more phases of the three phases of their active duty. Police units mobilized to active duty in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom during the period from October 2001 through March 2003. We chose California, Colorado, Maryland, Mississippi, Virginia, and West Virginia. From these six states, we selected three special forces and three military police units that had a variety of deployment locations and missions. We also identified and performed a limited review of the pay experiences of a unit still deployed during the time of our review; Colorado’s 220th Military Police Company. The purpose of our limited review was to assess the effectiveness of the controls over active duty pays in place for those units. Six units were deployed to various locations in the United States and overseas in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. In addition, we conducted a limited review of the pay experiences of a seventh unit mobilized more recently and deployed to Iraq in April 2003. The Colorado Army Guard’s 220th Military Police Company was one of the six case study units. These case studies are presented to provide a more detailed view of the problems faced by the units in our study. The study was conducted from October 1, 2001 through March 31, 2003. immediate threat of further attacks on the United States. At that time, Army Guard soldiers accounted for 34 percent of the total reserve components mobilized in response to the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001. The Secretary of Defense delegated to the Secretary of the Army the authority to order Army Guard soldier to active duty as part of the overall mobilization effort. Approximately 93,000 Army Guard troops were activated as of March 2003. The active duty component of the U.S. Army National Guard is known as the Army Reserve. Missions to fight terrorism outside the U.S. were categorized under Operation Enduring Freedom, while missions to provide domestic defense were categorized as Operation Noble Eagle. For example, Army Guard soldiers participated in direct combat in Afghanistan under OperationEnduring Freedom. U.s. homeland security missions, such as guarding the Pentagon, airports, nuclear power plants, domestic water supplies, bridges, tunnels, and other military assets were conducted under OperationNoble Eagle. The active duty federal missions established in response to the September 2001 national emergency were categorized into two operations. DOD’s total force concept is based on the premise that it is not practically feasible to maintain active duty forces sufficient to meet all possible war contingencies. On September 14, 2001, the President declared a national emergency as a result of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon and the continuing and immediate threat of further attacks. Under this concept, DOD's active and reserve components are to be blended into a cohesive total force to meet a given mission.the states. All Army forces are integrated under the “total force” concept. reported unpaid debt balance was $26,806, but the actual amount of his debt remained unresolved. On January 2, 2002, the Virginia Army National Guard’s B Company, 3rd Battalion, 20th Special Forces, was called to active duty in support of Operation Enduring Freedom for a 1-year tour. The unit in-processed at Fort Pickett, Virginia, and departed for Fort Bragg, North Carolina, in May 2002. In early May 2002, B Company deployed to Afghanistan to perform search and destroy missions against al Qaeda and Taliban terrorists. The 19th Special Forces Group, 2nd Battalion, C Company, was called to active duty in support of Operation Enduring Freedom for a 1-year tour. The unit was mobilized at Fort Knox and subsequently deployed in Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and surrounding areas to search for possible Taliban and al Qaeda terrorists. A timeline of the unit’s actions associated with its mobilization under Operation Endured Freedom is summarized in figure 12. As summarized in table 12, the majority of the family members involved were from West Virginia. The 114th Military Police Company deployed to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to perform base security and guard duties for Taliban and al Qaeda prisoners. After guarding detainees in Cuba for approximately 6 months, the unit returned to Fort Campbell in late November 2002. At Fort Campbell the unit out-processed and returned to Clinton, Mississippi, and was released from active duty on January 5, 2003. At every stage of the unit’s 1-year tour of active duty, soldiers experienced some sort of pay problem. Colorado Army National Guard’s B Company, 5th Battalion, 19th Special Forces was mobilized to active duty on orders for a 2-year period. The unit was mobilized at Fort Knox and subsequently deployed in Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and surrounding areas to search for Taliban and al Qaeda. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9505. Overall, all 62 soldiers with the company had at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization. These pay problems included not receiving entitled pays and allowances at all; not receiving some entitled pay and allowances within 30 days; and for some, overpayments of pays and allowance. As summarized in table 12, the majority of soldiers from C Company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more of the three phases of their active duty mobilization. Overall, 86 of the 94 soldiers in the company experienced at least a pay problem. Of 119 soldiers of the Mississippi Army National Guard’s 114th Military Police Company, 105 experienced at least one pay problem associated with mobilization in support of Operation Noble Eagle. Pay problems included not receiving pays and allowances at all (underpayments), receiving some pay and allowances over 30 days after entitlement (late payments), and the overpayment of allowances. In total, we identified estimated overpayments of $74,000, underpayments, and late payments of $10,000. Almost all soldiers from the 49th Military Police Company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more phases of the active duty mobilization. Overall, 50 of the 51 soldiers with the unit had at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization to active duty and the Fort Lewis Finance Office. In total, 48 out of 51 soldiers did not receive certain pay and allowances and incentive pays at all, or did not received them within 30 days after being mobilized on October 2, 2001. The unit was demobilized from active duty at Fort Lewis on July 28, 2002. Sixty-two soldiers from the unit were overpaid their entitled subsistence allowance by active Army finance personnel. The soldiers were stationed at Fort Stewart and were not provided lodging or mess and properly received the full subsistence allowance. When the unit was redeployed to.and pay the soldier a “catch-up” housing allowance payment. As summarized in table 22, we identified a number of pay problems associated with five different types of active duty pays and allowances associated with the unit’s deployment. soldiers who were released from active duty on September 30, 2002 (the original date for the unit’s demobilization, designated on the mobilization orders). However, as shown in table 23, we did identify three soldiers who continued to receive active duty pay after their early release. Specifically, the three soldiers from the unit returned from Cuba, demobilized at Fort Stewart, and were released on July 10, 2002, while their original orders showed a September 30,. 2002, release date. Enlisted soldiers are not entitled to the full subsistence allowance when mess facilities are provided. In January 2002, three soldiers who received mobilization orders from the 200th MP Company left Fort Stewart and traveled with the 115th Military Police Company to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to assist with base security and guard duties. While in Cuba, the soldiers received the full allowance. The unit was redeployed to the Pentagon, and mess facilities became available. However, active Army finance personnel did not reduce the unit’s subsistence allowance rate to reflect the available mess facilities. The unit performed general military police guard duties at Fort Stewart until December 15, 2001, when 87 of the soldiers in the unit were deployed to guard the Pentagon. The company arrived at Ft. Eustis, Virginia, in late August 2002 and was released from active duty on September 30, 2002. In addition, 3 of the 90 soldiers who received orders from the 200th Military Police Company were discharged from the Army in September 2002. The unit is now based at Fort Campbell, Kentucky. The 49th Military Police Headquarters and Headquarters Detachment (HHD) was mobilized to active duty for a period not to exceed 24 months. The unit performed its active duty mission at Fort Lewis, where it provided base security as part of the military police force. The 49th MP HHD mobilized at its home station, Pittsburg, California, and then proceeded to its designated mobilization station, Fort Lewis on October 12, 2001. Fort Stewart did not provide the amended orders with the earlier release date in time to stop the pay.and allowances through July 15, 2002. Only two knowledgeable military pay officials were present to support active duty pay transaction processing for the 51 soldiers mobilized for his unit. The assigned pay technician initially failed to enter transactions to start pay and allowances for a significant number of the unit’s soldiers because the supporting documentation was misplaced. The Fort Lewis finance office asked the California USPFO to supply additional personnel and temporarily reassigned soldiers from other units stationed at Fort Lewis to assist in the pay processing. The company commander for the unit said he was frustrated with the level of customer support his unit received as it moved through the initial mobilization process. We identified a number of pay problems associated with the unit’s mobilization to active duty. Failures to enter transactions or late entry of transactions needed to start active duty pays were the initial cause of the pay problems. We also found that the underlying cause was a lack of sufficient numbers of knowledgeable personnel at the California USPFO and the Fort Lewis Finance Office. The Fort Lewis finance office lacked sufficient number of knowledgeable military pay staff to expeditiously enter the large volume of transactions necessary to begin active duty pay. USPFO officials were unable to provide sufficient documentation to explain why 3 soldiers appeared not to have received cost of living allowance payments due them for a 2-month period. An Army pay technician at the Fort Lewis finance office entered the incorrect code, thereby paying a soldier the wrong type of allowance. California’s 49th Military Police Company demobilized at Fort Lewis on July 28, 2002, and returned to its home station in Pittsburg, California. We did not identify any pay problems for this unit in the demobilization. unit’s initial mobilization included basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence,basic allowance for housing, family separation allowance, and the continental United States cost of living allowance. The late payments during the mobilization phase primarily resulted from California USPFO military pay personnel’S lack of understanding of their responsibility for initiating active duty pays. According to DFAS reserve component mobilization procedures; the California US PFO was responsible for initiating these pays. However, a USPfo military pay official mistakenly instructed the unit to take its pay data to the mobilization station to enter transactions to start active duty pay. In 1995, the Army decided to process pays to mobilized Army Guard soldiers from the DJMS-RC system rather than the active Army payroll system. At this time, the supporting USPFO is responsible for discontinuing monthly input of all nonautomated pays and allowances. If the demobilization station did not take action to return a soldier to a demobilized status, the state USPfo has this responsibility. The Army decided in 1995 to process pay to mobilized soldiers from a different system than the one used to pay mobilized soldiers previously. Each of these soldiers to receive active duty pay for 10 days. Several other soldiers received promotions at the time of their mobilization. State military pay personnel at the USPFO did not enter transactions for the promotions until several months later, resulting in late promotion pay to the affected soldiers. Delays by the unit in submitting the promotion paperwork or by the state personnel office in entering the promotion papers into the personnel system caused these problems. However, supporting documents were not available to enable us to determine the specific cause of the delays. for subsistence, basic allowance for housing, family separation allowance, and location-based pays such as hardship duty pay. 3 soldiers experienced pay problems during their demobilization from Fort Stewart related to continuation of active duty pay entitlements after they were released early from active duty. We identified a number of causes associated with these pay problems, including delays in submitting documents, incorrect data entry, and limited personnel to process the mass mobilizations. Maryland’s USPFO officials told us they had not experienced a large-scale mobilization to active duty in more than 10 years. Colorado’s B Company demobilization was complicated by the fact that the unit did not demobilize through the same active Army location used to mobilize the unit. Some soldiers in the unit told us that upon their return from overseas deployments, they were informed that they should have corrected these problems while in- theater, despite the fact these problems were not detected until the demobilized phase. Fort Campbell finance office personnel we interviewed were not present during B Company’S demobilizations. soldiers, the finance office inadvertently overlooked entering one or more monthly hardship duty payments. Five soldiers continued to receive active duty pay and allowances after being discharged or returned from active duty. Instead of demobilizing on schedule with their unit, these five soldiers demobilized individually earlier due to various reasons. 85 of 88 soldiers of the 114th Military Police unit’s soldiers continued receiving the incorrect certain places payments through their last day of active duty, according to DFAS guidance. The 114th Military Police Company returned to Fort Campbell on November 23, 2002, to begin the demobilization process. C Company returned to Fort Campbell during the fall of 2002 to begin the demobilization process. By October 2002, all of the unit had returned from overseas and was demobilized on December 4, 2002. 66 of C Company’s 94 soldiers experienced pay problems associated with their demobilizing from active duty. In October 2002,. eligible soldiers in the unit were entitled to a special duty assignment pay increase from $110 per month to $220 per month. To initiate this higher pay rate, the. specific cause of the delays. After leaving the unit’s home station, the 114th Military Police Company traveled to Fort Campbell, its active Army mobilization station. At this point, because the soldiers had only recently mobilized and had not received their first paychecks, they were unaware of pay problems. Failure to follow requirements for finance verification at Fort Campbell caused pay problems to persist past the mobilization stage. In addition, we were unable to determine specific causes for certain pay problems associated with the unit's mobilization because the unit remobilized in February 2003. 39 of the unit’s 62 soldiers continued to receive active duty pay and allowances, some until February 14, 2003. One of these soldiers was discharged early because of drug-related charges. However, his pay continued for 3 months past his discharge date. In at least one case in which documentation was available, state USPFO military pay personnel did not immediately detect the overpayments in monthly pay system mismatch reports. For these five soldiers, overpayment continued for up to 3 months. Campbell finance personnel were either unaware of their capability or unwilling to take the actions needed to address the unit's active duty pay concerns. Colorado’s B Company soldiers turned back to the USPFO for assistance. In one case, a soldier's spouse had to obtain a $500 grant from the Colorado National Guard in order to pay bills while her husband was on active duty. Such pays were started more than 30 days after the date they were entitled to receive such pays, according to the report. associated with four types of active duty pays and allowances associated with the unit’s deployment while on active duty. While at Fort Campbell, eight soldiers experienced problems resulting from delays in entering changes in the family separation allowance, basic allowance for housing, and active duty pay increases from promotions. For example, one soldier was promoted to the rank of Private First Class at the end of May, but the pay system did not reflect the promotion until October. Although the soldier eventually received retroactive promotion pay, the delay caused the soldier to be paid at her old rank for 5 The Mississippi Army National Guard was mobilized in January 2002. The unit stayed at Fort Campbell to perform post security duties until June 2002. On June 14, 2002, the E-4 specialist received a "general" discharge order for a drug-related offense. He continued to receive active duty pay, totaling approximately $9,400, until September 2002. Although the discharge information was promptly entered into the soldier's personnel records, it was not entered in the pay system for almost 4 years.. $220 per month. To initiate this higher pay rate, the West Virginia Army National Guard military personnel office was required to cut new special duty assignment pay orders for all eligible C Company soldiers. USPFO officials stated that they could not pay the increased amount until they received a copy of the new orders. However, the orders for the soldiers were not received received for several months, which created a delay in the payment of the soldiers’ special duty assignments pay. 63 soldiers received their last 3 months of specialduty assignment pay over 30 days late. Virginia’s B Company attended a soldier readiness program at the USPFO at Fort Pickett, Virginia. According to U.S. Army Forces Command Regulation 500-3-3, these 1996. problems should have been corrected. Some of these long-standing pay problems had been resolved. For example, over $22,500 was processed for 52 B Company soldiers' and included in soldiers’ pay distributions from October 2001 to March 2003, the report says. The Army says it has been working with a sergeant from B Company who performed a detailed analysis. Soldiers not submitting the correct paperwork at the time of the Soldier Readiness Program caused some payments to be late. For example, according to the USPFO, one soldier did not submit the proper paperwork for his family separation allowance. The delay caused the soldier's pay to be paid late. This program was intended to ensure that all soldiers had proper administrative paperwork and financial documents and were physically fit for the ensuing mobilization. The program was conducted by the U.S. Army Pay Office. as specified in the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 26. The purpose of this review was to ensure that all soldiers had proper administrative paperwork and financial documents and were physically fit for the ensuing mobilization. Mississippi USPFO personnel, who conducted the finance portion of the 114th Military Police unit’s soldier readiness program, were required to verify soldiers’ supporting financial documentation. Not submitting the complete and current paperwork at the time of the mobilization was a violation of the FMR. In May 2002, Virginia’s B Company left Fort Bragg and traveled to Afghanistan to assist in missions against al Qaeda and Taliban forces. While in Afghanistan, the soldiers encountered additional pay problems related to hardship duty pay, special duty assignment pay, and, to a lesser extent, hostile fire pay and basic pay. Table 10 summarizes the pay problems we identified for the unit while it was deployed. Once the soldiers arrive in-theater, of pay were made when B Company returned in October 2002. hostile fire and hardship duty overpayments were occurring and took action to terminate the payments. Four members of Virginia’s B Company, who were injured while deployed in Afghanistan, returned to Fort Bragg and requested medical extensions to their active duty tours. One of the soldiers told us, “People did not know who was responsible for what. No one knew who to contact or what paperwork was needed.” To support themselves and their families, these four soldiers needed the active duty military pay they needed. detailed analysis of soldiers’ long-standing pay problems. This sergeant performed these pay-related tasks in addition to his mission- related duties as a professional engineer. After leaving the unit’s home station, B Company traveled to Fort Bragg, its active Army mobilization station. According to USPFO officials and active Army finance office officials, problems with jump pay have been a problem for the unit since January 2002 for the majority of their mobilization. The unit is currently deployed in Afghanistan. not for the remaining months of his deployment. Some soldiers in B Company left Afghanistan during August and September 2002. Most of the unit returned to Fort Bragg in October 2002 to begin the demobilization process. 57 soldiers continued to receive pays to which they were no longer entitled because they left Afghanistan. According to DOD mobilization procedures, the finance office at the servicing demobilized station is to conduct a finance out-processing. The finance office is responsible for inputting transactions to stop certain location-based payments. the more accurate list continued to receive HALO pay. Problems with HALO and family separation pay were not resolved for several months after the mobilization. As a result, the soldiers’ pay problems persisted into their deployment overseas. The unit’s soldiers were confused about whether they were receiving all their entitled active duty pays while mobilized. It does not appear that the active Army finance office at Fort Knox carried out its responsibility to review and validate all of C Company soldiers' active duty pay and allowance support records. C Company soldiers traveled to Uzbekistan and Afghanistan to perform special forces missions. Soldiers consistently experienced problems related to specific location-based payments such as hostile fire pay and hardship duty pay. In 78 cases, the payments were not started within 30 days from when the soldiers left the U.S. C Company soldiers consistently experienced issues with location- based payments. In 58 cases, they experienced problems with hostile firepay and hardshipduty pay. The problems were related to three different types of active duty pays related to the unit's deployment. the payments were not started within 30 days from when the soldiers were entitled to the payments. In 22 other cases, we determined that soldiers had not received all location-based pays as of March 31, 2003. In 60 cases, the Soldiers were overpaid or payments werenot stopped when they left the combat zones. Due to the lack of supporting documents at the state, unit, and battalion-levels, dates for when each soldier entered and left combat zones were not always available. Consequently, there may have been other deployment-related pay problems for C Company that we were not able to address. A West Virginia soldier took several days away from his unit to get location-based pay started for both the West Virginia and Colorado special forces units. We were also told that some members of the unit used their satellite radios to attempt to resolve their pay problems while deployed in Afghanistan. In addition, several of the units’ soldiers told us their ability to identify and correct pay problems was impaired by time away from their units. The U.S. military has more than 100,000 troops in Afghanistan and the region surrounding the country. around Afghanistan at that time and the dates they arrived in country with him as support for starting the unit’s in theater-based pays. Finally, at Kuwait the appropriate in-theater pays were activated and the two soldiers returned to Afghanistan. The entire trip required interim stops at eight locations because of limited air transportation and took about a week. Despite this costly, time-consuming, and risky procedure to start location- based pays for the unit, 63 of Virginia's B Company soldiers, who became eligible for hardship duty pay in May 2002, did not receive their location-based pay entitlements. Guard in order to pay bills while her husband was on active duty. Some soldiers in Colorado’s B Company received these pays sporadically, were not paid at all, were paid but for inexplicable dollar amounts, or were overpaid their entitled active duty pays. Soldiers told us they spent significant amounts of time and effort trying to correct the pay problems while deployed on critical mission operations in Afghanistan and surrounding areas. A frequent complaint we received from soldiers concerned the circular nature of any attempts to get assistance on pay issues while deployed overseas. Soldiers from Colorado’s B Company say recurring pay problems play a major role in their decision whether to reenlist. Having two-thirds of their monthly training paychecks garnished to pay off often erroneous payroll-related debts, and receiving poor payroll customer service during their active duty tours adversely affects morale. For example, a unit official advised us that as of September 30, 2003, three soldiers had left B Company primarily due to frustration, he said. The U.S. Army National Guard is the second-largest military service in the world. pay in May 2002, not receive their location-based pay entitlements until July 2002. Problems with special duty assignment pay also occurred during the unit’s deployment. We found that both underpayments and overpayments of this type of pay were made as a result of confusion about who was responsible for making the manual monthly transactions necessary for entitled soldiers in the unit to receive these pays. For example, 10 soldiers in B Company did not receive at least 1 month of entitled special duty assignments pay. B Company submitted the necessary documentation certifying that the unit’s soldiers were entitled to receive back pay for missed special assignment duty pays. USPFO officials told us that special duty assignment pay was processed because, having received this certification from the unit, they assumed that payments had not yet been made. We identified 11 B Company soldiers eligible for HALO pay who did not receive 1 or more months of 1/2 to 1/3 of their regular pay for special duty duty duty. The pay problems experienced by Virginia’s B Company were the result of a number of factors, including late submission of required pay support documents, incorrect pay inputs by Army personnel, and an active Army in-theater finance office. Several B Company soldiers we interviewed expressed dissatisfaction with the time and effort they, or their spouses, were required to spend attempting to identify and correct problems with their pay. Another complaint concerned the circular nature of any attempts to correct the problems with the soldiers’ pay. case study unit, 34 soldiers received pay for several months past their official discharge dates. Although records were not available to confirm that these overpayments were reported as discrepancies on monthly mismatch reports, the USPFO military pay supervisor told us that at the time the mismatch reports were not being used to identify and correct pay-affecting errors. As discussed later, a mobilized soldier was released from active duty and discharged from the Army in June 2002, earlier than his planned release date. But, the soldier continuied to involvement in drug- related activities. for 3 months past his discharge date. By the time the USPFO stopped the active duty pay, the former soldier had received overpayments of about $9,400. Another 114th Military Police soldier was returned in an overpayment. Another soldier, facing disciplinary proceedings related to a domestic violence incident, agreed to an early discharge on May 22, 2002. The unit administrative officer, while deployed in Cuba, reviewed the unit commander’s finance report and discovered the soldier still on company pay records. was not entered into the pay system for almost 4 months. This problem was caused by weaknesses in the processes designed to work around the lack of integrated pay and personnel systems. It was not until over 3 months after the soldier's discharge, through its September 2002 end-of-month reconciliation, that the Mississippi Army National Guard USPFO identified the overpayment and took action to stop the individual's pay. However, collection efforts on the $9,400 overpayment did not begin until October 2, 2002. A USPFO pay technician incorrectly coded a soldier’s account to receive a family separation allowance when the soldier had only been on active duty for 2 weeks. This overpayment problem had not been resolved as of March 31, 2003. Five soldiers were unable to provide supporting documentation explaining why they continued to receive an allowance after their active duty tours had officially ended. We identified the payments made to these five soldiers as overpayments. Late, under- and over payments of foreign language proficiency pays resulted from delayed or inadequate data entry. we found. Of the estimated $50,000 in overpayments, we identified about $13,000 that was subsequently collected from the unit’s soldiers. Seventy-five of 90 soldiers from the 200thth Military Police Company did not receive the correct or timely entitlements related to basic pay, basic allowance for housing, and family separation allowance when called to active duty. Thirteen soldiers received over pay because they continued to receive pay after they were released early from active duty, and then received pay again. the complete and current paperwork at the time of the soldier readiness program contributed to some of the late payments we identified. Some soldiers did not receive their family separation allowance because they did not provide documentation supporting custody arrangements. confusion at the USPFO over the eligibility of single parents contributed to these late pays. It was later in the unit’s active duty tour that finance officers initiated action for 11 of the 114th Military Police unit's soldiers to receive retroactive payments, some for as much as 7-months of back pay. Five soldiers improperly received active duty pay and allowances even though they did not mobilize with the unit. In another case, a former Special Forces soldier improperly received jump pay even though his assignment to this military police unit did not require that special skill. For as much as 7-months of back pay, a soldier could receive up to $10,000. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/military/military-pay-pay/stories/stories-military-paid-pay. 30 days, the hostile fire pay or other “high-risk location” pays they were entitled to receive based on their deployment in Uzbekistan and Afghanistan. 53 soldiers either improperly continued to receive hostile fire. pay after leaving high-risk locations overseas or continued to. receive paychecks, as if they were still on active duty status, for over 2 months beyond their release from active duty. In total, we identified estimated overpayments of $494,000, underpayments. of $28,000 and late payments of $64,000. period from October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003. For one unit, these pay problems resulted in largely erroneous debts totaling $1.6 million. 450 of the 481 soldiers from our case study units had at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization to active duty. Of the estimated $74,000 in identified overpayments, we identified about $32,000 that was subsequently collected from the unit’s soldiers. 64 soldiers experienced pay problems during their tour of active duty related to the proper payment of basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, and family separation allowance. For purposes of characterizing pay problems for this report, we defined over- and underpayments as those pays or allowances for mobilized Army Guard soldiers during the period from October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003. We did not include any erroneous debts associated with these payments as pay problems. We provided the support for the pay problems we identified to appropriate officials, at each of our case study locations so that they could fully develop and resolve any additional amounts owed to the government or to the Army Guard. pay who did not receive 1 or more months of this pay as of March 31, 2003. We determined that these problems occurred because such pays require manual monthly input, and the pay technicians inadvertently did not make the required entries each month. We also identified 40 soldiers who received hostile fire pay after they had left the country and were no longer entitled to receive such pays. Although some Company’s soldiers received retroactive payments over 2 months after they should have received their pay, we determined that 18 soldiers from the unit were not yet paid for 1 and more months that they were in the hostile fire zone. Soldiers who perform duty in hostile fire zones are entitled to hostile fire pay as soon as they enter the zone. 45 soldiers in C Company did not have their hostileFire pay started until over 30 days after they were entitled to receive it. Some of C Company’s soldiers received retroactive payments over 2 months after they entered the hostile fire zone. One soldier was put in harm's way by the delay in starting location-based pays for the unit. The U.S. military says the delay put the soldier in danger. Army Guard soldiers had difficulty using the leave and earnings statements to determine if they received all entitled active duty pays and allowances. Soldiers’ pays may appear as lump sum payments under “other credits” on their leave and Earnings statements. Without such basic customer service, the soldiers cannot readily verify that they got all the active duty pay and allowances to which they were entitled, the report says. The Army Guard review found that some of the sergeant’s pays were started up to 2 months late, but others had been paid properly. 55 of 64 soldiers eligible for hostile fire pay were overpaid for at least 1 month beyond their departure from Afghanistan. The Army National Guard Special Forces sergeant believed that he was not receiving certain active duty pays and allowances during his mobilization to active duty in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. The sergeant wrote a letter from Afghanistan to a fellow battalion soldier back in his home state, discussing his pay problems. In the letter, the sergeant stated that he wasn't receiving what he thought he was receiving. The sergeant was killed in action in Afghanistan on April 15, 2002, before he knew if his pay problems were resolved. His letter concluded, “Are they really fixing pay issues or are they putting them off till we return? If they are waiting, then what happens to those who (god forbid) don’t make it back?” The sergeant’s letter also stated he was not receiving his hostile fire pay and combat zone tax exclusion. Our review determined that some of the sergeant's pay problems had been resolved. Soldier did not receive the correct housing allowance amount for the first 2 months of active duty. Soldier attempted to get various unit and military pay officials to take action to initiate back pay for these housing allowance underpayments, including forwarding copies of the lease agreement as proof for payment on three different occasions. Soldier was told that he should have taken care of this issue while he was deployed and that it was now too late to receive in documents. As of March 30, 2003, the soldier had not received the correcthousing allowance for October and November 2001. Finance officials at the active duty station in Fort Belvoir, Virginia, inadvertently entered a transaction to collect the entire amount of the housing allowance previously paid to the soldier. The soldier received the correct housing allowance for October and November 2001. The transaction was reversed and the soldier received a “catch-up” payment. The incident occurred seven months after his initial mobilization to active duty, when the soldier complained to the unit administrator. As a result of the error, the soldier was not paid the correct amount of housing allowance after his mobilization. 42 soldiers from the unit were underpaid their entitled family separation allowance when they mobilized. Soldiers are entitled to receive this allowance after they have been deployed away from home for more than 30 days. Maryland USPFO military pay officials entered the incorrect date for the tour and therefore shortened the unit’s soldiers’ allowance by 1 day. Other soldiers did not receive the correct amount for this allowance as a result of different interpretations of how to enter “dependent” information provided on housing allowance application forms. allowance for housing after being mobilized as specified in the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 26. We were unable to determine specific causes and amounts of all the unit’s problems associated with the basic allowance for housing because the unit had remobilized in July 2003. Some of the historical records relating to housing entitlements applicable to the prior mobilization could not be located. Based on our inquiries, we determined that some soldiers were underpaid their housing allowance because the Maryland unit had been mobilized in 2003. A number of Maryland soldiers were not paid the correct amount. Existing guidance did not clearly specify that simply checking the box indicating that they are married is not sufficient support to receive the higher housing allowance (with dependents) rate. As a result, several soldiers’ dependent information was not loaded into the personnel system correctly. Other soldiers did not receive the correct housing allowance because they did not turn in complete forms and documentation to initiate the correct allowance rate or were late in turning in documents. her unit, or how the USPFO was to take action to validate the status of such soldiers. Data input and eligibility requirements for housing and family separation allowances were not clear, the audit found. A soldier returned early from a deployment when the soldier appeared at a weekend drill while his unit was still deployed. The audit found that procedural guidance was not clear with respect to transaction entry and eligibility requirement for the basic allowance for Housing and Family Separation Allowance (HFCA) for soldiers returning from deployment. Soldiers mobilized on October 1, 2001, and then received amended orders to be released from active duty around October 13, 2001. Many continued to receive basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, basic allowances for housing, and family separation allowance payments through the end of November 2001. The overpayments occurred because the Maryland Army Guard command was not informed by either unit personnel or the active component that individuals (1) did not deploy or (2) were released fromactive duty early. The Maryland Army Guards command generated an amendment on August 21, 2003, to reinstate the original order to avoid future questions. Extension status, soldiers are entitled to continue to receive active duty pays, allowances, and medical benefits while under a physician’s care. At the Virginia 20th Special Forces, B Company, 3rd Battalion, four soldiers were eligible for continued active duty pay and associated medical benefits due to their involvement in Operation Enduring Freedom. Although these injuries precluded them from resuming their civilian jobs, they experienced significant pay problems as well as problems in receiving needed medical care, in part, as a result of the lack of clearly defined implementing procedures. of the lack of clearly defined implementing procedures in this area. All four soldiers experienced pay disruptions because existing guidance was not clear on actions needed to ensure that these soldiers were retained on active duty medical extensions. One of the soldiers told us, “People did not know who was responsible for what. No one knew who to contact or what paperwork was needed….” As a result, all four have experienced gaps in receiving active duty pay and associated medical benefits while they remained under a physician’s care. received while on their original active duty tour. These problems resulted in numerous personal and financial difficulties for these soldiers. “Not having this resolved means that my family has had to make greater sacrifices and it leaves them in an unstable environment,” one soldier said. ‘This has caused great stress on my family that may lead to divorce.’ ‘I feel like no one is really looking after their interest or even cared about them,’ said another soldier who was injured in Afghanistan for Operation Enduring Freedom. Army Regulation 135-381 provides that Army Guard soldiers who are incapacited as a result of injury, illness, or disease that occured while on active duty for more than 30 consecutive days are eligible for continued health benefits. Officials at those active Army locations directed the soldiers back to the USPFO because they were Army Guard. We also found procedures were not clear on how to ensure timely processing of active duty medical extensions for injured Army GuardSoldiers. The finance office at Fort Campbell was not available for comment. wait for them before I went back to work. The whole mess was blamed on the ‘state’ and nothing was ever done to fix it.” One sergeant was required to stay at Womack, the medical facility at Fort Bragg, while on medical extension. His home was in New Jersey. He had not been home for about 20 months, since his call to active duty. While he was recovering from his injuries, his wife was experiencing a high-risk pregnancy and depended upon her husband’s medical coverage. available while he remained in active duty status. Even though she lived in New Jersey, she scheduled her medical appointments near Fort Bragg to be with her husband. Lapses in obtaining approvals for continued active duty medical extension status caused the sergeant’s military medical benefits and his active duty pay to be stopped several times. He told us that because of gaps in his medical extension orders, he was denied medical coverage, resulting in three delays in scheduling a surgery. He said he has since been able to get back on his feet. great stress on my family that may lead to divorce. “My orders ran out while awaiting surgery and the care center tried to deny me care. I called the Inspector General at Walter Reed and my congressman. My orders were finally cut. In the end, I was discharged 2 weeks before my care should have been completed because the second amendment to my orders never came and I couldn’t afford to wait for them before I went back to work.” “I couldn't afford to waiting until I was back at work to get the care I was supposed to get.’ Under current procedures, if a soldier is determined to owe the government money while on active duty, he is assessed a debt. This debt assessment notification procedure is even more egregious when debts, particularly large debts, are assessed in error and up to two-thirds of the soldier’s pay may be garnished to begin repaying the erroneous debt. For example, at our case study units, we found that the only notice several soldiers received when they were erroneously assessed payroll debts was an “Unpaid Debt Balance” buried in the remarks section of his Leave and Earnings Statement. date consistent with the date on the Release from Active Duty Order. In May 2003, DFAS-Indianapolis erroneously processed a payment transaction instead of a debt correction transaction in DJMS-RC. This created a payment of $20,111, which was electronically deposited to the sergeant’s bank account without explanation, while a debt of $30,454 still appeared on his Leave and Earnings Statement. In addition, we found that current procedures used to notify soldiers of large payroll-related debts did not work. of $48,000 per soldier, for a total debt of $1.6 million. Some of the soldiers wanted to settle the debt by writing a check to DFAS. They were told not to because the exact amount of each soldier’s debt could not be readily determined. Some soldiers now returned from active duty, resumed participation in monthly training, and began having two-thirds of their drill pay withheld and applied to offset their largely erroneous debt balances. We were told that it would take approximately 4 to 5 years for the soldiers to pay off these debts using this approach. Pay technicians at either a USPFO or an active Army finance office made errors in amending existing orders. These errors resulted in establishing virtually all prior pays made under the original orders as debts. We identified over $1 million in largely erroneous debt transactions as a result of breakdowns in this area. We found instances at two of our case study locations in which military pay technicians made errors. At the Colorado case study location, we found instances in which pay technicians at both a US PFO and active Army Finance Office made Errors in Amending active duty orders. system edits to prevent large debts from being assessed without review and approval prior to being processed. Our case studies identified individuals who received debt notices in excess of $30,000 with no explanation. At five of the 6 units audited, we identified 86 individuals who had total pay and allowance debts of approximately $300,000 as of March 31, 2003. A sergeant with the Colorado Army National Guard, Special Forces, encountered numerous severe pay problems associated with his mobilization. The sergeant was able to return to his unit. As of the end of our audit fieldwork in September 2003, the problems at the Colorado Special Forces unit had not been resolved. DOD officials did advise us that, as a result of our work, they implemented a software change on September 18, 2003, intended to help avoid such problems in the future. New warning messages have been added to JUSTIS that will appear when a transaction is entered to cancel or amend a tour of duty. The new warnings will advise of the $1.6 million debt. finding resulting from the further investigation of improper payments found in our 1993 audit of Army military payroll. The inaccurate, late, and missing pays and associated erroneous debts found during our current audit had a profound financial impact on individual soldiers and their families. DOD erroneously billed 34 soldiers in a Colorado National Guard Special Forces unit an average of $48,000 each. Some soldiers did not receive payments for up to 6 months after mobilization and others still had not received certain payments by the conclusion of our audit work. As a result of confusion over responsibility for entering transactions associated with a Colorado soldier's promotion, the soldier’s spouse had to obtain a grant to pay bills while her husband was in Afghanistan. 34 soldiers received notice on their Leave and Earnings Statements that they owed the government an average of approximately $48,000 per soldier, for a total largely erroneous debt of $1.6 million. Personnel at the Colorado USPFO inadvertently revoked the soldiers’ original mobilization orders when attempting to amend the orders to reflect the unit’s actual release date of December 4, 2002. Although we informed DOD of this, we were not informed that the soldiers were actually released 1 year before the original date. estimated $494,000 in overpayments, we identified about $88,000 that was subsequently collected from the soldiers of Colorado’s B Company. Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) billed 34 of the unit's soldiers an average of $48,000 each, for a largely erroneous total debt of over $1.6 million. Many soldiers with the company characterized the service they received from the state United States Property and Fiscal Office (USPFO) and the active Army finance offices while deployed in Afghanistan. failure to stop location-based and other active duty pays and allowances for the unit’s soldiers resulted in overpayments. Colorado USPFO inadvertently revoked the soldiers’ pay and allowances. As a result of the errors made, large debts were created for many soldiers in the unit. We interviewed soldiers who were not present during B Company's demobilization and had no knowledge of why pay was not stopped during the demobilized process. We also interviewed members of the unit who were present but did not know why pay wasn’t stopped. The unit commander for C Company did not provide the USPFO with a list of the unit members who were eligible to receive HALO pay. The error caused debts on soldiers’ accounts but was corrected immediately after a pay supervisor detected the error in February. The delay in submission caused his first payment to be over 3 months late. In addition to the 7 soldiers who were actually on the HALO team, 10 other soldiers were on the initial list given to the U.S. Pay Office. did not receive certain types of pay at all, were not paid in a timely manner, or were overpaid after being activated on January 2, 2002. Problems with jump pay and foreign language pay occurred because the necessary documentation to support jump pay eligibility or language proficiency for a number of soldiers was not always provided to the USPFO or the mobilization station. For example, of the 8 soldiers in the unit who were underpaid for jump pay, 4 did not receive jump pay until mid- February 2002. In another instance, we identified 10 soldiers who were eligible to receive foreign language proficiency pay in January 2002. pay, foreign language proficiency pay, and high altitude low opening (HALO) pay. Army area servicing finance offices are responsible for entering into DMO hardship duty pay, for deployed soldiers entitled to these types of pays. However, because pay transactions must be manually entered every month soldiers are entitled to receive these pays, it is often difficult to ensure that mobilized soldiers receive their entitled nonautomated pays and allowances. For example, we found a number of instances in which soldiers were underpaid. eligible to receive foreign language proficiency pay in January 2002, but did not receive payments for 1 or more months after they became eligible. Seven of the nine soldiers eligible for HALO pay received both jump pay as well as HALo pay during January 2002. These overpayments occurred because Fort Bragg, unaware that the USPFO had previously processed HALO. pay for these soldiers, processed HAL O pay a second time, based on supporting documentation received from the unit. Documentation was not available to the unit’s soldiers. Also, we found that two soldiers, who were not eligible to receive HALOPay, received HALO Pay for 3 months. 56 out of 62 soldiers did not receive certain pays and allowances at all, or in a timely manner, after being activated on December 5, 2001. We found that some soldiers received payments over 5 months late and other soldiers had been overpaid. We also found that these pay problems were exacerbated by breakdowns in customer service. Prior to being mobilized, the soldiers in C Company attended a soldier readiness program at their unit armory. This program was intended to ensure that the soldiers were ready for active duty. dates, or (3) being paid twice during a pay period. Each month, DFAS Indianapolis pay personnel receive an Electronic Fund Transfer Excess Dollar Listing after the electronic fund transfer payment has been processed. DJMS-RC does not contain edit checks to reject payments over the threshold amounts or to require review and approval of payments over these amounts prior to their final processing. In addition, our analysis showed 76 other payroll-related payments during the period October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003, of over $7,000 (net) each. DJMS-RC lacks effective edits to reject large proposed net pays over $4,000 at midmonth and over $7,000 before their final processing. DOD established these thresholds to monitor and detect abnormally large payments. The lack of preventive controls over large payments poses an increased risk of fraudulent payments. We found several instances in our case studies in which soldiers received large lump sum payments, probably related to previous underpayments or other pay errors, with no explanation. As a result of the weaknesses detect abnormality large payments, we found. USPFO pay technicians failed to enter transactions into DJMS-RC in a timely manner for four soldiers resulting in late foreign language proficiency payments. USPFO officials were unable to provide sufficient documentation to explain why five other soldiers continued to receive basic pay after their active duty tours had ended. Late payment, underpayment, and overpayment of cost of living allowances resulted from the inability of DJ MS-RC to pay certain active duty pays and allowances automatically, inaccurate data entry, and inadequate documentation retention practices. duty, but would remain on the DJMS-RC system. Maintaining such outdated references in current policies may have contributed to confusion by USPFO and active Army finance personnel. The lack of sufficient numbers of well-trained, competent military pay professionals can undermine the effectiveness of even a world-class integrated pay and personnel system. We found weaknesses, including (1) insufficient resources allocated to pay processing, (2) inadequate training related to existing policies and procedures, and (3) poor customer service. Lacking sufficient numbers of personnel undermines the ability of the USPFO pay functions to carry out established control procedures. No independent reviews of proposed pay transactions before they were submitted to DJMS-RC for processing. A USPfo official told us that because of the limited number of pay technicians available to process, the review process was not carried out as required by operating procedures. The report was published by the Institute for Fiscal Studies and Democracy, a think tank based in Washington, D.C. DJMS-RC pay records at least monthly. Lacking specific written policies and procedural requirements for such reconciliations, several of the case study locations we audited established a standard, but undocumented, practice of SIDPERS and DJMS- RC mismatch reports. We found that although all the USPFOs. told us they received monthly SIDpERS and. DJ MS-RC mismatch reports, they did not always fully reconcile and. make all necessary system corrections each month. The Master Military Pay Account (MMPA) is the central pay record repository in DJMS-RC for each soldier. While deployed on active duty, there are several Army Guard (USPFO), active Army, and DFAS components involved in paying mobilized Army Guard personnel. The active Army servicing finance office, which may be within the United States or in a foreign country, is responsible for initiating pays earned while the soldier is deployed, such as hostile fire pay and hardship duty pay. Upon completion of an active duty tour, soldiers normally return to the same Army. payments to soldiers beyond their authorized active duty status. Human intervention is required when a pay or allowance error is detected or an event occurs that requires a change in the soldier’s pay and personnel file. A change in dependent status, such as marriage or divorce, a promotion, jump pay disqualification, or being demobilized before an active duty tour ends would change or eliminate some of the pays and allowances a soldier would be entitled to receive. All pays and allowance and subsequent changes are documented in the Master Military Pay Account (MMPA)—the central pay record repository. or revoked orders that were entered into SIDPERS but were not entered into DJMS-RC. We also found instances in which personnel pay-affecting changes such as changes in family separation allowance, basic allowance for housing, and active duty pay increases from promotions, weren't entered into the pay system promptly. Consequently, these soldiers either received active duty pays they were not entitled to receive—some for several months—or did not timely receiveactive duty pays to which they were entitled. A soldier with the Mississippi Army National Guard was overpaid due to a lack of Integrated Pay and Personnel Systems. DJMS-RC was originally designed to process payroll payments to Army Reserve and Army Guard personnel on weekend drills or on short periods of annual active duty. DFAS officials told us that the system is now stretched because it is being used to make payments and allowances that it was not designed for. Army Guard pay technicians relied primarily on on-the-job-training and phone calls to pay technicians are required to manually enter transactions for nonautomated pay and allowances every month. While the Army Guard offers training for their military pay technicians, we found that there was no overall monitoring of Army Guardpay personnel training. We used DJMS-RC pay transaction extracts to identify pay problems associated with our case study units. We did not perform an exact calculation of the net pay soldiers should have received. Rather, we used available documentation and follow-up follow-ups. The information provides further insight into some of the pay experiences of selected Army Guard soldiers who were mobilized under Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. These data collection instruments is not representative of the views of the Army Guard members in these units nor of those of Army Guard member overall. observed and documented procedures and practices followed by the various DOD components involved in providing active duty pays to Army Guard soldiers. We interviewed officials from the National Guard Bureau, State USPFOs, Army and DOD military pay offices, as well as unit commanders to obtain an understanding of their experiences. In addition, as part of our audit, we performed a review of certain edit and validation checks in DJMS-RC. We also obtained documentation on and walk-throughs of the personnel-to-pay system interface process. Army Regulation 37-104-4, dated September 1994, provides that mobilized Army Guard soldiers are to be paid through the active Army pay system. This procedure, in effect during the mobilizations to support Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm, was changed in 1995. In 1995, it was agreed that Army Guard personnel would no longer be moved to the active duty pay system, DJMS-AC, when mobilized to active duty, but would remain on theDJMS-RC system. Maintaining such such a system would be difficult. system workaround procedures at the case study units we audited. For example, for the special forces units weAudited, our analysis disclosed a workaround used to exclude soldiers’ pay from federal taxes while in combat. DJMS-RC was not designed to make active duty pays and exclude federal taxes applicable to those pays in a single pay transaction. To compensate for this system constraint, DFAS established a workaround that requires two payment transactions over a 2-month payroll cycle to properly exempt soldiers' pay for the combat zone tax exclusion. For those soldiers entitled to this exclusion, DJMS-RC withholds federal taxes the first month, identifies the taxes to be refunded during end- of-month pay processing, and then makes a separate payment during the first pay update the following month to refund the taxes that should not have been withheld. Soldiers’ taxes could not be refunding the same month because the DJ MS refund process occurs only one time a month. Army Guard USPFO and in-theatre active Army area servicing finance office pay technicians are required to manually enter transactions for nonautomated transactions. DJMS-RC is an aging, COBOL/mainframe-based system. DFAS established a number of “workarounds’ to compensate for existing DJMS- RC processing limitations. Such manual workarounds are inefficient and create additional labor-intensive, error- prone transaction processing. We observed a number. of such system workaround procedures at the case study units we audited. to expeditiously enter the large volume of transactions necessary to start active duty pay entitlements for the 49th Military Police Company’s soldiers. Also, the. mobilization station finance office assigned an insufficient number of personnel to the task of starting active duty pays. Pay technicians did not understand how to properly code data on the soldiers’ dependents status into the pay system. As a result, we identified cases in which soldiers were underpaid housing allowances to which they were entitled. 16 of the 62 soldiers in B Company received the wrong type of hardship duty pay, formerly called Foreign Duty Pay, in addition to the correct hardship duty location pay while they were deployed in Afghanistan. An Army finance office official told us that handling amounts, or were overpaid their entitled active duty pays and allowances while deployed. DJMS-RC is not programmed to generate automatic payment of certain other types of pay and allowances. Some pays, such as basic active duty pay and jump pay, can be generated automatically. High altitude, low opening jump pay requires manual computation and input of a transaction for payment. Hardship duty pay is scheduled for implementation for April 2004. The small volume of members entitled to this pay has not justified nor provided an adequate return on investment for this automation. A study was conducted of improvement alternatives in the fall. After soldiers complete their initial SRP and receive individual mobilization orders, they travel as a unit to a mobilization station. At the mobilization station, mobilized Army Guard personnel undergo a second SRP review. Mobilization pay technicians are required to promptly initiate pays that were not initiated during the first SRP. If entered correctly, the stop date in DJMS-RC will be the end of active duty tour date documented on the soldier’s mobilization orders. This automated feature is intended to prevent erroneous payments to soldiers beyond their authorized active duty status. USPFO pay technicians use JUSTIS to access and record data in DJMS-RC. Unit commander is responsible for ensuring that all personnel data for each soldier under their command are current. If documentation, such as birth certificates for dependents or parachute jumping certifications, is missing, soldiers have a few days to obtain the necessary documents. If done correctly, soldiers will start to receive basic pay, basic allowances for housing, basic allowance for subsistence, and jump pay automatically based on the start date. Army Guard soldiers’ active duty pays continued after their demobilization. Available documentation showed only one instance in the six case study units we visited in which a reconciliation of the unit commander’s finance report resulted in action to stop improper active duty pay and allowances. The unit was mobilized in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and an administrative clerk reviewed the finance report while the unit was there. The review resulted in the unit stopping the soldier who was previously demobilized from its active duty program. pay is not an automated pay, the active Army finance office at Guantanamo Bay was required to manually enter the “designated areas” payment each month for each soldier. While they were in Cuba, the three soldiers did not receive all their entitled hardship duty pays. The 200th Military Police Company returned to Fort Eustis around the end of August 2002 to begin the demobilization process. We did not identify any pay issues associated with the unit’s soldiers who were released from active duty on September 30. Bay finance office correctly entered transactions to start hardship duty pay for designated areas for the 114th Military Police unit’s soldiers into DJMS-RC. However, unknown to Guantanamo finance personnel, Fort Campbell finance personnel incorrectly initiated recurring certain places hardship duty payments for the soldiers. These payments of both types of hardship duty pays resulted in overpayments to 88 enlisted soldiers. For 11 soldiers, the finance office inadvertently overlooked entering one or more payments. As a result, several soldiers in the unit did not receive one or one monthly hardship duty payment. Most of the 114th Military Police unit’s soldiers were mistakenly provided both types of hardship duty pay while deployed to Cuba. While in Cuba, the soldiers were either underpaid, or were late in receiving their entitled hardship duty pays. Soldiers who perform duties in “designated areas” for over 30 days are entitled to hardshipduty pay. The FMR specifies Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as a designated area and provides payment of $50 a month to soldiers serving there. The local Guantanamo Bay finance office correctly entered transactions to start hardship duty base security and guard duties. soldier to be paid at her old rank for 5 months. According to DFAS guidance, when a change occurs in a soldier’s pay, the on-site Army finance office should input the change. In cases where personnel changes occurred that affected pay, either the soldiers failed to submit documents or personnel at Fort Campbell failed to input the changes. Due to the lack of documentation, we could not determine the origin of the delays. During the unit's deployment to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, the soldiers encountered additional pay problems related to hardship duty pay. the variable housing allowance. The act also replaced foreign duty pay with hardship duty pay. Yet, chapter 8 of Army Regulation 37-104-4 (Military Pay and Allowances Policy and Procedures – Active Component) still refers to foreign dutypay. Further, current DFAS and Army mobilization procedural guidance directs active Army finance units to use transaction codes to start soldiers’ hardship duty pays that are incorrect. However, DOD amended FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 17, to establish a new “designated area” hardshipduty pay with rates of $50, $100, or $150 per month, depending on the area. per month, depending on the area. DFAS guidance dated December 19, 2002, directed mobilization site finance offices to use transaction codes that resulted in soldiers receiving a prior type of hardship duty pay that was eliminated in the December 2001 revisions. 91 of 100 Mississippi military police unit soldiers deployed to Cuba to guard al Qaeda prisoners were paid incorrect amounts of hardshipduty pay. In addition, Army Regulation 37-104-4, dated September 1994, was used to start hardship duty pays for soldiers deployed in Cuba. The FMR provides for two mutually exclusive types of hardship duty pay for identified locations. The regulation specified Afghanistan and Uzbekistan as designated areas and provided for paying $100 a month to each soldier serving there. Some soldiers received extra hardship duty payments, while others were only paid sporadically. In total, only 9 of the 100 soldiers who deployed to Guantanamo Bay with the 114th Military Police Company received the correctly computed hardshipduty pay. The local finance duty pay, a location-based payment for soldiers located at designated hardship duty locations. total of 5 soldiers who missed one or more monthly payments of entitled hardship duty designated area pay. Other soldiers received entitled payments over 9 months late. Still others were paid more than once for the same month or paid after leaving the designated area, resulting in overpayments to 12 soldiers. The mix of erroneous certain places hardship duty payments along with sporadic payments of the correct type of designated area hardship duty pay caused confusion for the soldiers of C Company and their families regarding what types of pay they were entitled to receive. Virginia’s B Company soldiers became concerned that they were not receiving pays they were entitled to while deployed. After attempts to initiate location-based pays at the battalion finance unit in Afghanistan were unsuccessful. Two soldiers were ordered to travel to Camp Snoopy, Qatar, where another Army finance office was located. One of the soldiers told us that they flew to Kuwait because they were advised that the finance unit at that active Army Finance office was more knowledgeable about how to enter the necessary transactions into DJMS-RC. unit while it was deployed. An active Army finance office assigned to the unit is responsible for initiating assignment and location-based pays. The in- theater finance office for Virginia’s B Company, located in Kuwait, did not start these pays as required. We were told that this occurred because finance personnel in Kuwait did not know that B Company had arrived in Afghanistan. We found that the active Army in-theater finance offices did not always know which units they were responsible for servicing or their location. Soldier was ordered to travel to Camp Doha, Kuwait, to have the unit's location-based pays started. DFAS policy clearly states that it is the active Army in-theater finance office’s responsibility to start and maintain monthly payments. This trip proved to be not only a major inconvenience to the sergeant, but was also life-threatening. The soldier stated that he traveled to Camp. Doha because he was told that the finance unit at that active Army. finance location was responsible. The sergeant left Uzbekistan for the 4-day trip to Kuwait. He first flew from Uzbekistan to Oman in a C-130 ambulatory aircraft (carrying wounded soldiers). From Oman, he flew to Masirah Island. The total travel time was 16 hours. At Camp Doha, a reserve pay finance unit was sent from the United States to deal with the reserve component soldiers’ pay issues. The sergeant delivered a box of supporting documents used to input data into the finance office. The sergeant worked with the finance office personnel at Camp Doha to enter the pertinent data on each member of his battalion into DJMS-RC. On his flight between Oman and Uzbekistan, the sergeant’s plane took enemy fire and was forced to return to Oman. No injuries were reported. The next day, he left Oman and returned safely to Uzbekistan. The sergeant returned to the Kuwait International Airport, flew to Camp Snoopy in Qatar, and from there to Oman to return home. entitled automated pays when they were demobilized from active duty. This occurred because pay technicians did not update the stop date in DJMS-RC. For example, the military finance office in Kuwait, which was responsible for paying Virginia 20th Special Forces soldiers in the fall of 2002, did not stop hostile fire and hardship duty pays as required when these soldiers left Afghanistan in October 2002. We found that 55 of 64 soldiers eligible for automated pays were not paid when they left active duty early. stop date for the soldier’s mobilization entered into DJMS-RC. The active Army finance office in Uzbekistan did not amend the stop dates for automated active duty pays. The failure to follow prescribed procedures resulted in overpayment of this pay to 40 soldiers. Per DOD FMR, volume 7A, chapter 17, soldiers who perform duties in designated areas for over 30 days are entitled to the hardship duty pay incentive. The FMR provides for two mutually agreed upon stop dates to be used. The sergeant’s active duty pay and other pay and allowances should have been stopped on December 4, 2002, when he was released from active duty. The Army area servicing finance office at the demobilization station, Fort Campbell, did not enter the release from activeduty date into DJMS-RC. The sergeant continued to be paid for 730 days of active duty instead of the 365 days that he was actually mobilized. He was also paid for his deployment to Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. release from active duty date into DJMS-RC, the sergeant continued to improperly receive payments, as if he were still on active duty. In an attempt to stop the erroneous payments, in February 2003, pay personnel at the Colorado USPFO created a transaction to cancel the tour instead of processing an adjustment to amend the stop date. The sergeant was one of 34 soldiers in the company whose pay continued after their release from activeduty. In total, the soldier was paid over $8,000. DJMS- RC to stop these payments as required. 55 of 64 soldiers eligible for hostile fire pay were overpaid for at least 1 month beyond their departure from Afghanistan. 57 of 64 soldier eligible for hardship duty pay wereoverpaid at least part of 1 month. For some soldiers, payments continued until May 31, 2002 and for others the payments continued. Fort Bragg official explained that the Army finance office personnel were not aware that these payments were still being made after the soldiers had returned to the United States. office is responsible for inputting transactions to stop certain location-based pays, such as hardship duty pay and hostile fire pay. Overpayments to B Company soldiers occurred during demobilization because the in-theater finance office continued to make hostile fire and hardship duty pays after soldiers left Afghanistan in October 2002. The Fort Bragg active Army finance office did not enter transactions into DJMS- RC to stop these payments as required. We found that the Army had overpaid soldiers by more than $100,000. The West Virginia USPFO was told by personnel at DFAS-Indianapolis not to get involved because problems for C Company that we were not able to identify. The local finance office in Uzbekistan did not have the systems up and ready, nor available personnel who were familiar with DJMS-RC. According to DFAS policy, the in-theater finance office was responsible for initiating location-based payments for the unit. Unit personnel stated that the staff in the finance office were not adequately trained in how to input pays. The sergeant took with him all the necessary paperwork to have the pays started for all the companies under the battalion, including C Company. On the return flight from the sergeant’s mission in Kuwait, his plane encountered enemy fire and was forced to return to a safe airport until the next day. The finance unit at that active Army finance location was more knowledgeable in how to enter transactions into DJMS-RC to initiate location-based pays for the unit's soldiers. The failure by active Army personnel at the finance office in Uzbekistan to enter the transactions necessary to start location- based pays was the sergeant's fault. for entering changes to soldiers’ pay records enabled almost simultaneous attempts by two different pay offices to enter pay transactions into DJMS-RC for the same soldier. As shown in the following illustration, at another case study location we found that, in part because of confusion over responsibility for starting location-based pays, a soldier was required to carry out a dangerous multiday mission to correct these payments. A sergeant with the West Virginia National Guard Special Forces unit was stationed in Uzbekistan with the rest of his unit. This page is intentionally left blank. until May 31, 2002 and for others the payments continued until the end of their tour of active duty on December 4, 2002. These erroneous certain places hardship duty pays resulted in overpayments. In addition, because DJMS-RC processing capability limitations required the designated areas payment to be manually entered every month the unit was in the designated area, the in-theater finance office in Uzbekistan failed to consistently enter the monthly designated area payments for all entitled soldiers. Throughout the time C Company was in Uzbekistani and Afghanistan, we identified a total of 5 soldiers who missed one or more monthly payments. Regulation 500-3-3, Reserve Component Unit Commander’s Handbook (July 15, 1999) requires unit commanders to annually review and update pay records for all soldiers under their command. We saw little evidence the commanders of our case study units carried out these requirements. Neither Army Guard unit commanders nor active Army commanders were required to receive training on the importance of the pay to on-board personnel reconciliations. We were told that this was primarily because unit commanders have many such administrative duties, and without additional training they may not receive sufficient priority attention. she had not received any formal training on how to operate JUSTIS when she was assigned to the job. She estimated that she was not fully comfortable with all the required transaction processing procedures until she had been on the job for about 7 years. In addition, unit commanders have significant responsibilities for establishing and maintaining the accuracy of solders’ pay records. U.S. Army Forces Command Regulation 500-3-3, Reserve Component Unit Commander’s Handbook (July 15, 1999) locations we audited showed that state Army Guard personnel were not performing effective reconciliations of pay and personnel record discrepancies each month. One such report concluded, “Failure to reconcile the Personnel/Pay Mismatch listing monthly provides a perfect opportunity to establish fraudulent personnel or pay accounts.” Several of the instances we identified in which soldiers received pay and allowances for many months after their release from active duty likely would have been identified sooner had USPFO military pay personnel investigated the personnel/pay mismatch discrepancies more frequently. and personnel mismatch reports and unit commanders’ finance reports. Available documentation showed that these controls were either not done or were not done consistently or timely. The processing of Army Guard pay relies on systems that are not integrated or effectively interfaced. These after-the-fact detective controls are critical to detecting and correcting erroneous or fraudulent pays. To be effective, the 54 state-level Army Guard commands must individually reconcile common data elements in all54 state-operated personnel databases for Army Guard personnel at least monthly. locations we audited established a standard, but undocumented, practice of reconciling roughly a third of the common data elements every month. However, documentation was not always retained to determine the extent to which these reconciliations were done and if they were done consistently. Our findings are similar to those in reports from Army Guard operational reviews. For example, the most recent reviews at three of the six case study locations showed that state Army Guard personnel were under-represented in the unit's operations. Currently, as a matter of practice, pay and personnel representatives from the USPFO conduct a manual reconciliation. The purpose of the reconciliation is to ensure that for common data elements, the pay and Personnel systems contain the same data. A U.S. Navy official told us that while it is the US PFO’s goal to carry out such reconciliations each month, it currently does not have the resources required to do so. As summarized in table 25, we look at some of the issues that have been raised in the past. GAO: Standards for the timeliness of processing pay transactions are currently in place for units, finance offices, and central site. These standards are focused on the full range of transactions and associated unit level data is generated based on the normal permanent/home station relationship with a Reserve Component Pay Support Office. Within the next 6 months, DFAS and the Army will jointly review how these existing mechanisms can be used to more succinctly capture data specifically related to mobilized soldiers and units. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Army pay office of proper documentation and processing the related pay transaction through the pay system. Some locations had established informal processing targets, for example, 3 days. These lengthy processing delays resulted in late payroll payments to deployed soldiers. The case study units lacked specific written requirements for conducting and documenting monthly reconciliations of pay and personnel mismatch reports and unit commanders’ finance reports. Available documentation indicated lengthy delays in processing pay transactions after pay offices received supporting documentation. The report also found that the Army pay office was not required to provide a written explanation of how it processed pay transactions. errors in entering pay start transactions when they were processing large numbers of Army Guard soldiers during initial mobilizations. Military pay personnel told us that they were able to avoid backlogs by conscripting personnel from other USPFO sections to help in assembling and organizing the extensive paperwork associated with activating appropriate basic pays, entitlements, and special incentive pays for their mobilized soldiers. In addition to concerns about the numbers of personnel onboard at the USPfo military pay offices involved in processing pay transactions for our case study units, we identified concerns over the number of personnel involved. The National Guard Financial Services Center is working with each of the identified units and supporting USPFOs to ensure all pay issues are resolved. The Army and DFAS will continue to work the correction of any specific cases identified as still open for these units. As noted by the GAO, many of the cases identified have already been resolved or involved a delay in payment over 30 days from the date of the report. (p. 77/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur.to review the pay problems we identified at our six case study units. units, we identified numerous instances in which military pay technicians at both the USPFOs and active Army finance office locations made data coding errors. We were told that these errors occurred because military pay personnel were unfamiliar with the system’s pay processing requirements for active duty pays to mobilized Army Guard personnel. Correcting these erroneous transactions required additional labor-intensive research and data entry by other more skilled pay technicians. As discussed previously, we also found that pay technicians did not understand how to properly code. Data collected from Army Guard units mobilized to active duty indicated that some members of the units had concerns with the pay support customer service. Of the soldiers who provided written comments about customer service, none provided any positive comments about the customer service they received. Only two knowledgeable military pay officials were present to support active duty pay transaction processing for the 51 soldiers in our case study. For example, a company commander told us that he was frustrated with the level of customer support his unit received during the initial mobilization process. Unit officials expressed frustration with being routed from one office to another in their attempts to resolve problems with their active duty pays and allowances. Personnel we talked with at the Colorado special forces unit we audited were particularly critical of the customer service they received both while deployed in Afghanistan and when they were demobilized from active duty. For example, a unit administrator told us he contacted.to support active duty pay transaction processing for the 51 soldiers mobilized for his unit. He characterized theCustomer service his unit received at initial mobilization as time consuming and frustrating. None of the DOD, Army, or Army Guard policies and procedures we examined addressed the level or quality of customer service that mobilized Army Guard soldiers should be provided concerning questions or problems with their active duty pays. We identified several sources that soldiers may go to for customer service or information on any such issues. These include reviews and carry out monthly reconciliations. Establish an ongoing mechanism to monitor the quality and completion of training for both pay and finance personnel and unit commanders. Identify and evaluate options for improving customer service. Many Army Guard soldiers were displeased with the customer service they received. Not all soldiers and their families were informed at the beginning of their mobilization of the pays and allowances they should receive while on active duty. This information is available at the USPFO of their home state’s Army Guard, the designated active Army area servicing finance office, and a toll free number, 1-888-729-2769 (Pay Army). We found indications that many soldiers were not informed of this information. they should receive while on active duty. This information is critical for enabling soldiers to identify if they were not receiving such pays and therefore require customer service. In addition, as discussed later in this report, we found that the documentation provided to Army Guard soldiers concerning the pays and allowances they received did not facilitateCustomer service. Our audit identified customer service concerns at all three phases of the active duty tours and involving DFAS, active Army, and Army Guard servicing components. Consistent with the confusion we found among Army Guard and. duty pays and combat zone tax exclusion transactions. We found significant pay problems at the six Army Guard units we audited. These problems related to processes, human capital, and systems. The six units were: three special forces and three military police units. In addition, we conducted a limited review of the Army National Guard’s “Special Forces’’ and “Military Police” units. The units were as follows: Special forces units Colorado B Company, 5th Battalion, 19th Special Forces Virginia B Company. Military police units California 49th Military Police Headquarters and Headquarters Maryland 200th Military police Company One soldier from a Mississippi unit was paid $9,400 in active duty pay during the 3 months following an early discharge for drug-related charges. Forty-eight of 51 soldiers in a California National Guard military police unit received late payments because the unit armory did not have a copy machine available to make copies of needed pay-related documents. Four Virginia Special Forces soldiers who were injured in Afghanistan and unable to doaudit work were not paid for their service. They were later paid. For the six units we audited, we found significant pay problems involving over one million dollars in errors. These problems consisted of underpayments, overpayments and late payments that occurred during all three phases of Army Guard mobilization to active duty. Overall, for the 18- month period from October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003, we discovered more than $1 million in errors in the Army Guard pay system. The Army Guard was responsible for providing security at the Pentagon shortly after the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Army Guard soldiers will likely be required to rely on existing pay systems for at least several more years. Review of the pay experiences of the soldiers in the Colorado Army Guard’s 220th Military Police Company indicated that some of the same types of pay problems that we found in our six case study units continued to occur. Of the 152 of the units reviewed, only four had problems with their pay systems. The Army Guard is the second largest military pay system in the U.S., after the Air Force. three soldiers had left B Company primarily due to frustration over pay problems. The unit official indicated that he expected additional soldiers would depart as a result of the current debt problems. We identified 31 out of 65 soldiers from Virginia’s B Company who did not receive certain types of pay at all. These problems resulted from failures by unit soldiers to provide necessary documentation to initiate certain pays, and data entry errors or late entry of data needed to start active duty pays by Army Guard USPFO military pay personnel. Case study location found that when the unit was first mobilized, USPFO pay personnel were required to spend considerable time and effort to correct hundreds of errors in the unit’s pay records dating back to 1996. Such errors could have been identified and corrected during the preceding years’ readiness reviews. Many cases in which active duty pays were not started until more than 30 days after the entitled start dates because soldiers did not submit the paperwork necessary to start these pays. The extensive problems we identified at the case study units vividly demonstrate that the controls currently relied on to pay unit. show they received. We used available documentation and follow-up inquiries with cognizant USPFO personnel to identify if (1) soldiers’ entitled active duty pays and allowances were received within 30 days of initial mobilization date. Soldiers in our case study units may have experienced additional pay. As such, our audit results only reflect problems we identified and not the actual amount of pay received by soldiers in our cases study units. We apologize for any confusion caused by our findings. We are working to correct the problems identified in this report. phases of active duty mobilization. Due to the lack of supporting documents at the state, unit, and battalion levels, we may not have identified all of the pay problems related to the active duty mobilizations of these units. The payment problems we identified at the six case study units did not include instances of fraudulent payments. In addition, our work was not designed to identify, and we did not identify, any fraudulent pay and allowances to any Army Guard soldiers. However, we counted soldiers’ pay problems as a problem only in the phase in which they first occurred. six case study units continued to occur. Of the 152 soldiers mobilized in this unit, we identified 54 soldiers who our review of available records indicated were either overpaid, underpaid, or received entitled active duty pays and allowances over 30 days late. We found that these pay problems could be attributed to control breakdowns similar to those we found at our cases study units. For example, available documentation and available documentation could not be used to determine if a soldier had been overpaid or underpaid. We also found that pay system input errors associated with amended orders, delays and errors in coding pay and allowance transactions. We used mobilization data supplied by the Army Operations Center to assist us in selecting the six units we used as our case studies. We also obtained in-depth information from soldiers at four of the six case study units. Using a data collection instrument, we asked for soldier views on pay problems and customer service experiences before, during, and after mobilization. The information we received from these data collection instruments is not representative of the views of soldiers in these units. The purpose of our limited review was to determine if there were any pay problems experienced by a more recently mobilized unit. they were entitled to receive during their deployment. Of the $17,000 in overpayments, we found that less than $100 was subsequently collected from the soldiers. We found a lack of sufficient numbers of knowledgeable staff. In addition, after-the-fact detective controls were not in place, including a reconciliation of pay and personnel records. We determined a number of causes for these pay problems. In total, we identified estimated over payments of $17,.000, underpayments of. $1,300, and late payments of $67,000. active Army finance offices while deployed in Afghanistan and surrounding areas as “poor’ or “openly hostile” Some of the soldiers in the unit expressed significant dissatisfaction with the time and effort they, or their spouses were required to spend attempting to identify and correct their pay. The labor-intensive efforts by the special forces soldiers to address pay problems, in some cases, distracted them from important mission operations. Several soldiers told us that the numerous pay problems they encountered would play a major role in their decisions whether to reenlist. Special Forces soldiers who were injured in Afghanistan and unable to resume their civilian jobs experienced problems in receiving entitled active duty pays and related health care. In some cases, the problems we identified may have distracted these professional soldiers from mission requirements, as they spent considerable time and effort while deployed. Further, these problems may adversely affect the Army’s ability to retain these valuable personnel. Appendixes I–VI provide details of the pay experiences of the soldiers at the case study units we audited. We compared the actual number of personnel on board to the NGB-authorized staffing level for the military pay sections. Two of the six case study locations had fewer military pay technicians on board than they were authorized. The highest pay grade of the nonsupervisory pay technicians at the six cases study units was a GS-7, and the majority of personnel were in the GS-6 pay grade. The Army and DFAS have established an agreement that in part seeks to ensure that resources are available to provide appropriately skilled personnel. the USPFO, Military Pay Section is based on Full Time Support authorized state strength levels. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to determine whether concerns over relatively low graded military. pay technicians exist at all 54 USPfos. (p. 76/Draft Report) Enclosure grade levels in the USP FOs’ Comptroller sections were validated as correct under OPM standards. Army Guard operating procedures provide that the primary responsibility for administering Army Guard soldiers’ pay as they are mobilized to active duty rests with the 54 USPFOs. NGB provides annual authorization for the overall staffing levels for each state. Each state allocates positions to each of the sections within aUSPFO, including the military pay section and other sections such as vendor and contract pay. Few military pay technicians on board at six locations we audited had received formal training on pay eligibility and pay processing requirements for mobilized Army Guard personnel. No such contingency staffing plan exists for the USPFOs. Consider expanding the scope of the existing memorandum of understanding between DFAS and the Army concerning the provision of resources to support surge processing at mobilization and demobilization sites. Determine whether issues concerning resource allocations for the military pay operations identified at our case study units exist at all 54 USPfos, and if so, take appropriate actions to address these issues. If so, consider providing additional resources for surge processing for pay start and stop transaction requirements at Army Guard home stations. The National Guard could use additional National Guard soldiers being brought on active duty in a Temporary Tour of Active Duty status. Normal manning at the USPFO, Military Pay Section is based on Full Time. The additional requirement and funding will need to be addressed by the supplemental provided to Army. (p. 76/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur.concerning resource allocations for the military pay operations identified at our case study units. If so, take appropriate actions to address these issues. processing pay transactions for our case study units. No DOD or Army requirements for military pay personnel to receive training on pay entitlements and processing requirements associated with mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Modify existing training policies and procedures to require all USPFO and active Army pay and finance personnel responsible for entering pay transactions to receive appropriate training upon assuming such duties. Require unit commanders to receiving training on the importance of adhering to requirements to conduct annual pay support documentation reviews and carry out monthly reconciliations. Establish an ongoing mechanism to monitor the extent to which personnel have taken recently established training courses. pay technicians relied primarily on on-the-job training and phone calls to the Army Guard Financial Services Center in Indianapolis. Only two of the six case study locations we audited tracked the extent to which pay technicians have taken training in this area. One payroll clerk told us that she had not received any formal training on how to process active duty pays to activated Army Guard personnel. Two of the five scheduled courses for fiscal year 2003 were canceled—one because of low registration and one because of schedule conflicts. pay technicians were validated as correct under OPM standards. The National Guard has instituted mobilization specific training for pay technicians. National Guard Financial Services Center quality assurance program pay support documentation reviews and monthly reconciliations will be incorporated into precommand courses at the company level for the National Guard by the end of Fiscal Year 2004. The appropriate mechanism for monitoring the training of unit commanders and finance battalion personnel is dependent on the location of that training in the overall Army training infrastructure and will be considered as part of the overall evaluation of the reserve pay training. Army finance school is already evaluating the expansion of the current instruction on mobilized reserve component pay in the training curriculum for the finance advanced individual training course. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The importance of conducting annual pay support documentation reviews and monthly reconciliations will be incorporated. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to require unit commanders to receive training on the. importance of adhering to requirements. US Army Reserve Command (USARC) has expanded training programs on DJMS-RC. Over 35 training events have occurred since February 2002 in support of deploying units and mobilization/demobilization sites. The Army finance school is working with USARC to develop an exportable training package on DJ MS-RC, which should be available within the next 6 months. The National Guard Financial Services Center quality assurance program is currently used to monitor completion of JUMPS Standard Terminal Input System (JUSTIS) training. available within the next 6 months. DFAS and the Army are sending a joint training team to Kuwait and Iraq in November 2003 to specifically address reserve component support. For the midterm (6 months to 2 years), the training on reserve component pay input for soldiers in finance battalions and garrison support units will be evaluated to determine how best to expand the training within the Army total training infrastructure. The Army finance school is already evaluating the expansion of the training for reserve and active component pay processing into a single system. coverage, resulting in three delays in scheduling a surgery. He also told us he received medical bills associated with his wife’s hospitalization for the delivery of their premature baby as a result of these gaps in coverage. We found several instances in which existing DOD and Army regulations and guidance in the pay and allowance area are outdated and conflict with more current legislative and DOD guidance. Some existing guidance reflected pay policies and procedures dating back to Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm in 1991. While we were able to associate pay problems with only one of these outdated pay problems, we found them to be common. Out-of-date requirements in current regulations may contribute to confusion and customer service issues. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998 replaced the basic allowance for quarters and the variable housing allowance. However, volume 7A, chapter 27 of the DOD FMR, dated February 2002, still refers to the basic allowances. The act also replaced foreign duty with the basic housing allowance, which is the same as the quarters allowance. It is possible that these outdated requirements may have caused as yet unidentified pay problems. state of Colorado to provide service for his pay problems. Several systems issues were significant factors impeding accurate and timely payroll payments to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Lack of an integrated or effectively interfaced pay system with both the personnel and order-writing systems, limitations in DJMS-RC processing capabilities, and ineffective system edits of payments and debts. DOD has a significant system enhancement project under way to improve military pay. Given that the effort has been under way for about 5 years and DOD has encountered challenges fielding the system, it is likely that the department will continue the system. that this reengineering effort deals not only with the systems aspect of the problems we identified, but also with the human capital and process aspects. In its written comments, DOD concurred with our recommendations and identified actions to address the identified deficiencies. DOD’s response outlined some actions already taken, others that are underway, and further planned actions with respect to our recommendations. If effectively implemented, these actions should substantially resolve the deficiencies pointed out in our report. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no. active duty pay and allowances, would result in significant pay problems. A complete and lasting solution to the pay problems we identified will only be achieved through a complete reengineering. The need for such actions is increasingly of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to take the following actions. Establish a unified set of policies and procedures for all Army Guard, Army, and DFAS personnel to follow for ensuring active duty pays for Army Guard personnel mobilized to active duty. days would seem reasonable). Establish who is accountable for stopping active duty pays for soldiers who return home earlier than their units. Clarify the policies and procedures for how to properly amend active duty orders, including medical extensions. Require Army Guard commands and unit commanders to carry out complete monthly pay and personnel records reconciliations and take necessary actions to correct any pay and Personnel record mismatches found each month. Update policies to reflect current legal and DOD administrative requirements with respect to active duty pay and allowances. amend a tour of duty. The new warnings will advise that the transaction will or could result in a collection action and will ask the pay technician to confirm that is their intent. Required time frames for processing pay transactions. Written requirements did not exist with respect to the maximum amount of time that should elapse between the receipt by the responsible Army Guard or Army pay office of proper documentation and processing the related. While we did not verify the effectiveness of this change, it has the potential to reduce pay problems. or involved a delay in payment over 30 days from entitlement rather than an actual unresolved discrepancy. Within the next 6 months, we will evaluate the feasibility of using the personnel-to-pay interface as a means to proactively alert pay personnel of actions needed to start entitled active duty pays and allowances. (p. 77/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The GAO recommended that the. Secretary of Defense direct the Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to evaluate the. feasibility. vividly demonstrate that the controls currently relied on to pay mobilized Army Guard personnel are not working and cannot provide reasonable assurance that such pays are accurate or timely. The personal toll that these pay problems have had on mobilized soldiers and their families cannot be readily measured, but clearly may have a profound effect on reenlistment and retention. It is not surprising that cumbersome and complex processes and ineffective human capital strategies, combined with the use of an outdated system, would result in significant pay to augment our documentation and walkthroughs. GAO’s Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government states that effective human capital practices are critical to establishing and maintaining a strong internal control environment. A sufficient number of well-trained military pay staff is particularly crucial given the extensive, cumbersome, and labor-intensive process requirements that have evolved to support active duty pay to Army Guard soldiers. Management should take steps to ensure that its organization has the appropriate number of employees, including hiring, training, and retention, are in place and effectively used. Several organizations with key roles in payroll payments to mobilized Army Guard soldiers have issued their own implementing regulations, policies, and procedures. The DOD Financial Management Regulations (FMR) guidance on pay and allowance entitlements alone covers 65 chapters. We found that policies and procedures were not well understood or consistently applied across the potentially hundreds of organizations and thousands of personnel involved in paying mobilized Guard personnel. These processes have been developed in piecemeal fashion over a number of years to accommodate changing legislative requirements, DOD policies, or the unique operating practices of different DOD organizations and systems involved in these processes. developed in piecemeal fashion over a number of years, provide numerous opportunities for control breakdowns. We found that a substantial number of payment errors were caused, at least in part, by unclear procedural requirements for processing active duty pay and allowance entitlements to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. In addition, these cumbersome policies and procedures contributed to the pay errors we identified. For example, we found existing policies and procedural guidance were unclear with respect to the following: pay and allowances for active duty soldiers and their dependents. requirements, particularly in light of the potentially hundreds of organizations and thousands of personnel involved, were not well understood or consistently applied. Further, we found instances in which existing guidance was out of date—some of which still reflected practices in place in 1991 during Operation Desert Storm. These complex, cumbersome processes, which were developed in piecemeal fashion over a number of years, provide an opportunity for the Army to make timely, accurate active duty pays to mobilized Army Guard soldiers, the report says. Confusion centered principally around pay processing responsibility for Army Guard soldiers as they move from state control to federal control and back again. To be effective, current processes rely on close coordination and communication between state (Army Guard unit and state-level command organizations) and federal (active Army finance locations at mobilization/demobilization stations and at area servicing finance offices) We found a significant number of instances in which critical coordination requirements were not clearly defined.to which they were entitled. We also found that existing policies and procedures were unclear with respect to organizational responsibilities. During the initial mobilization, units receive an alert order and begin a mobilization preparation program, Soldier Readiness Processing (SRP) The financial portion of the SRP is conducted by one of the 54 United States Property and Fiscal Offices (USPFO) According to DFAS procedures, the unit’s Army Guard USPFO should have initiated these pays. In addition, these problems could have been minimized if they were identified and corrected by the Army mobilization station finance office at Fort Knox during the soldier readiness processing. identify any pay problems for this unit in the demobilization phase. To obtain an understanding and assess the processes, personnel (human capital), and systems used to provide assurance that mobilized Army Guard soldiers were paid accurately and timely. We reviewed applicable policies, procedures, and program guidance; observed pay processing operations; and interviewed cognizant agency officials. We applied the policies and procedures prescribed in these documents to the observed and documented procedures and practices followed by the various agencies. We also used the internal controls standards provided in the Standards for Internal Control in Federal Government. duty pays for Army Guard personnel mobilized to active duty. A joint task force has and deployed Army finance elements. As a first step, expanded central guidance will be published within the next 30 days. This breakout of responsibilities will also be provided in a simple matrix form to visually reinforce this guidance. Within approximately 60 days, the Army and DFAS will begin compliance reviews of the mobilization/demobilization stations to ensure adherence to published guidance and to provide any further assistance these offices may need. (p. 74/GAO Draft Report) The report indicated these deficiencies were the direct result of a myriad of current systems with multiple, complex interfaces to fully support current business process requirements. The five key DOD systems involved in authorizing, entering, processing, and paying mobilized Army Guard soldiers were not integrated. Lacking either an integrated or effectively interfaced set of personnel and pay systems, DOD must rely on error-prone, manual entry of data from the same source documents into multiple systems. Figure 6 provides an overview of the five systems currently involved in processing Army Guard pay and personnel information. Thousands of Army Guard (individual units and state-level organizations), active Army, and DFAS components may be involved in authorizing, processing, and paying mobilized Army Guard soldiers. An estimated 2,300 local Army Guard home units, unit commanders, and unit administrators are involved in maintaining up-to-date soldier personnel and related pay records. 28 active Army area servicing finance offices at over 50 locations worldwide that are involved with servicing Army Guard soldier’s location-based active duty pays. requirements were not clearly defined. Confusion over Responsibility for Entering Pay Transactions Results in Family Obtaining a Grant to Pay Bills. A sergeant incurred pay problems during his mobilization and deployment to Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom that caused financial hardship for his family while he was deployed. In this case, the active Army and his state's USPFO were confused as to responsibility for processing pay input transactions associated with a promotion. The sergeant was promoted from a sergeant first class to master sergeant (E-8)  DFAS garnished his wages and collected approximately $1,100 of the soldier's salary. The soldier's wife had to obtain a grant of $500 from the Colorado National Guard's Family Support Group to pay bills. DFAS Indianapolis mobilization procedures authorize the Army Guard’s USPFOs and the Army Guardsman's Association to garnish the wages of members of the Army National Guard. The Army National Guardsman was overpaid during the period of his demotion. He was demoted back to an E-7, and a second promotion was given back to him. Indianapolis mobilization procedures authorize the Army Guard’s USPFOs to enter transactions for deployed soldiers. We found existing guidance did not provide for clear responsibility and accountability. For example, at one of our case study locations, we found that this broad authority for entering changes to soldiers’ pay records enabled almost simultaneous pay changes for soldiers who separate early or who are absent without leave or are confined. The Army Guard has the responsibility for entering transactions while in-theater and terminating payments for soldiers. The local servicing active Army finance office also has primary responsibility for entering transactions to stop hardship duty pay, hostile fire pay, and the combat zone tax exclusion. However, in this case, that office did not take action to stop these types of pay and allowances for many of the unit’s soldiers. For example, military pay personnel at Fort Campbell failed to deactivate hostileFire pay for many soldiers who were in a hostile fire/combat zone. The unit also failed to identify and stop any active duty pays that soldiers were no longer entitled to receive. active duty tour, soldiers normally return to the same Army locations from which they were mobilized for demobilization out-processing before returning to their home units. Demobilization personnel, employed by the active Army or Army Guard, are required to provide each soldier with a Release from Active Duty (REFRAD) order and a Form DD 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from active duty. At this time, the supporting USPFO is to use these documents as a basis for deactivating the soldier’s active duty pay and allowances.  DFAS-Indianapolis guidance provides only that “the supporting USPFO will be responsible for validating the status of any soldier who does not return to a demobilized status with a unit.” The guidance did not state how the USPfo should be informed that a soldier did not return with his or her unit, or how theUSPFO was to take action. The guidance also did not clearly specify how to carry out assigned responsibilities for soldiers who return from active duty earlier than their units. allowances. For example, a unit administrator told us he contacted the servicing area active Army finance office for the 101st Airborne in West Virginia. The finance office instructed him to contact the USPFO in WestVirginia because, although he was from a Colorado unit, his unit was assigned to a West Virginia Army Guard unit. However, when he contacted West Virginia for service, officials from that office told him to reach out to his home state of Colorado for help with his pay problems. USPFO referred soldiers to the active Army finance office and that office referred them back to the USPFO. Officials said the circular nature of giving assistance to soldiers was sometimes unavoidable. For example, they said that once soldiers left their home unit and the Fort Bragg and in-theater finance offices assumed pay responsibilities, they informed soldiers and their spouses to contact these active Army Finance offices to discuss active duty payment problems. U.S. Army Pay Office acknowledged that it is sometimes unavoidable to refer soldiers to different offices. Oman and returned safely to Uzbekistan. While guidance that permits both Army Guard and active Army military pay personnel to enter transactions for mobilized Army Guard soldiers provides flexibility in serving the soldiers, we found indications that it also contributed to soldiers being passed between the active Army and Army Guard servicing locations. For example, at another of our case study locations, we were told that several mobilized soldiers sought help in resolving active duty pay problems from theactive Army’s mobilization station finance office at Fort Knox. the spouses nor the soldiers received clear guidance on whom to contact to address their pay concerns. For example, some soldiers sought help from the active Army’s finance offices at Fort Knox and Fort Campbell. However, upon contacting officials at those locations, soldiers were told that theactive Army could not help them because they were Army Guard soldiers. According to DFAS officials, the active army finance offices have the capability to service Army Guard soldier. Fort Knox or Fort Campbell finance personnel were either unaware of their capability or were not aware of it. Army Guard and active Army finance components are confused over responsibility for processing pay transactions for mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Many of the complaints we identified concerned confusion over whether Army Guard personnel mobilized to active duty should be served by the USPFO or by the active Army. One soldier told us that he submitted documentation on three separate occasions to support the housing allowance he should have received as of the pays and allowances for the unit’s soldiers. After not receiving any pay support, soldiers told us they contacted their Army Guard unit. guidance, the active Army mobilization stations are to act as a “safety net” to catch and correct any errors in soldiers’ active duty pays and allowances before they are deployed. The underpayments and late payments resulted in adverse financial repercussions for a number of the unit’s members and their families. We were told that neither the spouses nor the soldiers received clear guidance on whom to contact to get the money back. The unit members’ spouses tried to contact the soldiers while they were deployed to find out why they were not receiving the anticipated funds. to the government or to the Army Guard soldiers. We briefed DOD and Army officials, National Guard Bureau officials, DFAS officials, and USPFO officials in the selected states on the details of our audit. We conducted our audit work from November 2002 through September 2003 in accordance with U.S. generally accepted practices. On October 10, 2003, we requested comments on a draft of this report. We received comments on November 5, 2003 and have summarized those comments in the “Agency Comments and Our Evaluation” section of thisReport. 2002 through September 2003 in accordance with U.S. generally accepted government auditing standards. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) to establish a unified set of policies and procedures for all Army Guard, Army, and DFAS personnel to follow for servicing active duty pays for Army Guard personnel mobilized to active duty. GAO DRAFT REPORT DATED OCTOBER 10, 2003 GAO-04-89 (GAO CODE 192080) “MILITARY PAY: ARMY NATIONAL GUARD PERSONNEL MOBILIZED TO ACTIVE DUTY EXPERIENCED SIGNIFICANT PAY PROBLEMS” unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies of the report to interested congressional committees. We will make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at the following sites: www.cnn.com, www.dailymail.co.uk, and www.theguardian.com. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to clarify the policies and procedures for how to properly amend active duty orders, including. medical extensions. DoD RESPONSE: Concur.to recommendation one. For medical extensions, the GAO recommends that the Department of Defense clarify how to amend orders. The DoD responds that it will do so in a matter of days, not months. The Army published revised guidance on June 10, 2003, reinforcing procedures on this process. Concerning the specific case in Colorado cited by the GAO, DFAS and the Army have implemented changes to the input systems to warn the operator processing a tour cancellation when the correct input should be a tour curtailment. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the secretary of the Army, in conjunction with DFAS, to take action. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. (p. 75/Draft Report) Within the next 30 days, the Army will prepare a standard information flyer to be given to all mobilizing reservists. The flyer will address entitlements as well as sources of pay support. The existing centralized information sources on individual soldiers pay will be expanded. Specifically, the GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to identify and evaluate options for improving customer service provided to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. remains essentially a command responsibility. For dependents of deployed soldiers, the single source for finance, or any administrative issues, is either the rear detachment of the soldiers’ deployed unit or, for the National Guard, the applicable State Family Assistance Coordinator. The GAO recommended that the. Secretary of Defense direct the Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to review the pay problems we. identified at our six bases. The pay problems. we identified at six bases are now under review by the Department of Defense. The GAO recommended expanding the scope of the existing memorandum of understanding between DFAS and the Army. The Army will work with the National Guard on resourcing the USPFOs for surges. The DoD responded that it is not the appropriate vehicle to address staffing of U.S. Pay Offices under the National Guards. The GAO also recommended that the Secretary of Defense determine whether issues concerning resource allocations for the military pay operations identified at DFAS could be addressed at a later date. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to establish who is accountable for stopping active duty pays for soldiers who. return home separate from their units. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Within the next 30 days, DFAS, in cooperation with the. Army, will reinforce existing procedures on responsibilities for stopping. active duty pay for soldiers. This will be part of the revised guidance identified in response to. recommendation one. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to update policies and procedures to reflect current legal and DoD administrative requirements. The Army will reinforce to all reserve commands the importance of this requirement. In Fiscal Year 2004, DFAS, the Army,. and National Guard will respectively update the cited regulations under their cognizance to the most current and accurate requirements. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Guidance and to provide any further assistance these offices may require. Within the next 3 to 6 months, the task force will build upon the existing guidance to provide comprehensive procedures and related standards, down to the individual technician level, for all offices and units responsible for pay input support of mobilized soldiers. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Standards for the timeliness of pay transactions for mobilized soldiers will be established within the next three to six months. The need for such actions is increasingly imperative in light of the current extended deployment of Army Guard soldiers in Operation Iraqi Freedom. Immediate steps to at least mitigate the most serious of the problems we identified are needed to help ensure that the Army Guard can continue to successfully fulfill its vital role in our national defense. We recommend that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Army, to take steps to mitigate the problems. The Army Guard is a vital part of the U.S. military. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full- text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence.o.com. The list contains links to the full-text document site daily. To have GAO e-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to www.gaO.gov. interface as a means to proactively alert pay personnel of actions needed to start entitled active duty pays and allowances. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service to evaluate the feasibility of automating some or all of the current manual monthly pays. (p. 77/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Programming changes to DJMS-RC have been implemented to enhance the processes. The DoD has not commented on this report. A study was conducted of improvement alternatives in the fall of 2002, which concluded that a new commercial off the shelf based payroll capability (“Forward Compatible Payroll” (FCP) was the best option to expeditiously improve our system payroll services. FCP is currently prototyping military entitlements and deductions and has already demonstrated that DJMS RC’s current monthly manual pays can be automated rapidly. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service. component affiliations and duty statuses. FCP will also resolve pay systems capability related problems described in this report. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The DFAS has already updated its current input system (Defense MilPay Office) to provide a warning to field finance personnel concerning the debt impact of debt assessments above a specified dollar amount. (p. 78/Draft Report) DoD Response: The Department of Defense has no immediate plans to implement the proposed changes to its pay system. warning to field finance personnel concerning the debt impact of tour cancellation (vice modification) for Reserve/Guard members. DJMS-RC would require a small to medium system change to edit debts that exceeded an established threshold or required approval. Secondary manual processing would be required to start the collection process or delete the debts. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of defense (Comptroller), to incorporate the new system. are required for operators of a knowledge-based personnel community must be made after the capabilities of the commercial off the shelf product are fully known. Staff making key contributions to this report include: Paul S. Begnaud, Ronald A. Bergman, James D. Berry, Jr., Amy C. Chang, Mary E. Chervenic, Francine M. DelVecchio, C. Robert DeRoy, Dennis B. Fauber, Jennifer L. Hall, Charles R. Hodge. The General Accounting Office is the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is to go to www.gao.gov/audit and click on the link for a copy of a GAO report. For more information on the GAO, visit www.GAO.gov. By the end of fiscal year 2003, DOD reporting shows that it will have invested over 5 years and about $360 million in conceptualizing and planning the system. In 2002, DOD estimated that integrated personnel and pay functions of DIMHRS would be fully deployed by fiscal year 2007. Part of the requested funding for fiscal year 2004 was to acquire a payroll module, Forward Compatible Payroll. According to program officials, this module, in conjunction with a translation module and a Web services component, is to replace DJMS-RC by March 2006. DOD has a major system enhancement effort under way in this area. The Defense Integrated Military Human Resources System (DIMHRS) is intended to replace more than 80 legacy systems. One of the major benefits expected with DIMH RS is “service members receiving accurate and timely pay and benefits.” The DFAS and Army have been actively involved in recommending an improved operational military pers/pay concept in the D IMHRS environment. (p. 78/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. establishing an edit check and requiring approval before processing any debt assessments above a specified dollar amount. Consider a complete reengineering of the processes and controls and ensure that this reengineering effort deals not only with the systems, but also with the people behind them. As part of the effort currently under way to reform DOD’s pay and personnel systems—referred to as DIMHRS—incorporate a complete understanding of the Army Guard pay problems as documented in this report into the requirements development. In assessing the risks associated with DIMHRS implementation, DOD highlighted 20 such risks. For example, DOD reported a 60 percent risk associated with “Service issues with business process reengineering and data migration.” The department’s ability to effectively mitigate such risks is of particular concern given its poor track record in successfully designing and implementing major systems in the past, the authors say. Given the schedule slippages that have already occurred combined with the many risks, Army Guard soldiers may be at risk. The Army DIMHRS Program is still in the very early stages of determining when and how integrated processes and workflows will be incorporated. The current plan is to “…initially mirror the existing ‘As-Is’ structure until the new capability has been fielded and risk factors/ requirements have been clearly identified. A determination of what additional skills and expertise are required for operators of a knowledge-based personnel community must be made.’’ “Joint Service Functional Concept of Operations,” dated July 15, 2003, page 14. Each pay is designed to provide fully automated computation capability for active, Reserve/Guard and detailed leave and earnings statement reporting to the Service member through myPay. FCP will use legacy military pers/pay data feeds to create a single military pay record for each Service member supporting all Service component affiliations and duty statuses. Until such time FCP has been implemented, we will ensure that these certain pays paid under “other credits” USPFOs ands Reserve Component Pay Support Offices with monthly newsletters. Defense Finance and Accounting Service, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to evaluate the feasibility of redesigning leave and earnings statement. Soldiers would have clear explanation of all pay and allowances received so that they can readily determine if they received all and only entitled pays. (p. 78/Draft Report) Enclosure understanding their leave and Earnings statement by reviewing and updating (as necessary) the information provided on our website(s); by providing independent leave andEarnings statement remarks for present and future changes; and by providing monthly newsletters. information sources on individual soldiers pay will be expanded. DFAS will continue to add functionality to myPay for input of discretionary actions. Soldiers will be able to give their dependents so they can see the Leave and Earning Statement without being able to change anything on the pay record. This enhancement is scheduled for August 2004. The DFAS also operates a central customer service center for pay inquiries for all Services. The toll free number for this center as well as the myPay internet address will be 1-800-273-8255. MyPay.center as well as the myPay internet address will be incorporated in the flyer discussed in response to recommendation 13. Until the implementation of DIMHRS, with full integration of pay and personnel, the processing of pay transactions will still require the movement of some entitlement information/authorization from units and personnel to finance via paper. As always, pay remains essentially a command responsibility. For the individual soldier, the individual Soldier, the pay is the responsibility of the soldier, not the organization. will ensure that these certain pays paid under “other credits’ are included in the flyer addressed in response to recommendation 13. DFAS will update the DFAS Reserve Component Mobilization Procedures to mandate a remark be entered on the service member’s leave and earnings statement for pays paidunder “ other credits” to inform the service members exactly what entitlement(s) they have paid. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army to evaluate the feasibility of using the JUSTIS warning screen to help. the feasibility of using the JUSTIS warning screen to help eliminate inadvertent omissions of required monthly manual pay inputs. (p. 78/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The National Guard will develop a JUSTIS table identifying all applicable soldiers in order to notify the USPFO technician of accounts requiring monthly entitlement input. This will be more efficient and effective than a pop-up warning screen, which would appear only if the individual soldier’s social security number were input. In one case study, soldiers were underpaid their entitled jump, foreign language proficiency, special duty assignment, or hardship duty pays. Pay technicians inadvertently omitted the monthly manual input required to initiate these types of pays every month. USPFO pay personnel had a procedure in place to help prevent inadvertently omitting month-to-month entry of nonautomated pays for entitled soldiers. Although this was not the case in this case, the procedure was used to alert them that soldiers were eligible to receive that particular pay component that month. to receive that particular pay component that month. These month-to-month pays and allowances were not separately itemized on the soldiers’ leave and earnings statements in a user-friendly format. In contrast, at four of our six case study units, we found that a significant number of soldiers were overpaid their entitled automated pays when they were demobilized from active duty. The warning screen could be used to help preclude some of the pay problems we found resulting from failures to enter transactions. any pay problems. Review the pay problems we identified at our six case study units to identify and resolve any outstanding pay issues for the affected soldiers. Evaluate the feasibility of automating some or all of the current manual monthly pays, including special duty assignment pay, foreign language proficiency pay, hardship duty pay, and HALO pay. Use the personnel-to-pay interface as a means to proactively alert pay personnel of actions needed to start entitled active duty pays and allowances. Using the JUSTIS warning screen to help eliminate inadvertent omissions of required monthly manual pay inputs. Service, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to evaluate the feasibility of eliminating the use of the “other credits” for processing Hardship Duty (Designated Areas); high altitude, low opening jump pay; and special duty assignment pay. We acknowledge that the information available to the member is inadequate in today’s system. This has DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Hardships duty pay is scheduled for automation in April 2004. We will also recommend inclusion of automation of high elevation, low open jump pay in FCP. DJMS-RC is a large, complex, and sensitive payroll computer application. DFAS Indianapolis is the central site for all Army military pay. Each MMPA contains a 1 million MMPAs for the Army. Personnel data contained in the MMPA are generated from SIDPERS, a personnel database maintained and used by the Army Guard at the 54 state-level personnel offices. All pay-related transactions that are entered into DJMS- RC, through JUSTIS and DMO, update theMMPA.  JUSTIS is the pay input subsystem used by the 54 state-level Army Guard commands, including the USPFOs, to update DJMS-RC. JUSTIS receives certain pay-affecting personnel data from SIDPERS. Database management of JUSTis is decentralized in that each of the 54 sites owns and maintains its own JUSTIS database. DMO is the Technical Support Office that designs and maintains the DJ MS-RC core pay software. Users can sign on to DJ MS through online interactive software used for file transfer transactions. DMO is the pay input subsystem used by active Army finance offices and the DOD military pay offices to update DJMS-RC. DMO can be used to enter location-based pays, such as hostile fire and hardship duty pays and combat zone tax exclusion transactions. We found that DMO was used to create transactions for military pay and allowances that are not reported at the time of mobilization for upload to DJMS.JUSTIS from hard copies of mobilization orders. For more information on DMO, visit the DMO website. collection efforts on the $9,400 overpayment did not begin until July 2003, when we pointed out this situation to USPFO officials. The lack of an integrated set of systems was also apparent in the relationship between JUSTIS and the order writing system—AFCOS. Currently, certain personnel and order information entered and stored in the AFCOS database is automatically filled in the JUSTIS input screens. This auto-fill functionality eliminates the need for some error-prone, manual reentry of data into JUSTIS. error-prone, manual reentry of data into JUSTIS. Currently, manual entry of data from a hard copy of the soldier’s orders and other documentation is required. NGB officials stated that providing the auto-fill functionality to the mobilization would be a good idea. For example, at one of the case study units we audited, USPFO pay personnel had to manually enter the soldier's active duty tour start and stop dates into JustIS from a Hard Copy of the actual mobilization order. NGB officials planned to release a programming software change to all 54 USPFOs that would allow the start and stop dates to be automatically filled into the mobilization screens. Because this software change was scheduled to occur after the conclusion of our fieldwork, we did not verify its effectiveness. In any case, while this proposed programming change may be beneficial, it does not eliminate the need for manual entry and entry of mobilization information. They stated that providing the auto-fill functionality to the mobilization input screens would require minimal programming changes. personnel and pay systems, thus causing various pay problems—particularly late payments. We found that an existing interface could be used to help alert military pay personnel to take action when mobilization transactions are entered into the personnel system. For example, when Army Guard soldiers change from inactive drilling status to active duty status, state personnel offices create personnel-related transactions in SIDPERS. But associated pay- related transactions to update the soldier’s pay records are not automatically created in JUSTIS. USPFO pay personnel are not aware that a pay-related transaction is needed until they receive documentation from the soldier. Automated improvements could be used to proactively alert USPFOs of certain pay-impacting transactions that are created in SIDPERS. In our case studies, we found instances in which mobilization order data were either not entered into DJMS-RC for several months after the personnel action or were entered inconsistently. At the case study locations we audited, several Army Guard soldiers received amended or revoked orders that were entered into SidPERS but were not entered in DJMS. of the limited number of pay technicians available to process pay transactions. The Chief of Payroll at one of our case study locations told us that because they were currently understaffed, staff members worked 12 to 14 hours a day and still had backlogs of pay start transactions to be entered into the pay system. We were also told that two of our other cases study locations experienced backlogs and errors in entering pay start Transactions when they were processing pay start payments at the same time. For more information, visit the U.S. Army Payroll Association's website. With an effectively integrated system, changes to personnel records automatically update related payroll records from a single source of data input. An automatic personnel-to-payroll system interface can also reduce errors caused by independent, manual entry of data from the same source documents into both pay and personnel systems. Without an effective interface between the personnel and pay systems, we found instances in which pay-affecting information did not get entered into both the Personnel and Pay systems, thus causing various pay problems—particularly late.