Judge Gorsuch dissented from the majority's holding that federal agents did not abridge the defendant's Fourth Amendment rights when they approached the house where he was staying. The house had several "No Trespassing" signs posted in its yard and on its front door. In one of these decisions, United States v. Carloss, Judge Gorsuch wrote that these signs "revoked the implied license that the public has to approach the house and knock on it" The term "no trespassing" is used in this context. the public has to approach the house and knock on the door" on the grounds that the placement of such signs around a home would not have conveyed to an objective officer that he could not knock on its door asking to speak with its residents. In so doing, he noted that, at the time when the Fourth Amendment was drafted, "the common law permitted government agents to enter a home or its curtilage only with the owner's permission or to execute legal process" He also observed that at common law, homeowners could generally revoke licenses to enter. In the second case involving the scope of the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures, Judge Gorsuch wrote on behalf of a unanimous three-judge panel. In this case, the government had obtained one of the defendant's messages from an Internet service provider and opened the message and photographed it. The judge wrote that at common law, homeowners could generally revoke licenses to enter their property at their pleasure. "State officials no less than private visitors could be liable for trespass when entering without the homeowner's consent," he said. containing child pornography, and forwarded the email to the government's agent. In so doing, the court noted that the "Fourth Amendment was no less protective of persons and property against governmental invasions than the common law was at the time of founding" Another area implicating the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures is the prohibition against the use of excessive force in the course of making an arrest. While Judge Gorsuch frequently relied on originalist principles in other areas of search and seizure law, Supreme Court precedent appears to be the exclusive focus. seize evidence from the defendant's car during the resulting stop. Noting a New Mexico court ruling that had concluded that the ordinance relied on by the police officer did not provide a legal basis for the stop, the majority decision held that a failure to understand the law by the "very person charged with enforcing it" was objectively unreasonable and warranted suppression of the evidence seized. Judge Gorsuch in dissent rejected the view that an officer's mistake of law " always violates the Fourth Amendment" Instead, he relied on the text of the Fourth amendment and precedent emphasizing that suppression was necessary. Gorsuch has heard many criminal cases during his tenure on the Tenth Circuit. His views view the courts as being exclusively responsible for defining the playing field on which criminal suspects and the government interact. Like Justice Scalia, the nominee has taken an originalist approach to construing the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures, focusing on how the Framers would have construed the term "unreasonable" as it is used in this context. Two notable opinions authored by him include Constitutional Rules of Criminal Procedure. His views on the Confrontation Clause and the scope of self-incrimination rights under the Fifth Amendment are less clear because he has not written on them to a significant extent. On the whole, though, his opinions are seemingly shaped by his views regarding how legal texts, particularly the Constitution and statutes, are to be construed. Consequently, it would seem that Judge Gorsuch does not view the courts as being exclusively responsible for defining the law, rather than creating it. He also seems to believe that the courts' role is to apply the law and not create it. inquiry had previously been found to be required only in cases involving allegations of overly tight handcuffing. The issue in Nicholson was whether a police officer, who mistakenly thought the defendant had violated a local traffic ordinance, could seize evidence from the defendant's car during the resulting stop. A year and a half after the Tenth Circuit's opinion in Nicholson , the Supreme Court effectively sided with Judge Gorsuch's more flexible view of the exclusionary rule. The court held in a different case that a mistake of law can "give rise to the reasonable" a mistake of law can "give rise to the reasonable suspicion necessary to uphold" a traffic stop under the Fourth Amendment. While the approach taken by Judge Gorsuch in his dissent in Nicholson eventually found favor at the Supreme Court, the nominee's dissent in a case on another often litigated issue in constitutional criminal law didn't. In Williams v. Jones , Judge Gorsuch served on a panel reviewing the ineffective assistance claim of a criminal defendant who, after receiving a full defense, was denied a lawyer. process guarantees a fair trial, not a good bargain," he said. The Supreme Court, in a pair of 5-4 decisions for which Justice Scalia wrote dissenting opinions, held that the Sixth Amendment right to adequate assistance of counsel extends to the negotiation and consideration of plea bargains. Judge Gorsuch generally brought the same textualist approach to statutory criminal law issues that he brought to other statutory issues, as is illustrated by his opinion on behalf of a unanimous panel of the Tenth Circuit in United States v. Dolan. Judge Gorsuch's opinions could, in part, be seen to reflect or even expand on the precedent of the Supreme Court's decision in Heller. Judge Gorsuch has quoted or otherwise noted Heller 's language about restrictions on the possession of firearms by felons, in particular. In a few cases, such as Pope, the opinions cite to other judges who have taken a different view of Heller. But these citations by Judge Gorsuch may be intended to signal awareness of these judges' arguments, rather than agreement with them. been unremarkable. Judge Gorsuch has touched upon the Second Amendment and the constitutionality of firearms regulations briefly in his written opinions while on the Tenth Circuit. These writings suggest that Judge Gorsuch views the Second. Amendment as generally protecting an individual right to bear arms, a position that could be seen as consistent with the originalist. position. In short, if Judge. Gorsuch has any distinctive leanings with respect to questions regarding the interpretation or enforceability of international law in U.S. courts, they are not apparent in his judicial writings to date. Gorsuch's references to the Second Amendment have generally appeared in cases concerned with how to construe federal criminal statutes. The most notable of these was arguably Judge Gorsuch's dissent from the Tenth Circuit's.position that could be seen as consistent with the originalist approach often ascribed to him. The Supreme Court's decisions in District of Columbia v. Heller and McDonald v. City of Chicago were two challenges to firearms restrictions in which Justice Scalia notably participated during his time on the High Court. may be brought under Section 924(c) of Title 18 of the United States Code against a defendant who fired a single shot that hit two separate victims. The total number of charges lodged against a criminal defendant under the statute should never "exceed the number of uses, carries, or possessions" Just as you can't throw more touchdowns during the fourth quarter than the total amount of times you have thrown a touchdown, you cannot use a gun to kill two people at the same time. of the state in question exempted persons with valid licenses to carry concealed weapons, among others, from its general prohibition upon carrying loaded firearms in public. However, in the Tenth Circuit's view, the existence of this exemption did not negate law enforcement's reasonable suspicion, at the time when the defendant was detained, that the defendant's possession of the firearm was unlawful. Law enforcement had "no affirmative obligation prior to seizing Defendant—at the risk of harm to [themselves] and others—to inquire of [the defendant] whether his possession of a handgun fell within the classes excepted by the statute" Games-Perez centered on the question of whether federal statutes penalizing the possession of firearms by felons require the government to prove that a defendant knew of both his own status as a felon. The longstanding Tenth Circuit precedent is that the government need only prove knowing possession of a firearm. In his dissent, Judge Gorsuch opined that reading the mens rea element of a criminal statute as "leapfrogging over the first statutorily these was arguably Judge Gorsuch's dissent from the Tenth Circuit's denial of en banc review. times you have thrown a touchdown, you cannot use a firearm during and in relation to crimes of violence more than the total number of times you have used a firearm. Previously, in dissenting from the denial of en banc review in United States v. Games-Perez , Judge Gorsuch had expressed similar concerns about reading the mens rea element of a criminal statute. According to Judge Gorsuch, such a reading "defies grammatical gravity and linguistic logic," he said in a dissent. Judge Gorsuch has made similar statements about gun possession being "often lawful" and a "matter of constitutional right" In his 2015 opinion for the majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz, he said the only statutory element separating innocent (even constitutionally protected) gun possession from criminal conduct in [the statutory provisions in question] is a prior felony conviction. He also said the statutory provision in question could not be reasonably construed to prohibit using, carrying, or possessing a gun per se. Gorsuch's focus has been his focus on the grammar of legislative language. He has diagrammed a segment of a sentence in a criminal statute to help address the underlying interpretative question. In his 2015 opinion for a majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz, he asked whether multiple charges may be brought under Section 924(c) of Title 18 of the U.S. Code. The specific interpretativequestion in Rentz was if multiple charges could be brought. Amendment's Petition Clause, Judge Gorsuch, writing for a three-judge panel, reversed a district court's dismissal of a claim that several county officials had violated the plaintiff's First Amendment rights. In a particularly pointed passage in Van Deelan , Judge Gorsuch wrote broadly about the underlying dangers of suppression of speech by government officials. When public officials feel free to wield the powers of their office as weapons against those who question their decisions, they do damage not merely to the citizen in their sights but also to others, he writes. the First Amendment precludes defamation actions aimed at parody, even when involving a private figure on a matter of private concern. In the context of public employee speech, the nominee has authored several opinions limiting or dismissing First Amendment lawsuits brought by government employees against their employers. The speech occurred pursuant to the employees' official duties and, therefore, could be regulated by the government. With regard to challenges to zoning ordinances, he authored a concurring opinion that raised the question of whether constitutionalizing the protections for such parodies was necessary or wise. Gorsuch dissented from the denial of a petition for en banc rehearing. He contended that the underlying panel decision interpreted the First Amendment too broadly. In a case raising issues similar to those in a case presently before the Court, Judge Gorsuch joined the dissent. The dissent was in Doe v. Shurtleff , in which the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the government in a First Amendment case. The decision was appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. opinions over the past decade respecting the First Amendment and freedom of speech. Many of the Court's recent First Amendment rulings have been closely divided. The eight-member Court split evenly during the October 2015 term on a notable case regarding public employee unions. If confirmed, Judge Gorsuch could have a significant influence on the future direction of free speech law. The nominee has authored or co-authored a number of books on free speech and free speech rights, including "Free Speech in America" and "The First Amendment in America," among others. Gorsuch's work on the Tenth Circuit has broached the issue of campaign finance regulation and the First Amendment. The nominee has authored or joined a handful of opinions touching on free speech issues. For example, in the en banc ruling in Hobby Lobby v. Sebelius , Judge Gorsuch joined the majority opinion that concluded that the "logic" of Citizens United v. FEC —the First Amendment case.direction of free speech law. The Supreme Court has invalidated a number of federal and state election laws at the margins. Gorsuch rejected the county's argument that the plaintiff's tax assessment challenges did not amount to "constitutionally protected activity" He concluded that the First Amendment "extends to matters great and small, public and private" The Van Deelan decision and Judge Gorsuch's reluctance to distinguish between types of speech protected by the Constitution may align him with the majority of the Roberts Court. The First Amendment liberties and the promise of equal treatment essential to the continuity of our democratic enterprise, writes Julian Zelizer. Constitution may align him with the majority of the Roberts Court that has, in recent years, rejected the argument that the First Amendment does not protect certain "low value" speech. In Bustos v. A&E Television Network, Judge Gorsuch wrote an opinion holding that a prisoner who "merely conspired with" the Aryan Brotherhood could not sustain a defamation lawsuit resulting from a History Channel television show. In addition to Van Deelan , Judge Gorsuch has written or joined a number of opinions that promote the rights of the press at the expense of plaintiffs. preclude" the defense of substantial truthfulness. In two other cases brought against television stations, Judge Gorsuch joined opinions that dismissed privacy tort claims on First Amendment grounds. Nonetheless, the nominee should not be viewed as a free speech absolutist, as a number of Judge Gorsuch's opinions have recognized limits to the First Amendment's speech protections. For example, in Mink v. Knox, a 2010 case that concluded that the first Amendment precludes defamation actions aimed at parody, even parody. Gorsuch has written or joined a number of opinions that view the First Amendment as an important restriction on government activity. At the very least, the Riddle concurrence's language may signal that Judge Gorsuch disagrees with retired Justice John Paul Stevens's position that "money . . . is not speech" The Supreme Court "has yet to apply strict scrutiny to contribution limit challenges," he wrote. The Supreme court has yet to "applied strict scrutiny" to campaign finance challenges, he added. in Riddle does not go so far as to argue explicitly for subjecting contribution limits to strict scrutiny. It does cite to Justices who have made such an argument in the past, prompting some commentators to conclude that the nominee may favor subjecting campaign finance restrictions to the most stringent standard of review. On the other hand, other legal scholars have read Judge Gorsuch's opinion in Riddle to "simply highlight the confusion he saw" in the Supreme Court jurisprudence on the proper level of scrutiny to be afforded campaign contributions. disagreement between the members of the Court in Citizens United was more complex than whether the First Amendment protects a corporation's speech. In other words, Judge Gorsuch's vote in the 2013 en banc case may have limited significance with respect to his broader views on the constitutionality of campaign finance laws. Riddle v. Hickenlooper, a 2014 case that invalidated a Colorado law, may offer more insights as to his views on First Amendment and campaign finance regulation. The case involved whether the "asserted inclinations and advantages of corporations in corrupting officeholders" justified restricting corporate campaign expenditures. Hickenlooper , a 2014 case that invalidated a Colorado law allowing major party candidates to accept twice as much in contributions per individual as independent and minor party candidates. Judge Gorsuch agreed with the majority that the Colorado law violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. He attempted to allay fears that the ruling "imperiled" any attempts to regulate campaign contributions, citing federal law as a nondiscriminatory model available to the federal government. He said the law sprang from a "bald desire to help major party candidate at the expense of minor party candidate" basis that the court lacked jurisdiction over the suit. For example, in Wilderness Society v. Kane County , a majority of the en banc panel held that the plaintiffs lacked prudential standing in a challenge brought against a local government entity under the Supremacy Clause. Judge Gorsuch, however, wrote a concurring opinion concluding the court lacks subject matter jurisdiction overThe case in the first place. Similarly, in Kerr v. Hickenlooper , a suit brought by state legislators claiming that a voter initiative violated the Constitution's Guarantee Clause, the original three-judge panel rejected arguments that the Court lacked jurisdiction. In two dissents, Judge Gorsuch has criticized what he viewed as overly expansive interpretations of the reasonable observer test. In Green v. Haskell County Board of Commissioners, he dissented from the denial of a request for rehearing. In Van Orden v. Perry, he argued that the county's "inclusive display" of the Ten Commandments was indistinguishable from the display at issue in that case. He also argued that "like cases should be treated alike" in the Supreme Court's Establishment Clause cases. The Tenth Circuit should reevaluate whether the endorsement test even applies to the dispute. Judge Gorsuch's dissent is reminiscent of recent Supreme Court jurisprudence, where a majority of the Justices, including Justice Scalia, appeared to support the Ten Commandments' display. In that case, the Supreme Court had upheld a display of the decalogue among other monuments and historic markers on the grounds of the Texas state capitol. Given these perceived parallels between Green and Van Orden , the nominee's dissent concluded by noting the "long" custom of displaying the 10 Commandments in public places. The First Amendment prohibits the establishment of a national religion. The High Court has, at times, read the restriction to bar certain government actions that endorse religion. In determining what constitutes an unconstitutional endorsement of religion, the Court has in the recent past adopted Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's "reasonable observer test" Judge Gorsuch has, in two dissents, in American Atheists as merely replicating the errors from Green , stating: "[W]e will strike down laws other courts would uphold, and do so" Gorsuch similarly dissented from an order denying en banc rehearing in American Atheists, Inc. v. Davenport. In that case, the panel had relied on the reasonable observer test in holding that the display of twelve-foot high crosses on public lands to memorialize fallen Utah Highway Patrol troopers violated the Establishment Clause. Echoing his dissent in Green , Judge Gorsuch again raised concerns about the Tenth Circuit's interpretation of Justice O'Connor's test, arguing that "our observer continues to be biased, replete with foibles and prone to mistake" Gorsuch joined the majority opinion in Abdulhaseeb v. Calbone. He authored a concurring opinion reinstating several RLUIPA claims based on an Oklahoma prison's denial of an Islamic prisoner's request for a halal certified diet. In his concurrence, the nominee emphasized that the inmate's charge was that he was denied "all means of accessing food [that] he can eat consistent with his . . . sincerely held religious beliefs" But there appear to be some limits on how far statutory free exercise protections extend in his view. seen as unusual in that the opinion did not formally adjudicate the underlying dispute, perhaps reflecting the close division of the current Court on free exercise matters. Outside of litigation over the ACA's contraceptive requirement, Judge Gorsuch has emphasized the importance of accommodating religious beliefs in other statutory free exercise challenges. For instance, in Yellowbear v. Lambert , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of the state of Colorado, argued that the state should not be required to accommodate religious beliefs of its employees in the workplace. In Yellowbear v. Lambert, a Wyoming prison lacked a sufficiently compelling interest in imposing a substantial burden on the religious exercise of an inmate. The inmate was an enrolled member of the Northern Arapaho Tribe and sought access to a sweat lodge to practice his religious beliefs. In so doing, the nominee articulated two relatively pro-plaintiff interpretations of free exercise law, noting the "modest" task of the court in determining a claimant's sincerity and rejecting a conception of the compelling interest inquiry that would allow the government to impose a burden. this nation's long-held aspiration to serve as a refuge of religious tolerance," Judge Gorsuch's concurrence said. He emphasized that courts should largely defer to the assertions about the nature of religious beliefs made by those who sincerely hold these beliefs. This was out of respect for religious liberty and because of the judiciary's limited competence to scrutinize the veracity of such beliefs, he said. Judge Gorsuch emphasized that it made little difference that the burden on the plaintiffs in Hobby Lobby did not stem from the government affirmatively requiring their use of a particular drug or device. of a marijuana distribution conspiracy who claimed that the use of the drug was central to the exercise of their newly created religion. The Supreme Court has issued a number of notable opinions over the past decade respecting the First Amendment and Establishment Clause. Judge Gorsuch is apt to interpret statutory free exercise laws, much like the Establishment Clause, to embrace the role of religion in society. But there are limits to the degree to which he will defer to the purported interests suggested by claimants seeking to rely upon such laws. was Justice Scalia. If confirmed to the Supreme Court, Judge Gorsuch could have a significant influence on the jurisprudence regarding freedom of religion. In recent years, the Court has taken up a number of religious freedom cases, with Justice Scalia voting as part of five-Justice majorities cases. A central constitutional issue respecting free of religion that Judge Gorsuch has considered concerns the reach of the First Amendment's prohibition on the "establishment of religion" The nominee has expressed fairly clear views, writing or joining several notable opinions on the Tenth Circuit. Gorsuch's dissent in American Atheists expressed skepticism regarding interpretations of the First Amendment that discourage accommodation for religious views. He appears to favor an approach that is more restrained in using the power of judicial review in Establishment Clause cases. In two cases subsequently reviewed by the Supreme Court, the nominee authored or joined opinions involving challenges under the Religious Freedom Restoration. The nominee's most notable writings on freedom of religion may arise in the context of statutory free exercise claims.respect an establishment of religion," he said. or joined opinions involving challenges under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) to the contraceptive coverage requirement in the Affordable Care Act (ACA) RFRA provides that federal laws that substantially burden a person's exercise of religion are permissible only if they are the least restrictive means of furthering a compelling governmental interest. In the Tenth Circuit's 2013 en banc decision in Hobby Lobby v. Sebelius , Judge Gorsuch joined the lead opinion of Judge Timothy Tymkovich and wrote a separate concurrence. Gorsuch's Hobby Lobby concurrence viewed RFRA as a "tie-breaker" that Congress designed to "override other legal mandates, including its own statutes," he said. Two years later, Judge Gorsuch joined an opinion in Little Sisters of the Poor, he wrote. He said RFRA "overrides" other laws "if and when they encroach on religious liberty" and "must respect" the court's decision. The Supreme Court will hear arguments on the nominee's nomination on Tuesday. concluded that the "logic" of Citizens United v. FEC —the 2010 Supreme Court ruling that, in relevant part, stated that "First Amendment protection extends to Corporations" —compelled the conclusion that the First Amendment also protects a corporation's religious expressions. While various commentators have suggested the Hobby Lobby decision signals Judge Gorsuch's broader support for decisions like Citizens United , a lower court's reliance on Supreme Court precedent may not necessarily signal agreement with that precedent. More specifically, as noted by one of the concurring opinions in Hobby Lobby , the disagreement between the members of the Court in Citizens United was noted. Gorsuch joined an opinion in Little Sisters of the Poor v. Burwell that repeated many of the themes of his Hobby Lobby concurrence. The central issue was whether allowing religious entities that objected to the ACA requirement to fill out a form that would functionally require a third-party insurer to provide the coverage violates the free exercise rights of those religious entities. Judge Harris Hartz, joined by four other judges, including Judge Gorsuch, dissented from the decision in the case. The case involved a corollary issue to the one raised in the earlier litigation. by four other judges, including Judge Gorsuch, dissented from the decision not to rehear a case dismissing a challenge to this government accommodation policy. In particular, Judge Hartz's opinion criticized the panel's refusal "to acknowledge that [the plaintiff's] religious belief is that execution of the [accommodation] documents is sinful" In so doing, the dissent in Little Sisters of the Poor can be seen to have repeated many of the themes from Judge Gorsuch's Hobby Lobby concurrence by describing the majority approach as "dangerous" not the least restrictive means of achieving these goals. On appeal to the Supreme Court, a five-Justice majority (including Justice Scalia) largely agreed with the Tenth Circuit's assessment and affirmed the lower court. Judge Gorsuch's concurring opinion in Hobby Lobby , while centrally focused on procedural matters tangential to the RFRA claims, did discuss the substantive claims in broader terms than the majority opinion. Noting that RFRA was enacted for the express purpose of "vindicating this nation's long-held aspiration to serve as a refuge of free exercise disputes," the nominee may have a clear preference for accommodation. RFRA and RLUIPA are "super statute[s]," "capable of mowing down inconsistent" laws, he says. For a plaintiff "to win" under the law "takes no small effort," he adds. Such laws do "not offer refuge to canny operators who seek through subterfuge to avoid laws they'd prefer to ignore," he writes. In one case, United States v. Quaintance , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of a unanimous panel, rejected the argument that RFRA barred the prosecution. discussed below. However, the nominee's discussion of these concerns in Lexington Insurance is arguably notable for its relative length, particularly given that the sole legal authority cited by Judge Gorsuch is an 1892 Supreme Court decision. The two other judges on the panel would not have reached the questions regarding the absurdity doctrine, concluding instead that the plaintiff had waived the argument. Furthermore, consistent with a textualist approach, Judge Gorsuch has made limited resort to legislative history materials. Unlike the other judges, he has not used the term absurdity. The Tenth Circuit has a relatively routine caseload when compared to some of its sister circuits. More than forty percent of the cases that the Tenth Circuit hears are criminal law matters or petitions from federal or state prisoners. The Tenth Circuit also hears a number of private civil litigation disputes, such as cases on labor, insurance, contract, and tort law.on certain issues if he were elevated to the Supreme Court. The D.C. Circuit rarely has the opportunity to address certain topics, including international law and foreign affairs, terrorism and national security. The Tenth Circuit does not hear many environmental law cases because many major environmental statutes require parties challenging nationally applicable federal laws or administrative agency actions to file a petition in the D.C. Circuit. The territorial jurisdiction of the Tenth Circuit, however, does cover six western states and parts of Yellowstone National Park, which collectively contain millions of acres of land owned by the federal government. The lack of a robust record for Judge Gorsuch on environmental law matters may not be surprising. While on the Tenth circuit, he participated in a handful of otherenvironmental law cases. The Supreme Court enjoys "almost complete discretion" in selecting its cases. Unlike the Supreme Court, the federal courts of appeals are required to hear many cases as a matter of law. As a result, the appellate courts consider "many routine cases in which the legal rules are uncontroverted" Perhaps indicative of the nature of federal appellate work, the vast majority of cases decided by three-judge panels of federal courts are decided by federal courts. The Supreme Court is bound by Supreme Court and circuit precedent and is not normally in a position to espouse freely their views. Administrative law cases at the Supreme Court are often contentious, resulting in divided decisions on legal issues of national import. The Tenth Circuit's docket does not include as many administrative law cases as other federal courts. In the few cases that have come before the court, the justices have been split 4-4 in favor of the government. On statutory interpretation, the views of the justice he would replace would largely appear to align with those of the Justice he'd replace. On the issue of the scope of an agency's discretion to issue guidance documents to set regulatory policy, the Justice would likely side with the agency in this case. that the conduct alleged was constitutionally excessive. In reaching this conclusion, the nominee proceeded through an analysis of each of the Graham factors. Similarly, but resulting in a contrary outcome, Judge Gorsuch authored the majority opinion in Wilson v. City of Lafayette , finding qualified immunity protected an officer who used a taser on an individual fleeing arrest, resulting in the suspect's death. Perhaps responding to concerns raised by the two other panel members in their concurring and dissenting opinions, Judge Scalia noted that "no one" has ever been charged with excessive force. Gorsuch: "No one questions that the use of a taser, especially if one probe hits the head, amounts to a significant physical intrusion requiring a correspondingly significant justification" The nominee found the "physical intrusion" in Wilson was not clearly established to be excessive in light of the other Graham factors, including the arrestee actively resisting arrest. In Fisher v. City of Las Cruces, the majority found that a material factual dispute existed as to whether the plaintiff's injuries, which he sustained while being handcuffed after he had shot himself, were excessive. In Herrera v. Bernalillo County Board of County Commissioners , a case where three sheriff's deputies tackled a plaintiff who was not resisting arrest, resulted in injuries to his knee. Judge Gorsuch authored a unanimous opinion affirming the district court's holding that the deputies were not entitled to qualified immunity. In reaching this, he used the Graham factors to determine whether the deputies' conduct was excessive or not. The law at the time of the incident clearly established that the conduct alleged was constitutionally excessive. he sustained while being handcuffed after he had shot himself, were sufficient for an excessive force claim. Judge Gorsuch concurred with the majority's use of the Graham factors and its conclusion that the factors suggested the officers may not have acted reasonably. But he faulted the majority for "tak[ing] a detour, asking whether, in addition to satisfying all three Graham factors, Mr. Fisher has also shown that he suffered a 'non- de minimis injury'" Such an inquiry had previously been found to be required only in. Law, Supreme Court precedent appears to be the exclusive focus in his excessive force opinions. In such cases, the nominee has relied on what he views as the "relatively exacting 'objective reasonableness standard' articulated in Graham v. Connor" Application of this test has led Judge Gorsuch to find both excessive force and excessive force not justified. He has also found the use of excessive force to be a violation of the Constitution's guarantees of due process and the presumption of innocence in cases of self-defense. Gorsuch's most pointed critique of McDonnell Douglas came in a 2016 First Amendment retaliation case, Walton v. Powell. Rejecting the defendant's argument that the test should be applied in a free association. In Barrett v. Salt Lake County, the nominee highlighted criticism by two colleagues that thetest is not "helpful enough to justify the costs and burdens associated with its administration" The Supreme Court will vote on whether to confirm the nominee to the high court in October. The Senate is expected to vote on the nomination in the coming weeks. that the test should be applied in a free association case. The Tenth Circuit found it inapplicable outside of motions for summary judgment in cases relying on circumstantial evidence. Legal commentators have noted that because the test is "bedrock employment law doctrine" any limits Judge Gorsuch might put on it might not apply to that case. It is unclear whether the elimination of the McDonnell Douglas test would necessarily favor a particular side in employment litigation, but legal commentators have said it is a bedrock doctrine. Under the McDonnell Douglas test, a plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination, and then the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its employment action. If the employer meets this burden, the plaintiff can still prevail by offering evidence demonstrating that the employer's explanation is pretextual. In Paup v. Gear Products, Inc. , Judge Gorsuch joined a per curiam opinion that, while acknowledging McDonnell Douglas was "binding on us" in the case at hand, noted criticism that its multipart, burden shifting test is unfair. historical test for substantive due process. He notes that the test is the subject of "considerable methodological disputes," including "what 'level' of historical abstraction" is needed. The book itself does not expressly reject the historical test, nor does it attempt to resolve the debate over the test's "methodological warts" Instead, Judge Gorsuch, "seeking to apply the history test faithfully," examines the "historical record broadly in terms of time and at different levels of abstraction," concluding that there is limited support for the test. vote to grant an extension of time for a party to submit a filing generally does not signal agreement with the substantive legal position proffered by that party. A vote to rehear a case en banc could signal disagreement with the legal reasoning of the panel decision, and may suggest that a judge wants the entire court to have an opportunity to correct a perceived perceived mistake. Some observers have highlighted votes by Judge Gorsuch in favor of having certain three-judge panel decisions reconsidered. These votes should be viewed with a degree of caution. entire court to have an opportunity to correct a perceived error by the panel. Most of us vote against most such petitions and suggestions even when we think the panel decision is mistaken. En banc review is extraordinary, and is generally reserved for conflicting precedent within the circuit. It makes application of the law by district courts unduly difficult, and egregious errors are more likely to be made in such a case, a judge said in a dissent from a decision denying a petition for a rehearing en banc. three-judge panel rejected arguments that the court lacked jurisdiction over the case. Judge Gorsuch dissented from a subsequent denial of rehearing en banc. He argued the case presented a nonjusticiable political question. Under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), a reviewing court must set aside agency action that is "not in accordance with law" or is "in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations, or short of statutory right" The case is Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council. an issue that was not part of the trial court's record in the original proceeding. The Tenth Circuit, sitting en banc, held that the deferential standard of review of state court decisions under AEDPA does not apply when the state court fails to consider material evidence. Judge Gorsuch authored a dissent arguing that a state court's decision to exclude evidence in accordance with state evidentiary rules amounted to an adjudication on the merits, thereby requiring federal courts to apply AedPA's deferential standards. a majority of the entire Tenth Circuit, concluded that the Environmental Protection Agency had incorrectly determined that certain property was "Indian land" In so holding, the nominee adopted what he characterized as a "simple and predictable" two-part test for determining what constitutes Indian land. Judge Gorsuch's en banc opinion thus rejected the government's invitation to interpret the operative statutory language according to an older, multi-factor test, which the nominee described as consisting of "multifarious and incommensurable competing factors" based on a reading of an express preemption clause within the Medical Device Amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act (FDCA) This provision, however, has a complex history of statutory interpretation by the Supreme Court. Judge Gorsuch noted that one such case articulated the following test for preemption, stating: "[T]ort suits do not impose new 'requirements' on manufacturers and are not preempted so long as the duties they seek to impose 'parallel' duties" question: when exactly does a state law duty 'parallel' a federal law duty enough to evade preemption? That term doesn't appear in the statute, so its meaning was left entirely to judicial exposition," he said. The Supreme Court has twice revisited and cut back the scope of its initial decision, he added. "How are we supposed to apply all these competing instructions? It's no easy task," he asked. Ultimately, the court held that the law was clear and unambiguous. apply when an agency seeks to apply its interpretation retroactively via adjudication. As in his opinion in Gutierrez-Brizuela , the nominee grounded his decision in principles of separation of powers, due process, and equal protection. Judge Gorsuch reasoned that the more an agency's decision resembles that of a judge, the stronger the case for retroactive application of the decision. But the more the decision resembles legislation, the less likely such a decision should be, he said. He noted the presumptive prospective effect of legislation compared with the retroactive effect of a judicial decision. The Board of Immigration Appeals again applied its own reinterpretation of the immigration statutes retroactively, this time to a petition submitted prior to both the re Interpretation and the subsequent subsequent ruling. The court would have thought it improbable that the Framers had envisioned that an executive branch agency could ever overrule a federal court in the first place, Judge Gorsuch said in his ruling on the case. The decision was upheld on appeal by a federal appeals court in New York. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the matter in the coming weeks. petition submitted prior to both the reinterpretation and the subsequent appellate court approval of it. Judge Gorsuch also penned a solo concurrence to take note of the "elephant in the room" He wrote that Chevron and Brand X permit executive bureaucracies to swallow huge amounts of core judicial and legislative power. "It seems more than a little difficult to square with the Constitution," he said. The case is Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch, which the Supreme Court is expected to rule on soon. find agency actions arbitrary and capricious or lacking in substantial evidence, particularly where he has doubted that the parties received fair notice of applicable rules and regulations. For example, in National Labor Relations Board v. Community Health Services , the majority panel upheld the Board's decision to "exclude interim earnings from backpay calculations when the employer has wrongfully reduced employee hours" The majority noted that while the agency's decision was inconsistent with prior determinations, the agency had considerable discretion to determine how back pay should be calculated. determine how back pay should be calculated and, accordingly, ruled that its justifications were reasonable. Judge Gorsuch dissented, claiming that the agency's decision failed to explain why it treated similarly situated entities—that is, terminated employees versus reduced hours employees—differently and departed from its own preexisting rules. His views on capital punishment may be particularly important insofar as he would, if confirmed, be replacing Justice Scalia, who believed capital punishment should be reserved for the highest criminals. The Supreme Court granted certiorari in the case. A majority of the High Court voted to affirm the Tenth Circuit's decision in Dolan. Justice Scalia joined a dissenting opinion authored by Chief Justice Roberts that viewed the "clear statutory text" to preclude the court from granting restitution more than 90 days after sentencing. This difference seems to have been shaped by the different emphases that the Tenth circuit and the Chief Justice gave to different interpretations of the law. The Supreme Court will hear the case again in October. the Tenth Circuit and the Chief Justice gave to different words in the statute. The Tenth Circuit focused on the "notwithstanding" clause, viewing it as mandating restitution in every case. The dissenters on the High Court, in contrast, relied, at least in part, on the phrase "n notwithstanding any other provision of law," which they say requires restitution even if it is not made at sentencing or within 90 days thereof. The Supreme Court's ruling is expected to be appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. The court ruled that the 90-day rule was a claims processing rule intended to promote speed and unconnected to the case. The defendant argued that the language was jurisdictional, which would have meant that the court lacked the authority to enter any restitution order after the 90 days had passed. The case is U.S. v. Dolan, and the ruling is published online at www.cnn.com/2013/01/16/justice/judge-gorsh-dolan-says-90-day-rule-was-claims-processing-rule. processing rule intended to promote speed and unconnected to the court's authority. In so doing, the nominee noted various factors, including the "statute's language and structure," as well as an interpretative canon. Dolan was written relatively early in Judge Gorsuch's tenure on the Tenth Circuit. It could suggest certain differences between his textualist approach and that of Justice Scalia, as the nominee is known for being textualist. The Supreme Court is expected to make a decision on the nominee in the coming weeks. for "discrimination in compensation" claims applied only to "unequal pay for equal work" claims, and not to all claims of discriminatory compensation. In another decision, A.F. ex rel. Christine B. v. Española Public Schools, the judge looked to the "language of the Act itself," the Act's structure, key canons of statutory construction, and the context in which the statute was enacted in adopting a more narrow reading of the phrase in question. He rejected the view that the phrase was used in the Act as "some Rorschach inkblot to which we may ascribe whatever meaning springs to mind" decision, A.F. ex rel. Christine B. v. Española Public Schools , Judge Gorsuch wrote for the majority in holding that a student who had previously settled a lawsuit involving alleged violations of the IDEA was barred from "seeking the same relief" under the ADA, the Rehabilitation Act, and 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The nominee relied primarily on the "plain text" of the statute, which the majority construed to mean that plaintiffs attempting to bring civil actions under other federal laws must exhaust certain procedures set forth in IDEA. is "bedrock employment law doctrine" any limits Judge Gorsuch might impose on the use of this test could cause a "significant change in how employment discrimination lawsuits are prosecuted and defended" Other statutory civil rights cases can be seen to have been directly shaped by Judge Gorsuch's general approaches to statutory interpretation. For example, in Almond v. Unified School District #501 , the nominee employed a textualist approach in one of the first opinions interpreting the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009, concluding that the Act's expanded accrual period for "discrimination in compensation" claims applied only to "unequal pay" on race or sex, but may be more skeptical of interpreting the Equal Protection Clause expansively to shield against previously unrecognized forms of discrimination. Judge Gorsuch also joined the unanimous decision by a panel of the Tenth Circuit in 2015 in Druley v. Patton. In 2009, in 2009, Judge Gorsuch joined a unanimous decision  in a case involving a transgendered prisoner in an all-male facility. In that case, the court ruled that the prisoner was not entitled to wear female undergarments because she was housed in a male facility. Gorsuch joined a unanimous decision by a panel of the Ninth Circuit in Kastl v. Maricopa County Community College District. The case involved a transsexual instructor whose contract was not renewed after she had been banned from using the women's restroom. In both cases, unanimous panels purported to rely on direct precedent in reaching their conclusions. For example, in Druley , the panel noted Tenth Circuit precedent holding that Tenth Circuit precedence holding that Druley was a case of equal protection violation. Druley , the panel noted Tenth Circuit precedent holding that transsexuals are not members of a class for which heightened scrutiny is required under the Equal Protection Clause. Because of this, in the panel's view, the state officials' decisions were subject to the less stringent "rational basis review," which the decisions were able to withstand. Similarly, in Kastl , the Panel noted, in a short three-page order, that the plaintiff had failed to "put forward sufficient evidence demonstrating that [the school's actions were] motivated by her gender" Gorsuch: Secsys LLC v. Vigil engages in an extended discussion of equal protection. This opinion characterizes equal protection as "the law's keystone," he says. Secsys is unusual in that it explores the differences between intentional discrimination and discriminatory applications or enforcement of "rules of general application," he adds. It also explains what types of government action may be subject to heightened scrutiny, he says, and explains how the Supreme Court will rule in the case. The ruling is expected to be delivered by the end of the month. or women may not bid for a state contract or that only those of a certain religious faith may. The nominee also described the plaintiffs as asking the court to endorse a "novel theory" of equal protection in this case. This language could suggest that Judge Gorsuch believes that the Constitution's equal protection principles play a crucial role in prohibiting certain government discrimination based on race or sex. But he may be more skeptical of the plaintiffs' claims. The case is still pending and will be heard by the U.S. Supreme Court. Secsys claimed state officials deprived it of equal protection by requiring it to award a subcontract under a state contract to a specific individual. Judge Gorsuch rejected this claim, in part, on the grounds that the state officials would have required a similar subcontracting agreement from any other contractor, making their actions distinguishable from "a rule saying that African Americans or women may not bid for a statecontract or. subject to heightened scrutiny," he said in a ruling on the case. The ruling is expected to be published soon. In United States v. Manatau, the court relied on the plain language of sentencing guidelines. The government had argued that the term "intended loss" should be construed to refer to a loss "done on purpose" The court disagreed, finding that the "plain language" of the guideline was such that "Intended" must be construed as a loss that the defendant "knew would result from his scheme" A more stringent approach to mens rea requirements, in which intention or knowledge of wrongdoing is required, is also favored. subsequent cases: "While we apply judgment and restraint before certifying, . . . we will nonetheless employ the device in circumstances where the question before us (1) may be determinative of the case at hand and (2) is sufficiently novel that we feel uncomfortable attempting to decide it without further guidance" In articulating these principles, the nominee emphasized that "[i]n making the assessment whether to certify, we also seek to give meaning and respect to the federal character of our judicial system" the principle of individual liberty in applying his formalist approach to a number of cases implicating the separation of powers. In United States v. Baldwin , he spent a portion of his majority opinion criticizing the proliferation of criminal prohibitions in the Code of Federal Regulations. After a panel of judges affirmed a conviction for failure to register as a sex offender, he said the ruling was an exercise in excessive delegation. The conviction was nevertheless affirmed. He said the decision was not a case of excessive delegation, but of overreach. Dissenting judge argued that the majority had "misread[]" the statute in question. The outcome under the majority's reading ran contrary to Congress's intent, he said. However, in perhaps a reflection on how his broader views on the role of the federal judiciary might differ, the dissent also objected to the outcome under that reading. It "harm[ed] the interests of the children that IDEA was intended to protect," the dissent said. It also objected that the outcome "run contrary to the intent" of Congress. from an Internet service provider and opened the message and its accompanying attachments, thereby discovering child pornography. The government argued, among other things, that this search was permissible pursuant to the "private search doctrine" The nominee rejected this argument because the third party in Ackerman's case had not opened the email to view its contents, but instead had ran a search that merely identified the email as possibly containing child pornography, and forwarded it to the government's office. He said the search was a warrantless search of a person's effects that had previously been searched by a private third party. a court of appeals 'may accept an appeal' from an order of remand 'if application is made not [more] than 7 days after entry of the order'" Noting that "[t]he statute doesn't place any other conditions on our discretion," the nominee allowed the interlocutory appeal. In Shook v. Board of County Commissioners of the County of El Paso , the district court denied the motion for class certification of county jail inmates. For example, the court said it would not accept a motion to certify the inmates as class members. denied the motion for class certification of county jail inmates with mental health needs. On appeal, Judge Gorsuch affirmed this conclusion based on a close examination of the "two independent but related requirements" of Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23. The nominee concluded that the rule "demands a certain cohesiveness among class members with respect to their injuries, the absence of which would not be tolerated in a class action," he said. He added that the class would be unmanageable because of the difficulty of fashioning relief that would be applicable to the class. trade practices involving allegedly misleading website disclosures. The defendant sought to remove the case to federal court pursuant to the federal Class Action Fairness Act. The district court refused to exercise jurisdiction because it found the defendant failed to meet its burden of showing that over $5 million was "in controversy," as required by the statute. On appeal, Judge Gorsuch authored a unanimous opinion reversing the district court based on a detailed construction of the statutory term " in controversy" "In controversy" is "a term heavily encrusted with meaning," Judge Gorsuch explained. sought to remove the case to federal court as a "mass action" under the Class Action Fairness Act. The district court denied this request. In a unanimous opinion analyzing whether the Tenth Circuit had jurisdiction to hear an interlocutory appeal, Judge Gorsuch's analysis hinged largely on the plain language of the statute. "When we interpret a statute we begin, of course, with its plain terms," he said. "And here, as we've mentioned, provides that a court of appeals 'may accept an appeal' from an provide swift and definitive ends to protracted civil litigation to the extent the law allows. In Hammond v. Stamps.com, Inc. , for example, the plaintiff filed a putative class action in state court alleging unlawful trade practices involving allegedly misleading website disclosures. In keeping with his approach to statutory interpretation, in civil liability cases, Judge Gorsuch has shown a tendency to examine closely the federal statute or rule in question, especially in cases involving determinations of eligibility for class action status.. BP sought to remove the case to federal court as a state case. Judge found "federal jurisdiction here beyond doubt," thereby allowing the class action to proceed in federal court. BP Am erica , Inc. v. Oklahoma ex rel. Edmondson was a suit brought in state court alleging manipulations of propane gas prices in violation of state law. The case was settled out of court in 2010. The judge ruled that the case was a federal matter. The decision was appealed to the Supreme Court. Medical device and a proposed class action alleging securities fraud. In Cook v. Rockwell Int ernationa l Corp. , for example, the nominee lamented: It took a titanic fifteen years for the case to reach a jury. No doubt a testament to contemporary civil litigation practices that ensure before any trial is held every stone will be overturned in discovery, even if it means forcing everyone to endure the sort of staggering delay that took 15 years to get to a jury in this case. An issue of considerable dispute on the High Court in recent years, Judge Gorsuch could have an impact should he be elevated to the Court. In determining whether federal law preempts common law tort claims, the nominee's approach, as in other areas, is centrally grounded in the words of the federal statute at issue. In Cook v. Rockwell Int ernationa l Corp. , for instance, property owners filed a class action under the federal Price-Anderson Act and state tort law against each other. among class members with respect to their injuries, as he found the rule did in Shook. In 2005, the nominee, then in private practice, coauthored two articles critical of securities fraud class actions. Should he be elevated to the High Court, Judge Gorsuch could also be influential in the area of enforcement of arbitration provisions, writes Julian Zelizer, a professor at the University of California, Los Angeles. He says the nominee could have a major impact on the way arbitration is enforced in the future. means forcing everyone to endure the sort of staggering delay and (no doubt) equally staggering expense the parties endured here. Somehow, though, this case managed to survive the usually lethal gauntlet of pretrial proceedings and stagger its way to trial. From this sentiment, it might be surmised that Judge Gorsuch may be particularly receptive to curtailing the costly litigation process through strict readings of statutes that create private rights of action and provide for procedural devices, such as class action suits, broad enforcement of arbitration clauses. Claim of a criminal defendant who, after receiving a full and fair trial, was sentenced to a harsher sentence than he otherwise would have received under an offered plea bargain. The defendant argued that his trial counsel had unduly pressured him into rejecting the plea. A majority of the court agreed that the defendant had established that the trial counsel rendered deficient performance that prejudiced his client. Judge Gorsuch, however, dissented, arguing that there is no constitutionally protected entitlement to accept and enforce a pretrial plea offer. unlikely to interpret the substantive component of the Due Process Clause expansively. Relative to Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch has said little on the subject and does not appear to have significantly addressed the merits of a takings claim in a judicial opinion. This is unsurprising, as the Tenth Circuit does not hear many takings claims because the Tucker Act vests the U.S. Court of Federal Claims with jurisdiction over such claims when the plaintiff seeks more than $10,000 in compensation from the federal government. If Judge Gorsuch is elevated, he could very well hear takings issues on the Court's docket. v. Kemp , he wrote a unanimous opinion reversing a district court's dismissal of certain counts against a state official on Eleventh Amendment grounds. In reaching this outcome, the nominee reviewed extensively the Supreme Court'sEleventh Amendment jurisprudence. Namely, Judge Gorsuch described Hans v. Louisiana , which interpreted the Amendment as precluding suits by citizens in federal court against their own states, and Ex parte Young , which specified circumstances under which the Amendment does not bar suits against a states. rather than monetary damages and is brought against state officers acting in their official capacities, rather than against the state itself. In reviewing further additions to the "rococo quality" of this Eleventh Amendment jurisprudence, Judge Gorsuch noted that "the Supreme Court has in recent years added a new gloss on Young 's gloss on Hans' gloss on theEleventh Amendment" Ultimately, he found the case could be decided on the sole question of whether the relief was prospective in nature. Having found that it was, under the federal Price-Anderson Act and state tort law against operators of a nuclear weapons manufacturing plant to recover for damages caused by releases of plutonium and other hazardous substances. After the federal claims failed, the district court disallowed the case to proceed on the state law claims, holding that they were preempted by federal law. Judge Gorsuch disagreed, saying: "Where does any of this language—expressly—preempt and preclude all state law tort recoveries for plaintiffs who plead but do not prove nuclear incidents? We just don't see it" just don't see it," Judge Gorsuch said. In Caplinger v. Medtronic, Inc. , a case in which the plaintiff asserted a variety of state tort claims, Judge Gorsuch authored an opinion for the majority. Ca Plinger affirmed the district court's dismissal of the complaint as preempted by federal law based on a reading of an express preemption clause within the statute. The majority also looked to the "larger statutory structure" and the statute's legislative history to buttress his conclusion. The Supreme Court has long warned against this sort of regime. The parties in Browder were not properly raised by the parties inBrowder , Judge says. Judge: "Make of the Fourteenth Amendment a font of tort law" needlessly superimposed on perfectly adequate existing state tort law systems. He says the case should be decided in state courts where rights can be vindicated adequately. The case should not be heard in federal court as a matter of routine, he says, and the parties should have raised the issue. The themes highlighted in his 2016 lecture on Justice Scalia's legacy previously appeared in several of Judge Gorsuch's opinions on the Tenth Circuit. Rejecting the view of the judge as a "pragmatic social-welfare maximizer," Judge Gorsuch, quoting Justice Scalia, argued for a more limited role for judges in the American political system. In a number of cases, the nominee rejected more flexible approaches to interpreting the Constitution in favor of originalism. The nominee examined the time of the events in question would have understood the law to be. Gorsuch's respect for the decisions, interpretations, and rules of state courts is evident in the majority and concurring opinions in Browder v. City of Albuquerque. This case involved a claim against an off-duty police officer who killed one person and injured another while speeding through a red light. Although Judge Gorsuch affirmed the district court's denial of qualified immunity for the police officer in his majority opinion, he wrote separately to explain his views on when federal courts should abstain, for reasons of federalism, from deciding cases. most notable substantive due process opinion authored by Judge Gorsuch—is Browder v. City of Albuquerque. In Browder , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of a unanimous three-judge panel, upheld a district court order that declined to dismiss the substantive dueprocess claims brought against the officer by the victims of the crash. One of the victims was a man who was injured when a police officer raced through the city streets of Albuquerque in his police cruiser after finishing his shift. The judge ruled that the officer's actions violated the plaintiffs' substantive due due process rights. In 2009 in Strickland v. United Parcel Service, Inc. , Judge Gorsuch agreed with two colleagues that the plaintiff should be able to proceed to trial on a FMLA retaliation claim. But he differed from his colleagues as to the plaintiff's Title VII case based on the factual record before the court. While the other two judges voted to reverse the district court's grant of summary judgment to the defendant on the Title VII claim, Judge Gorsuch would have affirmed the lower court's decision. VII claim, Judge Gorsuch would have affirmed the lower court's decision. In particular, he construed two key depositions relied on by the plaintiff as simply showing that the plaintiff's supervisor "harassed male employees in very much the same manner he harassed Ms. Strickland" In another fact-intensive civil rights case resulting in a different outcome—a ruling for the plaintiffs— Orr v. City of Albuquerque , Judge Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion. He engaged in a "thorough review of the record," which examined official policies and testimony. sustain a defamation lawsuit resulting from a History Channel television series describing the plaintiff as a member of that gang. Noting that the First Amendment requires a plaintiff pursuing a defamation claim to prove the underlying falsehood of the statement at issue, the Bustos decision held that the plaintiff had failed to show the History Channel's statement had a significant impact on his reputation. Likewise, Judge Gorsuch joined a panel opinion in Cory v. Allstate Insurance , which dismissed a defamation suit on the ground that "minor inaccuracies will not preclude" the defense of substantial truthfulness. Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah & Ouray Reservation v. Utah , the nominee wrote a unanimous opinion that granted an injunction. In that case, the tribe had prevailed in federal court four decades earlier on its claims that Utah and several local governments were unlawfully trying to displace tribal authority. Judge Gorsuch acknowledged that the federal Anti-Injunction Act "usually precludes federal courts from enjoining ongoing state court proceedings" "out of respect for comity and federalism," he relied upon "an Supreme Court decisions about arbitration were closely split by 5-4 margins. In Howard v. Ferrellgas, Judge Gorsuch characterized the FAA as having a "heavy hand in favor of arbitration" In Ragab v. Howard, the nominee disagreed with the panel majority's conclusion that a collection of conflicting arbitration provisions in the parties' contracts was unenforceable. The Supreme Court has generally viewed federal law as encouraging alternative dispute resolution in this area of law, writes Julian Zelizer. "I just don't see any doubt that the parties before us did intend to arbitrate," he says. Gorsuch: The panel's "holding represents a significant new federal intrusion into state judicial functions" In another habeas case, Wood v. Milyard, the nominee's unanimous opinion held that a state procedural default did not bar federal habea review. He noted that federal courts must respect state court rules when appropriate, stating: "As a matter of comity and federalism, it's a federalism issue" The Supreme Court will hear arguments in the case in October. should be decided when possible by state, not federal, courts. Judge Gorsuch's preference for leaving novel questions of state law to the state courts also informed a dissent he authored in a habeas case. In Wilson v. Workman , the nominee faulted the majority for "ventur[ing] a guess about the meaning ofState law" He asserted that "[a]sking the [state court] to interpret its own rule . . . would have had the benefit . . ." of 'help[ing to build a cooperative federalism' interpretations. His support for the broader concept of a cooperative federalism between state and federal courts figures prominently elsewhere in his federalism jurisprudence. Such themes are evident in his dissent from a denial of a request for a rehearing en banc in Williams v. Jones. In that case, the majority declined to review a panel opinion that required a district court to craft a remedy for what the panel determined to have been ineffective assistance of counsel during plea negotiations in a criminal case. Gorsuch says deference to state courts is vital to a system of cooperative federalism. But he has also recognized limits to such deference, particularly when actions of a state or its subdivisions are in clear conflict with federal court judgments. For example, in Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah & Ouray Reservation v. Ute, he said: "As a matter of comity and federalism, . . . we will usually hold our tongues about any potential federal law violation" federal character of our judicial system,'" he writes. At the center of Judge Gorsuch's argument for sending questions of state law to the state is "certification's useful role in promoting a cooperative federalism" A related aspect of federalism is the doctrine of state sovereign immunity, which the Supreme Court has recognized underlies the Eleventh Amendment, and is a fundamental aspect of sovereignty retained by the states. In Hill v. Kemp, he wrote a unanimous opinion reversing a unanimous decision in favor of the state in that case. Nomination shows respect for state court decisions, interpretations, and rules, writes Julian Zelizer. He says it's unclear to what degree nominee's conclusions reflect his approach to federalism. Zelizer: One discernible limit on the nominee's general deference to state courts is the need for finality in federal court judgments. The nominee's respect for the decisions and interpretations appears to be grounded in his support for the of respect for comity and federalism, Zelizer says. The Senate is expected to vote on whether to confirm the nominee on Friday. Gorsuch has expressed a preference for state courts to decide novel matters of state law. In Pino v. United States, he laid out certain principles to guide the determination of when certification is appropriate. "While we apply judgment and restraint before certifying, we are equally aware of our obligation to defend the law's promise of finality," he says. "We are also aware of ... that we have a duty to respect and deference to state proceedings," he adds. The Supreme Court will hear arguments on the case on September 26. In December 2016, the Supreme Court split 4-4 over whether to stay (i.e., suspend pending further review) the execution of an Alabama man who had challenged the state's method of administering the death penalty. The tie vote resulted in the denial of the inmate's application for a stay and left in place a decision by the Eleventh Circuit that had rejected as untimely and unmeritorious the prisoner's Eighth Amendment challenge to the drug protocol that the State of Alabama uses. Amendment challenge to the drug protocol that the State of Alabama used in its lethal injections. Judge Gorsuch's votes in support of two Tenth Circuit opinions rejecting similar challenges to the method in which a state carried out executions suggests that, if confirmed, he might provide a fifth vote against such challenges. In Warner v. Gross , Judge Gorsuch joined the majority opinion holding that the use of the drug midazolam in executions by lethal injection was unlikely to violate the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment. Gorsuch could be influential regarding the future of the death penalty. He has authored or joined opinions reviewing the manner in which states carry out executions, as well as opinions reviewing state court convictions and executions. If confirmed, he would replace Justice Scalia, who believed the death Penalty was fully consistent with the Eighth Amendment. He would replace two Justices currently on the Court who have argued openly that the practice is unconstitutional in all its forms, and with the Court remaining closely divided on many issues relating to capital punishment. Supreme Court later affirmed that decision by a vote of 5-4, with Justice Scalia in the majority. Similarly, in Estate of Lockett v. Fallin , Judge Gorsuch joined the majority opinion affirming the dismissal of an Eighth Amendment claim brought by an executed prisoner's estate. The court, relying on recent guidance from the Supreme Court, held that an accidental and "isolated mishap" that occurs during an execution does not violate the Eighth Amendment even if it causes some pain to the inmate. Trammel , Judge Gorsuch agreed that the court should deny the petitioner's claim for relief. But he expressed concerns with the state court's apparent willingness to impose capital punishment on an accomplice. The judge wrote that the Eighth Amendment phrase "cruel and unusual punishment" would likely bar such a concept of punishment. He wrote that such a punishment would likely be illegal under the First Amendment's Eighth Amendment clause, which protects the right to a fair trial and the presumption of innocence in a criminal case. State prisoners sentenced to death pursuant to a judgment of a state court may challenge their convictions and sentences in federal court. Such prisoners may file a petition seeking a writ of habeas corpus. That is, generally, a judicial determination as to whether the prisoner should receive a new trial, new sentence, or be released. Notably, the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 2002 provides for such a petition. Also find expression in opinions he has authored or joined reviewing federal district court decisions on ha beas corpus petitions. The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA) requires federal courts to accord a large degree of deference to state court decisions when reviewing a prisoner's conviction or sentence. This deferential standard of review, which is designed to avoid friction between the federal government and the states, typically makes it difficult for an inmate to prevail in a federal habeas case. Like Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined majority opinions denying such relief in a number of cases. executions, as well as opinions reviewing state court convictions and sentences in capital cases. These votes and opinions suggest that, while the nominee is not wholly opposed to scrutinizing a state's imposition of the death penalty, in line with his general views on judicial restraint, he generally accords a large degree of deference to decisions by state legislators, judges, and executive branch officials on matters relating to the states' imposition and administration of capital punishment. For example, in December 2016, the Court has remained divided concerns the manner in which states carry out the death Penalty. prisoner's convictions should be affirmed, and two judges (including Judge Gorsuch) agreed. Judge Gorsuch disagreed with the other two judges on the panel on the question of whether the state court of appeals had neglected to apply controlling Supreme Court precedent properly in assessing the petitioner's claim of juror bias during sentencing. He argued that the court should defer to the state appeals court's statements in its opinion, which indicated that the state trial court had applied the correct standard. He asserted that the Tenth Circuit owed "double deference" to the appeals court. asserted that the Tenth Circuit owed "double deference" to the state criminal appeals court's decision that the state trial court did not improperly fail to exclude the jurors from sentencing proceedings. Judge Gorsuch's opinions in these cases suggest he will largely defer to the states on matters related to capital punishment. In one capital case in which the majority denied the petition for habeas relief, he said he may question the state's imposition of the death penalty. In Williams v. Trammel, he agreed that the court should deny the petition. majority opinions denying such relief in a number of cases, emphasizing AEDPA's deferential standard of review. In a few cases, the judge has dissented from majority opinions granting such relief, arguing that the court should have accorded more deference to the state court's decision to reject the inmate's challenges to his sentence or conviction. For example, in Wilson v. Workman , the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals had rejected two death row inmates' claims of ineffective assistance of counsel. courts to apply AEDPA's deferential standard in reviewing the state court's decision. A further example of his tendency to defer to the states on capital punishment issues is his opinion in Eizember v. Trammel. The prisoner argued that the state trial court should have excluded jurors because of their alleged bias in favor of capital punishment. All three judges on the panel agreed that the prisoner's convictions should be affirmed, and two judges (including Judge T.S. Ellis) agreed with the prisoner. or how he would approach these issues if he were a Supreme Court Justice. Even in closely contested cases where concurring or dissenting opinions are filed, it still may be difficult to determine the preferences of the nominated judge. The act of joining an opinion authored by another judge does not necessarily reflect full agreement with the underlying opinion. For example, in an effort to promote consensus on a court, some judges will decline to dissent unless the underlying issue is particularly contentious. As one commentator notes, "[T]he nominated judge did not actually write an opinion in the case" In a number of opinions the nominee expressly limited the scope of the majority opinions he authored. He has also frequently concurred or dissented to take issue with majority opinions that, in his view, reached issues that were unnecessary to the court's ultimate purpose. In a 2009 concurrence, the nominee wrote that "[j]udicial restraint usually means answering the questions we must, not those we can" For more on this story, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. The fact that a judge joins in a majority opinion may not be taken as indicating complete agreement. Using caution when interpreting a judge's vote isolated from a written opinion may be particularly important with votes on procedural matters. For example, aJudge's vote to grant an extension of time for a party may be seen as a vote on the outcome of the case, rather than a vote to agree with the majority opinion on the underlying issue. A judge's silent acquiescence may be understood to mean something more like 'I accept the outcome in this case, and I accept that the reasoning in the majority opinions reflects what a majority of my colleagues has agreed on' as a "progressive" legal scholar prior to his appointment to the Court in 1939. Justice Harry Blackmun disappointed some early supporters by becoming a voice for judicial restraint and caution when the Court reviewed laws that restricted civil liberties during World War II and the early Cold War era. Justice Blackmun was originally considered by President Richard Nixon to be a "strict constructionist," in the sense that he viewed the judge's role as interpreting the law, rather than applying it to a specific case. Justice Blackmun authored the majority opinion in Roe v. Wade recognizing a constitutional right to terminate a pregnancy. He was generally considered one of the more liberal voices on the Court when he retired in 1994. The difficulty in attempting to predict how a nominee will approach the job of being a Justice remains even when the nominee has had a lengthy federal judicial career prior to nomination. Federal appellate judges are bound by Supreme Court and circuit precedent and, therefore, must adhere to the precedents set by the Supreme Court. owners chose to "run their business to reflect their religious values," challenged the contraceptive requirement. They argued that it violated their religious beliefs for their businesses to "facilitate any act that causes the death of a human embryo" The opinion for the majority of the Tenth Circuit concluded that the ACA contraceptive coverage requirement likely created a substantial burden on the organization's free exercise rights. The Tenth Circuit deferred to the plaintiff's conception of its religious beliefs, and, viewing the dilemma posed by the contraceptive. religious beliefs, and, viewing the dilemma posed by the contraceptive policy as a "Hobson's choice" Judge Tymkovich concluded that the policy amounted to a substantial burden. While acknowledging the "importance" of the government's proffered compelling interests in promoting public health and gender equality, he said the existence of a wide range of exemptions to the requirement undermined the justifications for the policy and demonstrated the policy was not the least restrictive means of achieving these goals. On. describing the majority approach as "dangerous . . . to religious liberty" because it is "not the job of the judiciary to tell people what their religious beliefs are" On appeal, the High Court agreed to hear multiple lower court decisions on this issue. In the consolidated case, Zubik v. Burwell , ordered the respective circuit courts to reconsider the cases after affording the parties time to reach a compromise that would provide contraceptive coverage without imposing the alleged burden on the challenging entities. a divided Court appears to have moved toward such an approach. The book does question the reach of Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey. In particular, the controlling plurality opinion in Casey reaffirming Roe v. Wade 's central holding respecting the right to an abortion, grounded the decision partly on the moral argument that "choices should be made for the sake of the child" and not for the benefit of the mother or the fetus. It asks open questions that "one might" ask about the efficacy of such an interpretation. grounded the decision partly on the moral argument that "choices central to personal dignity and autonomy" "are central to the liberty protected by the Fourteenth Amendment" The Casey plurality also concluded that the doctrine of stare decisis—or respect for long settled law—required upholding Roe. Relying on this second holding to respond to autonomy based arguments for a right to assisted suicide, Judge Gorsuch contended that Casey should be viewed as based on its "narrowest rationale" He took the view that the alternative of recognizing new rights based on broad libertarian concepts like individual autonomy like autonomy was not worth it. or denying protection to, the asserted right can be identified" when identifying what "liberty" interests are protected under the Fourteenth Amendment. Judge Gorsuch questioned "whether Justices O'Connor and Kennedy meant to suggest in Michael H. Baird that a court actually may disregard an on-point specific tradition . . . in favor of a more generally analogous, but less directly applicable one" The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the issue in the next few months, and the case is likely to be closely watched. O'Connor's Michael H. concurrence, Eisenstadt v. Baird , as "an equal protection decision," rather than a due process one. Judge Gorsuch appears to be somewhat skeptical of more expansive views of the historical test to determine what constitutes a fundamental right. In recent years, a divided Court appears to have moved toward such an approach, Judge Gorsuch says. He also examines what he calls the "reasoned judgment" approach whereby "moral reasoning" and "critical discourse"dictate what is a right. levels of abstraction," concluding that there is limited support for a historical right to assisted suicide. In Michael H. v. Gerald D. , Justice O'Connor's concurring opinion, joined by Justice Kennedy, had rejected the conclusion in Justice Scalia's plurality opinion that courts should look to the "most specific level at which a relevant tradition protecting, or denying protection to, the asserted right can be identified" Judge Gorsuch challenges the views of Justices O' Connor and Kennedy respecting the historical test and the level of abstraction needed to recognize a historically based fundamental right. court of appeals. Report highlights Judge Gorsuch's nonjudicial writings, many of which address assisted suicide and euthanasia. Report focuses particularly on cases in which the sitting panel was divided, as these cases arguably best showcase how he might approach a legal controversy. During his 2006 confirmation hearing, Judge Gorsuch dismissed the argument that his writings on euthanasia and assisted suicide had nothing to do with the case before me. The book does not purport to provide a conclusive view of the author's understandings of the underlying constitutional issues. do with the case before me," as the "litigants deserve better than that" and "the law demands more than that," he says. In fact, much of the book has little to do with the law. At its heart, the book explores the various ethical arguments regarding assisted suicide and euthanasia, ultimately lodging an argument against their legalization "based on secular moral theory" He argues that "the intentional taking of a human life by private persons is always wrong" But his book does not address "publicly authorized forms of assisted suicide" The nominee addressed key legal doctrines implicating the right to die, writes Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: The writings of a nominee to the Supreme Court may not fully represent the nominee's current views. He says Judge Gorsuch's nonjudicial writings on substantive due process suggest that the nominee is unlikely to interpret the substantive component of the Due Process doctrine, if elevated to the court. The nominee's book does not address "publicly authorized forms of killing like capital punishment and war," Zelizer says. The book centers on two Supreme Court cases from 1997, Washington v. Glucksberg and Vacco v. Quill. Judge Gorsuch devotes a chapter to questions related to determining whether a right to assisted suicide can be justified by looking at past historical practices. In evaluating the historical test for substantive due process, he notes that the Supreme Court has ruled against assisted suicide in the past. Some insight into the nominee's views on such issues can be found in the book's chapter on assisted suicide and euthanasia. Court as constitutionally protected, including right to privacy, right to an abortion, and the right to marry. Justice Scalia was a vocal critic of the substantive due process doctrine. While serving on the Tenth Circuit, Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined a few opinions that touch on the substantiveDue process doctrine, and he has never squarely ruled on the right of an abortion or the rightto marry. In a 2011 case, Kerns v. Bader , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of a divided panel, dismissed the substantivedue process claims brought by a plaintiff. against the officer by the victims of the crash, one of whom died and the other of whom suffered serious injuries. In so holding, Judge Gorsuch broadly discussed the substantive due process doctrine. He noted the doctrine as having a "paradoxical name" and being a "murky area" of law. The extensive concerns raised by Judge Gorsuch in his Browder opinions may signal the nominee's skepticism toward the application of the doctrine in cases presenting less egregious fact patterns, says Julian Zelizer. rights to informational privacy by asking for and obtaining his psychiatric records from a local hospital. Judge Gorsuch dismissed the claim on qualified immunity grounds after concluding that the plaintiff had failed to demonstrate that his rights were clearly established at the time of the alleged violation. The dissent, however, called the majority's conclusion on the privacy issue "dismaying" and argued that it was "patently clear" that "individuals have a constitutional right to have their medical records kept private from law enforcement officers pursuing general investigative ends" noting the dangers of '"unchecked disregard of the restrictions' imposed by the Constitution." Judge Gorsuch's Gutierrez-Brizuela concurrence may suggest that if he is elevated to the High Court, he may embrace a more formalist approach to separation-of-powers questions. The Supreme Court has been divided in recent years in cases involving the substantive component of the Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. The source for various unenumerated rights that have been recognized by the Court as constitutionally protected. New rights based on broad libertarian concepts like individual autonomy could "prove too much," he says. In this sense, paralleling Chief Justice Roberts's reasoning with regard to the scope of substantive due process protections, the views may question broader conceptions of the Due Process Clause. There are, however, limits on what can be gleaned from Judge Gorsuch's book with respect to his broader views on unenumerated, he writes. The views in his 2006 book are based on abstract notions of morality. expected to reject "functionalist" approaches that weigh the extent to which a challenged law or action upsets the equilibrium of powers the Framers hoped to achieve. His formalist approach seems to guide his views on both the limited and exclusive nature of judicial power. For example, he wrote the panel opinion in Loveridge v. Hall overturning a district court decision allowing malpractice and breach of fiduciary duty claims to be resolved in a non-Article III bankruptcy court without the consent of the parties. Gorsuch described the purpose of Article III of the Constitution as crafted by the Framers to be "the cure for their complaint [against the crown]" The nominee also exhibited some doubt regarding the continued viability of the longstanding distinction between public rights and private rights as a governing principle for determining the types of claims Article I. Article I of the U.S. Constitution protects the right of the people to sue the government for violations of their civil rights. The Constitution also protects the rights of the public to have a say in what happens to their property. governing principle for determining the types of claims Article I courts (like bankruptcy courts) can hear. Judge Gorsuch has repeatedly stressed that he believes that the division of legislative and judicial powers is not a mere "formality dictated by the Constitution" Rather, he views the separation of powers as essential to the preservation of liberty. To the founders, the legislative andjudicial powers were distinct by nature and their separation was among the most important liberty-protecting devices of the constitutional design, he says. among the most important liberty-protecting devices of the constitutional design," he wrote. The right of the people is essential to the preservation of all other rights later enumerated in the Constitution and its amendments, he added. According to Judge Gorsuch, the combination of legislative and judicial functions poses a threat to the people's liberty. The U.S. legal system is predicated on the notion that good borders make for good government, he said. "Dividing government into separate pieces bounded both in their powers and geographic reach is of irreplaceable value when it comes to securing the liberty of thepeople," he said in his dissent. The Tenth Circuit docket does not appear to have afforded Judge Gorsuch an opportunity to evaluate any rifts between the President and Congress. But a review of his written opinions suggests misgivings when Congress assigns legislative or judicial responsibilities to be carried out by the executive branch. His writings indicate he is a proponent of reinvigorating the non-delegation doctrine to police overly broad statutory delegations of legislative functions to the other branches. He seems to view vagueness problems with criminal statutes at least partially through a separation-of-powers lens. Gorsuch says combination of legislative and judicial functions poses a grave threat to liberty, fair notice, and equal protection. He has taken exception to the executive branch engaging in activities he regards as judicial functions, even where Congress has delegated the authority. Judge Gorsuch has emphasized the principle of individual liberty in applying his formalist approach to the issue of criminal proscriptions, writes Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: By restricting lawmaking to one branch, the framers sought to make the task of lawmaking more arduous still. leave it to the courts to step inside and say who could be rightfully detained, and who should be set at large. His writings from the bench suggest he prefers to apply what scholars frequently term a "formalist" approach to separation of powers. Based on these writings, if elevated to the Supreme Court, Judge Gorsuch could be expected to reject "functionalist" approaches that weigh the extent to the extent of government's powers in a given case. The Supreme Court is the highest court in the U.S. and has the power to overturn lower court decisions. concurring opinion calling into the question the wisdom and constitutionality of the doctrines created by both cases. Emphasizing the concept of separated powers envisioned by the Founders, Judge Gorsuch's concurring opinion distinguished between the elected legislature's task of setting policy prospectively and the judiciary's duty of neutrally interpreting the law in retroactively adjudicating disputes. This assignment of responsibilities ensures liberty by protecting parties who cannot alter their past conduct to the changes in majoritarian politics and bars unelected judges from setting policy for the nation. passed by both chambers of Congress and signed by the President. Judge Gorsuch has similarly expressed concerns, akin to those voiced by Justice Scalia, about invocations of alleged congressional or statutory purposes that are untethered from or contrary to the express statutory text. As a result, if Judge Gorsuch were to serve on the Supreme Court, his views on statutory interpretation would largely appear to align with those of Justice Scalia. Much like Justice Scalia,. Judge Scalia has opined that courts should interpret the law, not create it. Gorsuch has made limited resort to legislative history materials. He has expressed concerns about the use of such materials similar to those voiced by Justice Scalia. Such materials are not subject to the same bicameralism and presentment requirements as statutes because they are not passed by both chambers of Congress and signed by the speaker of the House. The nominee has expressed skepticism about a jurist's ability to discern a single legislative "intent" beyond that embodied in the express terms of the statute. Gorsuch wrote an opinion for a three-judge panel of the Tenth Circuit in Lexington Insurance Co. v. Precision Drilling Co., L.P. He contrasted canons that he viewed as "finely honed and consistent with the judicial function" with the so called "absurdity canon" He expressed concern that broad application of this canon could enable judges to disregard clear statutory text in favor of the jurists' perceived view of Congress's purpose in enacting the statute. Gorsuch has an arguably high affirmance rate given that the Supreme Court in recent years has reversed the lower courts in roughly seventy percent of all cases it heard. As several commentators have noted, Judge Gorsuch can be seen to employ the same general approach to questions of statutory interpretation that Justice Scalia did. This approach—known as textualism —looks to the statutory text, context, and structure when construing laws, rather than to extrinsic evidence of the intent or purpose of the Congress. an agency's interpretation of its own statutory authority. Given the breadth and scope of federal agency power, the nominee has also raised "questions like whether and how people can be fairly treated" Judge has said the number of regulations issued by agencies has "grown so exuberantly it's hard to keep up" "No one seems sure how many more hundreds of thousands (or maybe millions) of pages of less formal [guidance] might be found floating around these days," he said. on the doctrine of judicial deference to agency statutory interpretations. He does not appear to have expressed strong objections to the mechanics of discretionary or factual review. The nominee has joined or written several unanimous decisions upholding agency actions under the arbitrary and capricious standard. However, he has sometimes departed from his colleagues and written separately to find agency actions arbitrary or lacking in substantial merit. He has not said he would rule out the possibility of a Supreme Court hearing on the issue in the future, however. Gorsuch: "Powerful and centralized authorities like today's administrative agencies . . . warrant less deference from other branches, not more" Citing to Justice Felix Frankfurter's concurrence in Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, he dismissed more functionalist arguments in favor of a "titanic administrative state" He noted the dangers of '"unchecked disregard of the restrictions' imposed by the state. The time has come to face the behemoth, he said. Gorsuch joined an opinion holding that a Utah law requiring registered sex offenders to provide the government with their usernames and online identifiers for certain websites was a permissible content-neutral regulation of speech. Justice Scalia's written work and public speeches reflected distinct attitudes toward the use of contemporary foreign law and practice to inform understanding of the U.S. Constitution and federal statutes. In contrast, due in part to the nature of the Tenth Circuit's docket, Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence offers comparatively little guidance as to his likely approach. Gorsuch dissented from the denial of a petition for rehearing en banc based on his view that Congress had foisted too much of its authority on the executive branch. By separating the lawmaking and law enforcement functions, the framers sought to thwart the ability of an individual or group to exercise lawmaking power, he said. He explained his view in United States v. Nichols, in which the Supreme Court denied a rehearing for a case involving a sex offender who failed to register. The nominee has authored few opinions involving environmental law issues. If confirmed, he could serve as a critical vote on such matters if confirmed to the Court. He has previously cited a separation-of-powers rationale for the rule of lenity. The Supreme Court has been closely divided on various aspects of environmental law in recent years. The nominee has also participated in a handful of other environmental law cases, including one in which he was part of the panel majority in United States v. Smith. The Senate is expected to vote on the nominee's nomination on Friday. The nominee examined the Fourth Amendment's text along with scholarly works on its historical underpinnings to conclude that the Amendment does not include a right against malicious prosecution. In several opinions, Judge Gorsuch voiced sentiments similar to those of Justice Scalia about the need for the "rule of law" be "a law of rules" For example, in Hydro Resources, Inc. v. EPA , Judge Gorsuch, on behalf of a majority of the entire Tenth Circuit, concluded that the Tenth Circuit's ruling was correct. Gorsuch has criticized overcriminalization in much the same way Justice Scalia did. He resorts to the rule of lenity in construing criminal statutes that are seen to be ambiguous. In its standard formulation, the rule "insists that courts side with the defendant 'when the ordinary canons of the law are not clear'," he says. The rule "is not a rule of law," he adds, but a "rule of law" that is meant to be "defendant-friendly" courts side with the defendant 'when the ordinary canons of statutory construction have revealed no satisfactory construction,'" he writes. Much as Justice Scalia did, Judge Gorsuch invoked the rule of lenity in several criminal cases, including his 2015 opinion for a majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz. Here, he asserts that "[t]o the extent any ambiguity remains about the meaning of § 924(c)(1)(A)—after we have exhausted all the evidence of congressional meaning identified by the parties—we don't default" on the High Court, in contrast, relied, at least in part, on the phrase "when sentencing," which they would have construed to mean that a district court has no power to act after sentencing. On the question of the mens rea—or mental state—requirements of criminal statutes, Judge Gorsuch's textualist approach is sometimes said to have led to "defendant-friendly" results, as illustrated by his opinion dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc in United States v Games-Perez. majority of cases decided by three-judge panels of federal courts of appeals are decided without dissent. The Tenth Circuit is no exception to this general trend, with the overwhelming majority of opinions issued by that court being unanimous. While Judge Gorsuch's majority opinions garnered few dissents, he has displayed relatively more willingness to dissent from others' majority opinions than some colleagues on the Tenth Circuit. On the other hand, there may be some insight into his general approach to particular legal issues, as Table 2 below shows. Gorsuch's majority opinions were accompanied by separate opinions roughly 3.3 percent of the time. By comparison, only one of the six active judges serving on the Tenth Circuit at the exact same time as the nominee had a lower rate of drawing a separate opinion when writing for the majority. The relative infrequency with which fellow judges dissented or otherwise wrote separately may suggest the nominee places a high value on reaching consensus in the opinions he writes or has the ability to persuade others to join his opinions. approximately 180 published majority opinions authored by the nominee. Only one has been reviewed in a formal opinion by the Supreme Court, wherein the Court ultimately affirmed the Tenth Circuit decision by a 5-4 vote. One opinion that Judge Gorsuch joined, Direct Marketing Ass'n v. Brohl , was reversed by the Court in a substantive opinion. As a result, Judge Gorsuch has an arguably high affirmance rate given that the majority opinions he has authored have been reviewed by the High Court. Five additional opinions that Judge Neil Gorsuch joined have been the subject of a formal opinions by theSupreme Court. Of these five opinions, four were affirmed by the high Court. then addresses fourteen separate areas of law, arranged in alphabetical order, from "administrative law" to "takings" Within each section, the report reviews whether and how Judge Gorsuch has addressed particular issues in opinions he authored or joined. The report analyzes majority, concurring, and dissenting opinions, including decisions that Judge Gorsuch participated in while serving by designation on another federal court of appeals. Where relevant, theReport also notes Judge may contrast with those of some of his colleagues. But because separate opinions are infrequent on the Tenth Circuit, the dataset is relatively small. the D.C. Circuit. On the other hand, there may be limits to what can be gleaned from this data. The choice to write separately is one that stems from various factors, and may simply depend on the personality and preferences of an individual judge. For instance, the fact that Judge Gorsuch's majority opinions garnered relatively few dissents may be a product of the cases on which he wrote, which, in turn, are assigned by the most senior active judge on each panel. Unlike Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch's views on constitutional civil rights questions are less well known because he has had relatively few occasions to address such questions directly in cases before the Tenth Circuit. He has not, for example, had occasion to write on the constitutional limits on affirmative action or the equal protection rights of sexual minorities. Most of the civil rights decisions in which the nominee has participated have centered upon statutory civil rights claims and, in particular, statutory employment discrimination claims. The nominee's opinions in these cases to date have resulted in a variety of outcomes—some favorable to individual plaintiffs, some unfavorable. panel's view, caused her claims to fail. More commonly, instead of assessing constitutional civil rights claims, Judge Gorsuch's opinions have addressed claims arising under one or more federal civil rights statutes. Such statutes include Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended; the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA); the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA); the Americans with Disability Act (ADA); and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) Examining Judge Gorsuch’s various rulings interpreting these various statutes, it appears that his jurisprudence is largely a product of his preferences. review of the record," which examined official policies and testimony from several officers to conclude that the plaintiffs had provided sufficient evidence to proceed to trial on their claims of illicit discrimination. And Orr is not the only case in which Judge Gorsuch has ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in a statutory civil rights case, which could suggest that the ultimate outcomes of particular cases are driven by Judge Gorsuch's general judicial philosophy as opposed to a general preference to reach a business or government friendly outcome. Nonetheless, while evaluating Judge Neil Gorsuch's record on civil rights cases, it's important to keep in mind that he has also ruled against plaintiffs in other cases. government friendly outcome. Judge Gorsuch has written multiple opinions questioning the efficacy of a central—but complicated—doctrine in federal employment discrimination litigation, the McDonnell Douglas test. For instance, in keeping with his preference for clear rules and his general critique of "needless" complexities in the law, he has questioned the effectiveness of the McDonnell-Douglas test in antidiscrimination cases. The substance of several of the nominee's opinions on federal antidiscdiscrimination law is, at times, telling and may suggest that his general views on adjudication shape his approach. plain text throughout his analysis. Ultimately, the court held that the state law claims were preempted because the plaintiff failed to identify a parallel federal requirement based on off-label promotion of a medical device. Justice Scalia's views regarding the scope of constitutional and statutory civil rights protections were established in a number of judicial opinions. However, unlike a reflection on how his broader views on the role of the judge influence his civil rights jurisprudence, Judge Gorsuch's opinion took a different view of this argument based on perceived congressional intent. to be confirmed to the Court. Some commentators suggest that Judge Gorsuch would limit the exposure of civil defendants. Through his judicial and nonjudicial writings, Judge Gorsuch has expressed an interest in issues related to civil liability. While Judge Neil Gorsuch has authored or joined some rulings that were unfavorable to such individuals, this fact may be of limited effect. The judge's jurisprudence is largely a product of his preferences for textualism and rules based adjudication, as opposed to a preference to rule for a particular side. the Supreme Court, would likely bar such a concept of accessory liability. Judge Gorsuch has generally demonstrated a propensity to defer to the decisions of state legislators, judges, and executive branch officials in matters relating to capital punishment. He appears willing to scrutinize state court decisions that appear to contravene existing constitutional protections for capital defendants if those protections are clearly articulated in Supreme Court decisions. Nevertheless, Judge Gorsuch may be reluctant to engage in a broad reading of the Constitution and Supreme Court precedent that would expand the rights of such defendants beyond existing precedent. Justice Scalia cast critical votes in cases that read federal law relatively expansively to restrict the ability of plaintiffs to use class action litigation. In other cases, Justice Scalia cast important votes that more narrowly interpreted the scope of federal law to limit corporate defendants' potential civil liability. Given Justice Scalia's decisions, commentators have considered how Judge Gorsuch might affect the Roberts Court's perceived "warmth" toward businesses on civil liability matters if the nominee were to be confirmed to the Court. Pointing to his writings, they say Judge Gorsuch could succeed on the Supreme Court. "penchant for . . . high pleading and procedural standards for civil litigants" This interest is evident in several pointed critiques that he has authored on what he perceives as the misuses or excesses of litigation. In addition, when asked to identify "the 10 most significant cases over which you presided" on the Senate Judiciary Committee's "Questionnaire for Nominee to the Supreme Court," two of the ten cases Judge Gorsuch selected were opinions that affirmed the dismissal of civil claims by the district court. In the few cases that have come before him, Judge Gorsuch has articulated distinct views that may signal how he would approach administrative law matters if he were elevated to the Supreme Court. In cases both arising in the context of a challenge to a federal agency policy and outside of that context, the nominee sided with the majority of the appellate panel in most cases. In the few judicial access cases in which Judge Gorsuch wrote a separate opinion, he has tended to do so on the basis that the court lacked jurisdiction over the suit. Gorsuch responded affirmatively to a written question about whether his courtroom "would be open to intervention in litigation by those concerned with the administration of . . . public lands" He wrote that "Judges owe the same obligation of fidelity to the record and the law in all cases and to all of liberty" In many key areas of the law related to issues of federalism, he has written little, writes Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: Gleaning any general trends respecting the nominee's views in this area of law is difficult. the law by district courts unduly difficult, and egregious errors in important cases. A vote for or against rehearing a case en banc or on other procedural matters does not necessarily equate to an endorsement or repudiation of a particular legal position. Despite having served on the federal appellate bench for a decade, Judge Gorsuch has said little about some areas of law because of the nature of the Tenth Circuit's docket. It may be difficult to predict how he might rule on certain issues if he were elevated to the Supreme Court. Gorsuch's jurisprudence offers comparatively little guidance as to his likely approach on such matters if appointed to the Supreme Court. The Tenth Circuit docket involves few cases touching upon international law issues, and the handful of cases considered by Judge Gorsuch in this area has been unremarkable. In short, if Judge Gorsuch has any distinctive approach to interpreting the Constitution, he has not shown it in the cases that have come before him. He would likely follow the originalist judicial philosophy ascribed to Justice Scalia. yielded "unpredictable results" and "left the law and litigants confused" The nominee has suggested a number of attorney-initiated reforms aimed at making the civil justice system more accessible and affordable for both plaintiffs and defendants. A number of the nominee's opinions have noted his personal sympathies for particular parties in the case, but distinguished these sympathies from what he viewed the law to require. In a similar vein, while the nominee has occasionally questioned precedent that he viewed as inconsistent with the rule of law. Justice Scalia and Judge Gorsuch reject results-oriented judging. Both have emphasized that judges must render decisions that do not necessarily conform to their personal preferences. Scalia often pointed to his vote to strike down a law prohibiting flag burning as an example of how his judicial philosophy could yield results that did not align with his own inclinations. Similarly, in a 2016 dissent, Judge Gorsuch emphasized that the role of the judge is to "apply, not rewrite, the law enacted by the people's representatives," noting that a judge's role is to apply the law. accordance with their ordinary meaning at the time of drafting, or resulted in too much ambiguity in the meaning of the law. Many commentators opined that Judge Gorsuch would, if confirmed, follow in Justice Scalia's footsteps as an originalist, and largely "preserve the ideological balance that existed on the court when [Justice] Scalia died" These conclusions were echoed by academic studies. For example, following President Trump's election, several studies by political scientists suggested that Judge Scalia's judging style would replicate that of Judge Gorsuch if elevated to the Supreme Court. to be elevated to the Supreme Court. Such an outcome would be in keeping with the reported intentions of President Trump. On the other hand, during Judge Gorsuch's confirmation hearings for his seat on the Tenth Circuit in 2006, the nominee explicitly rejected the view that he had any particular "philosophy" toward judging. He noted that he "resist[ed]" being "pigeon-hole[d]" because "people do unexpected things and pigeon holes ignore gray areas in the law" Justice Scalia and Judge Gorsuch, there are also discernible differences in their views on the role of the judiciary. Judge Gorsuch's approach to judging can be seen to differ in tone and tenor from that of Justice Scalia. During his career on the High Court, Justice Scalia frequently authored fairly broad and uncompromising opinions that did not garner the votes of a majority of the majority. The differences in Justice Scalia's and Judge Scalia's writing styles may indicate broader contrasts between the two jurists. The nominee may be more focused on collegiality and consensus-building than the Justice he could replace. that of Justice Scalia. In contrast to the oft quoted sentiment that "if it is not necessary to decide more, it is necessary not to decidemore," Justice Scalia regularly criticized majority opinions that, in his view, failed to provide broader or clearer guidance to the lower courts. While the nominee has not been immune from criticism that particular majority opinions he wrote swept too broadly, in contrast to Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch's writings have generally espoused a more minimalist role for courts. For example, he noted in a 2012 dissent that In a lecture delivered in April 2016 at Case Western Reserve University School of Law, Judge Gorsuch commended Justice Scalia's approach toward judging. He described the late Justice's "vision" of what a "good and faithful judge" entails to be a "worthy one" Judge David Sentelle and Justices Byron White and Anthony Kennedy have also been compared to Judge Gorsuch, as well as other jurists. The judicial and nonjudicial writings of Judge Gorsuch may provide another—perhaps richer and more nuanced—basis for evaluating how his approach to judging compares to that of Justice Scalia or any other jurist. Many commentators have likened the nominee to Justice Scalia. During the nearly thirty years that Justice Scalia served on the Supreme Court, the late Justice was a well-known proponent of originalism, textualism, and the view that clear rules should guide the work of the lower courts. Accordingly, Justice Scalia vigorously dissented from opinions that, in his view, failed to construe legal texts in accordance with their ordinary meaning at the time of drafting, writes John Avlon, a former Supreme Court justice. things and pigeon holes ignore gray areas in the law, of which there are many," Judge Gorsuch said. The nominee also noted the influence of "three significant but quite different judges" Judge David Sentelle and Justices Byron White and Byron White were among the judges who "brought him up in theLaw," he said. Judge Gorsuch is expected to be confirmed to the Supreme Court in the coming weeks. He will replace Justice Antonin Scalia, who was nominated to the court by President Barack Obama. judging, the findings in Table 1 and Table 2 may be noteworthy. Professor Michael McConnell of Stanford University described Judge Gorsuch as "unfailingly cordial and collegial" Another former colleague, Robert Henry, now the President of Oklahoma City University, described Judge Neil Gorsuch's "judicial temperament" as "superb" Judge Gorsuch's approach to judging may also differ in substance from that of Justice Scalia. In contrast to the oft quoted "common ground," Judge Gorsuch aims to "find[] common ground" while being "scrupulously respectful" President Donald J. Trump announced the nomination of Judge Neil M. Gorsuch of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit (Tenth Circuit) to fill the vacancy on the Supreme Court of the United States created by the 2016 death of Justice Antonin Scalia. Judge Gorsuch was appointed to the Tenth circuit by President George W. Bush in 2006. Immediately prior to his appointment to the bench, the nominee served as the Principal Deputy to the Associate Attorney General, the third-ranking official at the Department of Justice. U.S. Department of Justice, assistin g the Associate Attorney General with oversight of the Department's various civil litigation components. Before serving in the Justice Department, the nominee worked in private practice as a civil litigator at the Washington, D.C. firm of Kellogg, Huber, Hansen, Todd, Evans & Figel. Judge Gorsuch began his legal career clerking for federal judges. He served two Supreme Court Justices, newly retired Justice Byron White and Justice Anthony Kennedy, during the October 1993 term. during the October 1993 term. This report provides an overview of Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence and discusses how the Supreme Court might be affected if he were to succeed Justice Scalia. It is important to note that, for various reasons, it is difficult to predict accurately an individual's likely contributions to the Court based on their prior experience. The report begins by discussing the nominee's views on two cross-cutting issues—the role of the judiciary and statutory interpretation. It then addresses fourteen separate areas of law, arranged in alphabetical. and briefly describes each opinion authored by Judge Gorsuch during his tenure on the federal bench. Other CRS products discuss various issues related to the vacancy on the Court. At least as a historical matter, attempting to predict how Supreme Court nominees may approach their work on the High Court is a task fraught with uncertainty. For an overview of available products, see CRS Legal Sidebar WSLG1526, Supreme Court Nomination: CRS Products, by [author name scrubbed] and [authorname scrubbed]. Consumers comes from renewable sources. Justice Scalia viewed federalism as "one of the Constitution's structural protections of liberty," writes Julian Zelizer. If confirmed to the Court, he might be willing to entertain arguments opposing the Court's use of the dormant Commerce Clause doctrine to strike down state environmental laws, he says. Zelizer: The limited number of cases in which the nominee has ruled on other aspects of federalism and the scope of federal power vis-à-vis the states makes it difficult to conclude with certainty that he would. Gorsuch's writings have been with respect to the dormant Commerce Clause. In one case, he wrote that the case fell "within the scope of Ex parte Young and was not barred by the Eleventh Amendment" In another, he described the doctrine as "another pocket of federal jurisprudence characterized by a long and evolving history of almost common-law-like judicial decision making" The nominee's clear views appear to align closely with those of Justice Scalia, who called the doctrine a "judicial fraud" and a "judge-invented rule" In Epel , Judge Gorsuch ultimately upheld a state law that required electricity generators to ensure that twenty percent of electricity sold to state consumers came from renewable resources. This conclusion was based on a strict reading of one line of dormant Commerce Clause cases. Detractors find dormant commerce clause doctrine absent from the Constitution's text and incompatible with its structure. He went on to note, however, that "as an inferior court we take Supreme Court precedent as we find it and dormant commerce Clause jurisprudence remains very much alive today" Supreme Court, in a series of decisions, has held that the Commerce Clause represents not only a grant of authority to Congress, but also a prohibition on states "imposing excessive burdens on interstate commerce without congressional approval" This implied "negative command" is known as the dormant or negative Commerce Clause. In Energy and Environmental Legal Institute v. Epel , Judge Gorsuch reviewed a dormant Commerce Clause challenge to Colorado's renewable energy standard (RES), which requires many electric utilities in Colorado to ensure that twenty percent of electricity sold to state consumers comes from renewable sources. The Supreme Court has read the clause as embodying a sort of judicial free trade policy. Employing what's sometimes called "dormant" or "negative" commerce clause jurisprudence, judges have claimed the authority to strike down state laws that, in their judgment, unduly interfere with interstate commerce. Detractors find dormant commerce clause doctrine absent in this case. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few weeks. The case is expected in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York. In De Niz Robles , a precursor to the Tenth Circuit's opinion in Gutierrez-Brizuela , Judge Gorsuch, writing for a unanimous panel, rejected the retroactive application of an agency's adjudication that upset the affected party's reliance interests. The Tenth Circuit had previously deferred to an agency’s interpretation of an ambiguous statute under Chevron and Brand X when the agency prospectively applied a statutory interpretation at odds with the court's prior reading. In this case, the agency retroactively applied an interpretation against a party who had significant reliance interests on the prior contrary Tenth Circuit decision. generally applicable rules—the less likely such a decision should be granted retroactive force. De Niz Robles concluded that when an agency issues an interpretation of an ambiguous statutory provision under Chevron via an adjudication that displaces a contrary judicial decision, it is operating like legislators setting new policies. In TransAm Trucking, Inc. v. Department of Labor, he has tended to be more skeptical of deferring to agencies on legal questions. For example, he ruled that such decisions should presumptively apply only prospectively. Congress has delegated the authority. In a pair of cases interpreting two statutory provisions, one permitting the Attorney General to grant relief from removal to aliens and the other prohibiting it, he applied—but objected to—the Supreme Court's precedent in Chevron and Brand X. In De Niz Robles v. Lynch, he established for the majority that there is a presumption of prospectivity to agency exercises of delegated legislative authority unless Congress has clearly authorized retroactivity, he said. He said agency decisions generally permit agency decisions to override judicial decisions where statutory ambiguity is identified. Gorsuch has taken a narrow view of the situations in which Chevron deference is due. In Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch, the nominee wrote a separate concurring opinion calling into the question the wisdom and constitutionality of Chevron. He has critiqued Chevron and Brand X and has questioned the wisdom of deference to an agency's determination under Chevron andBrand X. The nominee has been nominated to the U.S. Supreme Court by President Barack Obama, who is up for re-election in 2016. If he were to succeed Justice Scalia, the nominee's opinions in De Niz Robles and Gutierrez-Brizuela could suggest that he might favor a narrowing of the scope of Chevron deference in future cases. On the other hand, while Justice Scalia supported Chevrondeference in cases of perceived statutory ambiguity, he nevertheless frequently found that statutory text was unambiguous, and, thus, there was no need for deference to Chevron. The nominee's views on the doctrine are discussed below. Court in Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. A court will generally defer to an agency's interpretation of a statute that is seen to be silent or ambiguous on a particular issue. In National Cable & Telecommunications Ass'n v. Brand X Internet Services, the Supreme Court interpreted Chevro n to extend to agency's interpretation even if a court had previously interpreted the statute in question. As a statistical matter, under the Chevron doctrine, courts have often deferred to an agencies interpretation of its own statutory authority. The panel majority upheld a determination by the Department of Labor that a truck driver was terminated in violation of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act. At issue was whether the truck driver engaged in protected activity under the Act by "refus[ing] to operate a vehicle" The court deferred under Chevron to the Department's determination that the driver's decision to drive his truck away from his trailer in freezing conditions qualified as protected activity. Judge Gorsuch wrote a dissenting opinion, arguing that the decision to terminate the driver was wrong. that statutory text was unambiguous, and, thus, there was no need to consider whether deference to the agency was appropriate. Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion in that case, objecting to the majority's decision on pragmatic and constitutional grounds. In Justice Scalia's view, and in a view similar to the nominee's, Brand X impermissibly permits "[j]udgments within the powers vested in courts by the Judiciary Article of the Constitution" to be overruled by executive branch officers. Concurrence further noted that the Founders provided that "judicial judgments 'may not lawfully be revised, overturned or refused faith and credit by' the elected branches of government" In the views of the nominee, however, Brand X runs contrary to this constitutional alignment by permitting executive branch agencies to displace the judiciary's legal determinations. As a consequence, Judge Gorsuch suggested that under Brand X , judicial declarations of what the law means are no longer authoritative. Such decisions are "subject to revision by a politically motivated agency," he said. Justice Scalia in invoking the "rule of lenity" when construing language that is seen to be ambiguous in favor of criminal defendants. On the other hand, the nominee's recently expressed concerns about " Chevron deference" —judicial deference to the reasonable interpretations by executive branch agencies of ambiguous or silent statutes. These last two facets of Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence are discussed in more detail later in this report.. Consistent with a textualist approach to statutory interpretation, Judge Gorsuch in a number of his deference. to the agency's view, allowing regulated parties to rely on consistent agency interpretations. Gorsuch wrote a dissenting opinion, arguing that the statute's meaning was plain. For him, "refus[ing] to operate a vehicle" simply did not include actually driving a vehicle. He rejected extending Chevron deference to the agency's interpretation, noting that, in contrast to the majority's reasoning, the absence of a statutory definition did not create ambiguity. Instead, Judge Gorsuch thought the statute was clear and unambiguous, and therefore would have ruled against thegency's interpretation at Chevron 's first step. The Gutierrez-Brizuela concurrence also critiqued a prominent justification for the Chevron doctrine. The application of Chevron deference violates the non-delegation doctrine, the concurrence said. The Chevron doctrine gives an agency authority to interpret the scope of its own jurisdictional power, it said. It also gives the agency the ability to reverse itself on short notice, it added. The concurrence questioned the propriety of consolidating power in the hands of a single branch of government. Under Brand X , Judge Gorsuch has argued, the executive branch is empowered to render decisions on the meaning of the law. Under Chevron deference, in Judge Gorsuch's view, operates as an "abdication" of the courts' duty to say what the law is. For the nominee, the constitutional remedy when the political branches disagree with the judiciary's interpretation of theLaw is legislation. Because such decisions are "subject to revision by a politically accountable branch of government," the nominee argues. deference effectively "invests the power to decide the meaning of the law . . . in the very entity charged with enforcing the law," he argued. Given the "vast power" of the executive branch and the lack of effective oversight of political appointees, he argued, "[u]nder any conception of our separation of powers, I would have thought powerful and centralized authorities like today's administrative agencies would have warranted less deference from other branches, not more," he said. Instead, he said, courts should examine the law's meaning de novo, or without deference to the agency's view. Engineers promulgated a rule defining the scope of waters protected under the Clean Water Act. Judge Gorsuch has expressed skepticism regarding the extent to which judges should defer to an administrative agency's reasonable interpretation of silent or ambiguous language in a statute it administers. Some commentators have suggested that a judge's refusal to defer to agency interpretations would impede efforts by federal agencies to regulate activities that would negatively impact the environment. If applied consistently, this could lead to a lack of deference to EPA interpretations of environmental statutes. also implied that he might have voted in favor of the groups joining the litigation if the government had abandoned its efforts to enforce the law at issue. Once a plaintiff in an environmental case has satisfied any jurisdictional and procedural requirements to bringing a lawsuit, a court might review the substance of the federal agency action. Sometimes, an action by an environmental agency may be based on that agency's interpretation of a statute that it administers, such as in 2015 when EPA and Army Corps of Engineers promulgated a rule defining the scope of waters protected. he wrote a majority opinion upholding EPA's reinterpretation of its Resource Conservation and Recovery Act regulations governing mineral processing waste. The court held that EPA was not required to provide notice and comment to change a "tentative" interpretation of its own. Neither the agency's original interpretation of the regulations nor the subsequent re interpretation was made in accordance with the APA's notice and comments rulemaking procedures, the court said. The ruling was published in the Federal Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. Gorsuch notes potential statutory and constitutional concerns regarding agency action that would uproot nontentative interpretations of law. Environmental cases may also implicate other constitutional issues, including the relationship between federal and state authorities. One question that may arise is whether the Constitution's Commerce Clause should render invalid certain state environmental laws. The Supreme Court, in a series of decisions, has held that it owed deference to the Bureau's interpretation of the order because that interpretation was consistent with the circumstances surrounding the order and its subsequent conduct. Judge Neil Gorsuch joined a majority opinion determining that an environmental group had standing to challenge the Bureau of Land Management's interpretation of its own prior order. The majority opinion concluded that the environmental group would suffer injury from the company beginning mining operations by impairing "the ability of its members to continue enjoyment of the aesthetic and scientific aspects of the Lila Canyon," the opinion said. The decision was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which is expected to rule on the case in the next few months. record and the law in all cases and to all persons appearing before them—regardless of who the litigant is or what the nature of the claim may be," he says. Judge Gorsuch has had limited opportunities to evaluate intervention matters in environmental cases. In 2013, he dissented from a majority opinion holding that environmental groups were entitled to intervene as of right in a lawsuit challenging a Forest Service plan in New Mexico's Santa Fe National Forest. Although his dissent in Backcountry argued that the environmental groups should not have been allowed to intervene in the case, the opinion also implied that he might have voted in favor of them. The outcome of an environmental case often depends on the court's resolution of threshold procedural issues. If such lawsuits are filed, to proceed an ongoing lawsuit, a plaintiff will need to establish standing. The limited number of cases on standing in the environmental context makes it difficult to discern any broad tendencies of Judge Gorsuch on the subject, says Julian Zelizer, a professor of law at the University of California, Los Angeles. He says there is no discernible trend in his environmental standing jurisprudence. The plaintiffs challenged a temporary U.S. Forest Service order that allowed motorcycles but prohibited all-terrain vehicles on certain forest trails. Judge Gorsuch, writing for a unanimous court, determined that the appellants lacked a genuine stake in the outcome of the proceedings. In dismissing the case, the nominee wrote that a victory for the appellant "would seem to do" for the plaintiffs. The case was dismissed because the plaintiffs lacked standing, the judge wrote in his decision. The decision was unanimous.