In all but Minnesota, the laws in general apply to all institutions of higher education, public and private. Minnesota’s law applies only to public colleges. Three of the eight states (Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Tennessee) have laws specifically requiring campus safety authorities to maintain daily logs open to public inspection. The remaining five, while not prescribing the log format, require disclosure of information similar to that required to be kept in the logs.and West Virginia. Certain provisions are common to a number of these state laws. All 50 states have open records or "sunshine" laws, most of which require public institutions' records to be open to the public unless they are specifically exempted. For example, Colorado’s open records law declares that it is public policy that all state records be open for inspection, including all writings made, maintained, or kept by the state. These laws generally provide that if records are kept, they must be open; the laws are not intended to impose a new recordkeeping requirement. The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) generally prohibits the disclosure of education records or information from education records. A 1992 amendment to FERPA, however, means reports of incidents maintained by campus law enforcement officials for law enforcement purposes are not now classified as education information. Even incidents reported to campus authorities other than law enforcement may be disclosed. For example, according to comments the Department received during rulemaking, students are sometimes more comfortable reporting incidents—particularly sex-related offenses—through academic rather than law law enforcement channels. contain a provision exempting disclosure that is otherwise prohibited by law. Many prohibit publication of the names of victims or of victims of sex-related crimes. Many also include some type of provision protecting witnesses, informants, or information that might jeopardize an ongoing investigation. The laws also differ in a number of other respects, such as the following: California, Pennsylvania, and Oklahoma specifically provide for penalties for noncompliance; the other states do not specify penalties. Only California includes a specific reference to occurrences involving hate. Records must be open, if kept; the intent is not to impose a new recordkeeping requirement. Names and addresses of persons arrested are not required unless otherwise provided by law. Information may be withheld upon certification of need to protect the investigation, but in no event after the arrest. Names of persons reporting, victims, witnesses, or uncharged suspects or other information related to investigation are required. Identification required is not specified. The first copy of this report is available online at http://www.dailymail.co.uk/. To identify difficulties colleges were having in complying with the act, we interviewed officials at 27 colleges selected from a judgmental sample of colleges from the following four groups. Members of the International Association of Campus Law Enforcement Administrators (IACLEA)—Ten Colleges. Non-IACleA Members in States With Open Log Laws—Eight Colleges. Using a list of non-IacLEA colleges provided by IACLEa, we selected six 4-year and two 2-year colleges. by IACLEA, we selected six 4-year and two 2-year colleges representing all eight states with open log laws and spoke to their heads of campus security. All eight colleges had an enrollment exceeding 1,000 students. Colleges in States Without Open Log Laws—Seven Colleges. We randomly selected colleges that participated in title IV programs from the Department’s Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System, stratified by type of college and geographic region. The chiefs ofcampus security at these seven colleges composed the list. Of the 25 reports we reviewed, only 2 provided information in all the prescribed categories. Campus law enforcement officials differ as to whether their reported statistics must include crimes reported to them by other campus authorities. Some were concerned about reporting incidents for which no details were provided because, without details on specific cases, they were unable to verify that a crime had occurred, had been properly classified, or had been counted. The fact that the incidents need not be reported is reflected by variations in campus security reports. The consistency and completeness of campus crime reporting envisioned under the act have been difficult to attain for two primary reasons. The differing characteristics of colleges may affect the colleges’ ability to provide a complete and consistent picture of incidents that occur on their campuses. Some confusion exists about reporting requirements, particularly about how certain categories of crimes are to be classified. For example, record systems of some local police departments do not lend laws are not intended to impose a new recordkeeping requirement. The Department of Justice is investigating the issue. Under the new monitoring guidance, program reviewers must check a college’s crime report for all required information. The accuracy of crime statistics need not be verified unless it becomes apparent from a complaint or some other source that the security report may be incomplete or inaccurate. In such cases, the Department is to take appropriate action to ensure compliance, including more thoroughly examining the statistics and, if warranted, taking action to rectify the situation. It is unlikely that the reviewers checked whether the reports contained all the required information or whether information was accurate. The Department conducted a national survey on campus crime and security. A representative sample of 1,500 colleges was surveyed to establish baseline information on crime statistics. The Department plans to evaluate whether additional actions are needed at the federal level. It also asked the campus security officials interviewed to send us a copy of the survey results, as well as complaints about crime statistics at the colleges they were included in the survey. The results were published in a report published by the Department of Justice on Wednesday. The report was released to coincide with the start of the 2014-15 school year. Some local police departments do not lend themselves to converting incidents to the categories required for campus security reports. Identifying incidents at college-related facilities can be a problem when a campus is dispersed throughout a large urban area. Three law enforcement officials told us that offenses are less likely to result in arrests on campuses that do not have security departments with the power to make arrests. We identified eight states that require public access to campus police or security department records on reported crimes: California, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia. state statutes and spoke with representatives of campus safety and other interest groups as well as faculty specializing in criminal justice. Names and addresses of arrested persons and charges against them Exempts from disclosure incidents involving certain types of handicapped persons, which are to be separately maintained. Public and private campuses (under the state’s Campus Security Act, private colleges’ police departments are public agencies for the limited purpose of crime enforcement) Records must be open, if kept; the intent is not. In 60 percent of the reports we reviewed, colleges had difficulty complying with the reporting requirement for sex-related offenses. Colleges are required to report statistics on sexual offenses; they are not required to distinguish between forcible and nonforcible offenses. Of the reportsWe reviewed, 15 incorrectly categorized offenses. Several colleges listed incidents as “rape” or “attempted rape,” both of which are less inclusive than the term “forcible sexual offense.” We also noted a discrepancy in how colleges reported the number of murders. had occurred, had been properly classified, or had been counted only once. At some colleges, security officials do not receive even unverifiable statistics from counselors. Officials at five colleges said counselors are not required to or generally do not report incidents to them. Although colleges’ statistical reports included most of the prescribed criminal reporting categories, reporting officials appeared to have difficulty principally with two categories: sex offenses and murder. In 60 percent of the cases, the crimes were not reported to the proper office. 11 of the 16 officials we asked about the omission told us they were unaware of the requirement. Another two said they lacked direction on how to report these crimes. The Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act requires that crime statistics include on-campus occurrences reported to local police. However, of the reports we reviewed, only five included this information. It was not mentioned in the Department’s letters explaining the statistical reporting requirements. It also was not included in the reports explaining the statistics. It is not required to report crimes based on race, religion, sexual orientation or ethnicity. includes a specific reference to occurrences involving hate; in fact, California’s law requires inclusion of noncriminal hate-related incidents. We did not find any reported cases challenging these laws or any studies of their positive or negative effects. All 50 states have open records or “sunshine” According to the Student Press Law Center”s Covering Campus Crime: A Handbook for Journalists, all 50 states has open records and ‘sunshine.’ We also agreed to determine whether any legal challenges had been raised to state open campus crime log laws. A federal open crime log law could offer more timely access to information on campus crime. However, inherent differences among colleges will be a long-term obstacle to achieving comparable, comprehensive campus crime statistics. For example, such logs might not include off-campus incidents or, without an amendment to FERPA, incidents that students report through non-law-enforcement channels. Reported by 25 colleges and evaluated to determine the extent to which the reports conformed to crime reporting requirements prescribed in the act. We did not trace the numbers to source documents to check their accuracy or completeness. The law also requires colleges to provide timely warning to the campus community about crimes that are considered to represent a threat to other students and employees. The bills were modeled after a law that has been in effect in Tennessee since 1994. The law requires the collection of data on campus crime, distinct from state or local data, and that information on the incidence of campus crime and of colleges’ security policies and procedures be available. The statistical reporting provision requires Colleges to annually compile and report to thecampus community statistics on reported crimes. 11 states have laws requiring schools to compile and release statistics on campus crime. Two bills would have required more detailed and current campus security records to be made accessible to the public. Although a hearing was held in the House, no further action was taken before the session’s end. Had the bills been enacted, they would have applied to colleges with police or security departments and required the colleges, in addition to reporting annual crime statistics, to maintain open-to-the-public, easily understood daily logs. The Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act of 1990 and its implementing regulations require colleges to publish and distribute an annual security report. The report includes statements about campus law enforcement policies, security education and crime prevention programs, alcohol and drug policies, sexual assault education and prevention programs. It also includes procedures for reporting sexual assaults, procedures explaining how reports of sexual assaults will be dealt with, and annual statistics on crime incidents. The law also requires colleges to provide timely information on campus crime incidents and sexual assaults. Department of Education is responsible for administering title IV programs. Only 24 of 2,800 title IV program reviews identified campus security violations. Department officials told us that monitoring had generally been limited to checking whether colleges published a campus security report and had procedures for its distribution. Since no review guidance for monitoring campus security was available until September 1996, it is unlikely that the reviewers checked whether the reports were accurate. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The Department of Education began issuing guidance to colleges on complying with the law in 1991. Guidance for monitoring program compliance came much more slowly. The Department did not issue its first program review guidance specifically addressing campus security until September 1996. As of January 1997, the Department had not imposed sanctions against any college found in noncompliance with campus security requirements. The department had identified violations at 63 colleges since the law’s enactment. It had not issued a required report to the Congress. It has only recently expanded its monitoring efforts by initiating program reviews that specifically address compliance. compliance, including more thoroughly examining the statistics and, if warranted, taking formal administrative action. As of January 1997, the Department had received five complaints of noncompliance. One precipitated an in-depth campus security compliance review; the other four complaints are still being investigated. Reasons for the difficulty include reviewers’ limited experience in dealing with law enforcement matters, uncertainties about how to interpret certain definitions of reportable crimes, and differences among campuses that make evaluation difficult under a single set of program. The Department has yet to issue guidance for independent auditors who conduct federally required annual audits of all colleges participating in title IV programs. As of August 1996, only six audits had documented noncompliance on security matters since the act took effect. Most auditors participating in training sessions held in regional Inspector General offices were unaware of campus security reporting requirements. The Department plans to issue an updated audit guide that will explicitly refer to campus security compliance and instruct auditors to ensure that campus security reports are prepared and distributed according to federal requirements. The Department was more than 1 year late in issuing a report on campus crime statistics to the Congress. Citing limited resources to perform such a review, the Department postponed issuing the report until February 1997. A Department official responsible for writing the audit guide expects it to be issued some time in 1997. The law required the Department to review campus crimeStatistics and issue a report to theCongress by September 1, 1995. As the basis for the report, the department conducted a study of campus security practices. certain categories of crimes are to be classified. The Department originally relied mostly on its regulations, letters to colleges, and technical assistance. Its continued efforts in providing technical assistance to school officials, as well as its recent issuance of monitoring guidance to Department officials, may achieve more consistent reporting and compliance with the law by colleges. However, inherent differences among colleges will be a long-term problem for the Department of Justice and for the colleges that enforce the law. For example, these efforts may improve consistency in categories used and type of crimes reported. in July 1994. To help colleges achieve compliance, the Department emphasizes providing such assistance, rather than imposing sanctions. Under Department policy, the Secretary imposes sanctions only if a college flagrantly or intentionally violates the regulations or fails to take corrective action when required to do so. Available sanctions include fines or limitation, suspension, or termination of participation in federal financial aid programs. Department officials told us that although the Department and independent auditors had identified violations at 63 colleges since the law’s enactment,. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. February 12, 1997, the Department of Education provided comments on a draft of this report (see app. III). The Department generally agreed with our basic conclusions and provided us a number of technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of thisReport to the Secretary of Education, appropriate congressional committees, and other interested parties. Please call me at (202) 512-7014 or Joseph J. Eglin, Jr., Assistant Director, at (Washington, D.C.) if you or your staff have any questions.