The Section 5 Pilot to reduce reporting burden has made progress. The design of the procurement portion of the pilot has improved substantially. The current design remains limited by its lack of specifics regarding how a pilot focused on assessing contractors’ experiences with a centralized portal will be applicable to many other federal procurement reporting requirements. By addressing issues such as this and continuing to focus on implementing the act, the administration greatly increases the likelihood of creating a system that will achieve the goals of the act. The goal is to increase the transparency of financial information and improve the usefulness of that data. types of FAR-required reporting and the revised design briefly mentions other FAR requirements such as those for service contracts and affirmative action plans. The absence of an assessment methodology and an approach to test the scalability of the design is inconsistent with leading practices for pilot design. The pilot design will meet its stated objective of reducing procurement reporting burden more broadly. HHS has taken a number of steps to reduce the reporting burden on the federal government, including the creation of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Section 5 Pilot has two primary focus areas—federal grants and federal contracts (procurements) OMB partnered with HHS to design and implement the grants portion of the pilot and with GSA to implement the procurement portion. HHS developed six “test models” to evaluate different approaches to potentially reducing grantee reporting burden. OMB’s Office of Federal Procurement Policy (OFPP) developed and test a proof of concept reporting portal for reports required by the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and is piloting it with the centralized reporting of certified payroll by contractors working construction projects. grants and procurement portions of the Section 5 Pilot. The DATA Act requires that the pilot program should include the following design features: collect data during a 12-month reporting cycle and include a diverse group of federal award recipients. We determined that the updated design meets the statutory requirements for the pilot established under the DATA Act. The updated design for both parts of the Pilot meets the requirements for a pilot program. The pilot program will be rolled out over the course of the next two years, with a goal of completing it by the end of 2015. OMB’s July 2016 revision of the design of the procurement portion of the Section 5 Pilot also showed substantial improvements in reflecting the leading practices for effective pilot design. 5. Ensure appropriate two-way stakeholder communication and input at all stages of the pilot project, including design, implementation, data gathering, and assessment. The revised design includes a data-analysis plan that describes how OMB will collect, track, and analyze data produced by the pilot. It specifies that participants will submit payroll information to the centralized test portal on a weekly basis. leading practice were met. If we identified a critical gap or shortcoming related to the practice, we determined that the criteria were not met. HHS and OMB generally accepted the design of the grants and procurement portions of the pilot during our review. The design partially met the criteria. When we were unable to assess whether all aspects of a leading practice were meeting, we deemed the design partially meeting the criteria, the report said. The report said the design was in line with the requirements of the DATA Act. a risk of errors being introduced though human error. Agencies that are developing interim solutions will only have until May 2017 to test the data before the reporting deadline. As required by the DATA Act, OMB is conducting a pilot program, known as the Section 5 Pilot, aimed at developing recommendations for reducing reporting burden for grantees and contractors. The Section 5 pilot has two primary focus areas—federal grants and federal contractors. An OMB document commended these agencies for developing robust contingency plans since this will better position them for timely implementation. OMB and Treasury to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our recommendation related to providing technical guidance. To assess whether the Section 5 pilot designs meet statutory design requirements, we reviewed Section 5 of the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006. We reviewed the draft design documents to assess OMB and its partners’ plans for meeting these requirements. To supplement our review of those plans, we also spoke with cognizant staff implementing these pilots at OMB, HHS, and General Services Administration. of the pilot during our review. Officials generally accepted our feedback as useful and, in some instances, noted that they have or planned to make changes to their design as a result of our input. We also met with OMB to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our recommendation related to the design of the pilot for reducing recipient reporting burden. We conducted the work upon which this report is based from May 2016 to December 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to HHS’s March 2016 revised design for the grants portion of the pilot partly reflects all five of the leading practices for effective pilot design. For example, in our April 2016 review we found that the grants design lacked specific details regarding how the data will be analyzed and how conclusions will be reached. Based on our feedback, OMB and HHS developed a plan to analyze survey and other data prior to the these pilots at OMB, HHS, and General Services Administration. We determined that the design met the criteria when we saw evidence that all aspects of a leading practice were met. federal contracts, grants, and subawards with an aggregate value between $1 billion and $2 billion. Based on our review of design documents as well as interviews with cognizant agency staff, there has been substantial improvement in this area since our last review. Both the grants and procurement portions of the pilot showed substantial improvements in the extent to which they reflect leading practices for pilot design (shown in the textbox below). The design of the overall pilot would meet these requirements. plan to analyze survey and other data prior to the start of data analysis. This plan specifies the types of quantitative and qualitative data analysis HHS intends to conduct for each test model and how that assessment links back to the stated hypotheses. HHS also added a sampling plan and information on participant outreach efforts to the design of the grants portion of the pilot which helped it to meet the leading practices for effective pilot design. Establish well-defined, appropriate, clear, and measurable objectives. Clearly articulate an assessment methodology and data gathering. more broadly. HHS has taken a number of steps to begin implementing the design of the grants portion of the pilot. Officials told us that they have attended an estimated 70 events since 2015 to discuss the grants pilot, during which they provided information to interested attendees on how to get involved. As of August 2016, HHS has begun administering data collection instruments for all of the test models. It has engaged in a number. of outreach efforts to recruit participants for its test models, officials told us. They have attended around 70 events. since 2015. objectives. Clearly articulate an assessment methodology and data gathering strategy. Identify criteria or standards for identifying lessons about the pilot to inform decisions about scalability. Develop a detailed data-analysis plan to track the pilot program’s implementation and performance. evaluate the final results of the project and draw conclusions on whether, how, and when to integrate pilot activities into overall efforts. Ensure appropriate two-way stakeholder communication and input for the project. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In August 2016, we reported that agencies are relying on a series of software patches from their enterprise resource planning (ERP) vendors to facilitate their data submissions. ERP vendors are developing patches that will extract data to help their clients develop files that comply with DATA Act requirements. Patches that will facilitate the generation of agency file submissions were planned to be completed between August 2016 and February 2017. As of September 2016, the release of one of these patches has been delayed. These patches will help link an agency’s financial and award systems. implemented since the patches will enable them to construct and format their files for submission to the broker. Two agencies reported in their implementation plan updates that a delay in the release of the patches could jeopardize complete and timely data submission for May 2017. Treasury officials acknowledged that patches will make the submission process easier, but also pointed out that not every agency is able to take advantage of software patches. Some agencies reported that they developed plans for interim solutions to construct these files until the patches can be developed, tested, and configured. example, USDA officials said that the effort to create an interim solution has been very resource intensive. HHS has also developed an interim reporting solution that can generate the required files without depending on a patch. However, HHS officials said this interim solution is complex and their processes cannot be fully automated until the Oracle patch is released. Furthermore, since these processes are not fully automated, they carry a risk of errors being introduced though human error, officials said.. Agencies are working with HHS to develop a solution. As of September 30, 2016, data uploaded to the broker needs to successfully meet less than a quarter of these complex validation checks in order to be accepted for submission to Treasury. Treasury officials said that having about half of the validation rules produce warnings rather than fatal errors would provide agency officials with the flexibility to correct issues flagged by the broker or not to do so, depending on their knowledge of the context and situation of specific data elements. According to Treasury documents, in a future release of the broker, data submissions will need to pass more of these validation rules at a later date. The files will undergo two types of validation checks in the broker before being submitted to Treasury. Data element validations check whether data elements comply with specific format requirements such as field type and character length. Complex validations perform tasks such as checking data against other sources or using calculation rules to verify whether certain data elements sum up to each other. Treasury has configured these complex validation rules so that if a rule is not met, the broker can either produce a warning message while still accepting the data for submission or. Treasury released the schema version 1.0 on April 29, 2016—4 months later than planned and approximately a year before reporting is required to begin under the act. Under the act, agencies must report data in compliance with established standards by May 2017. OMB’s summary of agencies’ implementation plan updates acknowledged that the.still needs to be addressed to ensure agencies report consistent and comparable data. The newly established Data Standards Committee will be responsible for developing guidance to provide additional operational clarity regarding these data definitions. systems limitations, modernization efforts, and timing. For example, one agency reported that validation presents challenges because its financial systems are not properly integrated with procurement and grant systems. Similarly, several of its components are undergoing grant, procurement, or financial system improvements that coincide with implementing the DATA Act, which could pose a risk to timely DATA Act implementation if the improvements are delayed. The lack of properly integrated systems increases the risk of delays in implementing the Data Act, according to one agency. Another agency reported, for one of its legacy systems, obtaining the unique identifier to generate award financial data will likely be a manual process. The broker also extracts award and sub-award information from existing government-wide award reporting systems. This function was added during software development efforts in late September and early October 2016. Unlike the files submitted by agencies, these extracted files are not subject to any validations in the broker. However, Treasury implemented additional validation checks on the file containing agency financial information. Some of the programs, grants award-level information may not be reported for security reasons. The broker is based in Washington, D.C. Treasury’s software development team has been iteratively testing and developing the broker. On September 30, 2016, Treasury released a version of the broker, which it stated was fully capable of performing the key functions of extracting and validating agency data. Treasury officials told us that although they plan to continue to refine the broker to improve its functionality and overall user experience, they have no plans to alter these key functions. According to Treasury guidance documents, agencies are expected to use the brokers to upload three files containing data. We reviewed the broker made available by Treasury through open source code posted on a public website. We observed several demonstrations of how agencies submit their data to a prototype of the broker and the feedback produced by the system regarding data verification. We also interviewed knowledgeable officials from OMB, Treasury, and selected federal agencies and inspectors general, as well as enterprise resource planning (ERP) vendors assisting federal agencies with technical issues. We reviewed the schema version, 1.0 and the broker's documentation related to the broker. Agencies may use the broker to verify the data files the agency plans to submit to Treasury. The broker uses validation rules to test the completeness and accuracy of the data elements and linkages between financial and award data. If data does not pass validation (see Step 6), the broker will provide error details to the agency. The agency should then update information and systems to make the data more accurate and reliable. Step 6: Test Broker Outputs and Ensure Data are Valid. Step 7: Update Data. agencies to complete each step. Playbook 2.0 states that agencies can use the milestones in Treasury’s implementation roadmap to help determine their own implementation milestones. Step 5: Prepare Data for Submission to the Broker. Step 6: Test Broker Outputs and Ensure. Step 7: Mapping agency data to the schema version 1.0, and implementing system changes as needed to collect and link data. Step 8: Testing Broker outputs and ensuring agency data is submitted to the broker. Treasury officials told us that the responsibility for ensuring the accuracy of these files lies with the DATA Act SAO at each agency. OMB Management Procedures Memorandum 2016-03 specifies that SAOs must provide reasonable assurance that their internal controls support the reliability and validity of the agency account-level and award-level data. Before final submission of the data files in provide error details to the agency. The agency should then reference the authoritative data sources and address the discrepancies. Once the data is linked, validated, and standardized, agencies are to submit the data to Treasury for posting on USASpending.gov. Currently, the broker does not allow agencies to submit their data with qualifications, such as known quality limitations. OMB staff and Treasury officials said that they are reconsidering this position. Agencies have made progress toward creating their data submissions and testing them in the broker, but work remains to be done before actual reporting can begin. Treasury has made empty sample files available to agencies so they can begin testing their data. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Inspectors general are particularly concerned about their agencies’ ability to provide quality assurances for data that are not directly provided by the agency. OMB released draft guidance in August 2016 that specifies DATA Act reporting responsibilities when an intragovernmental transfer (both allocation transfers and buy/sell transfers) is involved. The guidance also explains how to report financial assistance awards with personally identifiable information (PII), and clarifies the SAO assurance process over the data submitted to the broker.on USASpending.gov. their initial DATA Act submissions, as well as senior accountable officials (SAO) certification and reporting non-financial data. One agency reported that its SAO may be unable to certify the quality of data if OMB’s guidance for the SAO certification cannot be supported by existing processes. Another agency reported concerns with the burden of reconciling account data with financial and award data. In addition, two agencies reported challenges with reporting beginning balances at the level of detail required by the DATA Act. GAO has made a number of recommendations that could help ensure the full and effective implementation of the act. OMB and Treasury have made progress implementing 5 of our recommendations related to DATA Act implementation. However, additional effort is needed to address 11 previous GAO recommendations that remain open. See appendix II for a list of our previous recommendations relating to the DATA Act and their implementation status. In written comments submitted to us, OMB provided an overview of their implementation efforts since the passage of the Data Act. These efforts include issuing three memoranda. This report will be available at no charge on our website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff has any questions about this report, please contact J. Christopher Mihm at (202) 512-6806. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of our report. We are happy to answer any questions you may have about the report or its findings. We will make the report available at a no charge to all interested parties. GAO’s Data Act Internal Working Group contributed to the development of this report. Additional members of the DATA Act Internal working group also contributed to its development. For more information on the Data Act, visit GAO.gov/DataAct. For additional information on GAO's Data Act internal Working Group, visitGAO.com/Data Act InternalworkingGroup. for more information about the data act, visit the dataact.gov/. For more on the data law, visit www.gao.org/data. we reviewed our past reports to identify applicable laws, regulations, and guidance, as well as reports from other entities that could inform our work. We selected a range of organizations, including domestic and international standards-setting organizations, industry groups or associations, and federal agencies. All of the organizations we identified endorse establishing and using a governance structure to oversee how data standards, digital content, and other data assets are developed, managed and implemented. Based on these selection factors we drew on work from the following organizations to help us identify data. Act of 1990 (CFO Act) agencies in their implementation plan updates; (3) the operationalization of government-wide data standards and the technical specifications for data reporting; and (4) updated designs for the Section 5 Pilot for reducing recipient reporting burden. To identify key practices for data governance we reviewed our past reports to identify applicable laws, regulations, work from the following organizations. We also met with OMB and Treasury to obtain information on the status of their efforts to address our previous recommendation that they establish a data governance structure. This review is part of an ongoing effort to provide interim reports on the progress being made in implementing the Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014. This report examines: (1) steps taken to establish a clear data governance structure which is particularly important during the upcoming transition to a new administration; (2) challenges reported by Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (CFO Act) agencies in their implementation plan; and (3) key contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV.on the last page of our report. Both approve new standards and ensure that already established standards are consistently applied and enforced across the federal government. Having a robust, institutionalized data governance structure is important is to provide consistent data management during times of change and transition. The transition to a new administration presents one such situation. We have previously reported that, given the importance of continuity when implementing complex, government-wide initiatives, the potential for gaps in leadership that can occur as administrations change can impact the effectiveness and efficiency of such efforts, potentially resulting in delays and missed deadlines. In July 2015, we reported that OMB and Treasury had not yet established a formal framework for providing data governance throughout the lifecycle of developing and implementing standards. Such a framework is key for ensuring that the integrity of data standards is maintained over time. We recommended that O MB and Treasury establish a clear set of policies and procedures for developing and maintaining data standards that are consistent with leading practices. The first of these steps was to establish a new Data Standards Committee that will be responsible for maintaining established standards and developing new data elements. OMB staff told us that the committee will focus on clarifying existing data standard definitions. OMB and Treasury have not yet institutionalized and clearly documented policies and procedures that are consistent with these key practices. A common set of key practices endorsed by standards setting organizations recommend that data governance structures should include the key practices shown in the text box below. The key practices include developing and approving data standards, managing, controlling, monitoring, and enforcing consistent application of data, and involving stakeholders in key decisions, as appropriate. one functional community (e.g., financial management, financial assistance, and procurement) According to OMB staff, the Data Standards Committee held its inaugural meeting on September 15, 2016, and will meet on a monthly basis. The committee has also drafted a charter that will delineate the scope of the committee’s work, as well as the composition and responsibilities of its members. Members include representatives from a range of federal communities including the grants, procurement, financial management and human resources communities. document, OMB will also be monitoring progress toward the statutory deadline and setting up meetings with any of the 24 CFO Act agencies that OMB identifies as being at risk of not meeting the implementation deadline. The agency will schedule these visits by reviewing the implementation plan updates and discerning which agencies appear to be experiencing the most challenges to implementation. To help address their challenges, 16 of the 22 agencies reported that they use certain mitigating strategies in their implementation plans. Five agencies did not identify any challenges in their plans. The SAO assurance means, at a minimum, that data reported are based on appropriate internal controls and risk management strategies identified in OMB Circular A-123. Table 3 shows the information that OMB required CFO Act agencies to include in their implementation plan updates. The information also includes information on remaining actions the agencies should take to implement suggested steps 5 through 8 in Playbook 2.0. Table 4 describes the categories of challenges reported by 19 of the 24 CFO act agencies. Act implementation plans that they submitted in response to OMB’s May 2015 request. Each agency was to (1) update its timeline and milestones and explain the agency's progress to date and the remaining actions it would take to implement the act. OMB neither agreed nor disagreed with GAO's recommendation. Each of the 24 CFO Act agencies expect that they will fully meet the May 2017 deadline for DATA Act implementation, the GAO found in a review of the agencies’ updates. Act agencies to include in their implementation plan updates, remaining actions to implement the suggested steps in Playbook 2.0, and the number of CFO Act agencies that included the information. In our July 2016 report, we reported on challenges agencies included in their initial implementation plans. We analyzed the agency-reported challenges and mitigating strategies and categorized them. We interviewed cognizant OMB and Treasury officials and obtained any supporting documentation to further understand the implementation challenges reported by agencies in the DATA Act. Treasury’s DATA Act Implementation Playbook (Version 1.0) contained eight suggested steps and a timeline. Steps 1 through 4 were to be completed by September 2015. As of October 2016, only 16 of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported that they had completed all steps 1 through 3. Four agencies reported they had not completed their inventory of data and identified the gaps in systems and processes for data elements (step 3) Playbook 2.0—issued June 24, 2016—includes expanded guidance on actions to be included in steps 5 through 8. the agencies, we found the following: Each of the 24 CFO Act agencies’ updates included timelines and milestones. Most of the updates included most of the OMB required information. Some of the CFO act agencies did not include information about some of the remaining actions to implement the suggested steps in Playbook 2.0. For example, 5 of the 22 CFO acts did not included information about testing for completeness and accuracy of data elements. For more information, visit the Playbook2.0 website. In May 2015, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) directed federal agencies to submit Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014 (DATA Act) implementation plans to OMB concurrent with the agencies’ fiscal year 2017 budget requests. OMB and Treasury have taken significant steps toward implementing the act’s various requirements. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We have previously reported on these efforts and others and have identified a number of ongoing challenges that will need to be addressed. Signed into law on May 9, 2014, the DATA Act expanded on previous federal transparency legislation. The act requires government- wide reporting on a greater variety of federal funds. It also calls for the federal government to set government-wide data standards, identify ways to reduce reporting burdens for grantees and contractors (Section 5 Pilot) and regularly review data quality to help improve the data quality. It was signed into law by President Barack Obama on May 8, 2014. It will take effect on July 1, 2015. seven overarching categories of mitigating strategies reported by these agencies to address DATA Act implementation challenges. Changes to internal policies and procedures, leveraging existing resources, using external resources, continuing communications, employing manual and temporary workarounds, monitoring and developing guidance, and enhancing existing systems. These strategies, as a whole, were similar to the mitigating Strategies reported by agencies in their initial implementation plans. See table 5 in appendix III for descriptions of the categories of mitigation strategies and the number of CFOs involved. Three agencies were selected for our January 2016 and August 2016 reports. This allowed us to assess progress in DATA Act implementation at these agencies. Although the information obtained from these three agencies is not generalizable to all agencies, they illustrate a range of conditions under which agencies are implementing the act. We met with OMB and Treasury to obtain information on the status of the DATA Act. At each agency, we reviewed Data Act implementation plan updates and interviewed officials responsible for implementation and DATA Act Implementation team members. information about testing for completeness and accuracy of data elements submitted to Treasury. 11 CFO Act agencies did not include information about workflows for addressing validation errors and revisions needed to agency data submissions. 13 CFO act agencies didn't include information on testing linkages of program and financial data or possible interim solutions to link such data, if needed. Without such information in agencies’ updates, it may be more difficult for OMB and Treasury to determine where to target their monitoring and assistance efforts to help ensure the DATA Act is successfully implemented. As of October 2016, 21 of 24 CFO Act agencies reported that they had begun testing their data files in the broker. Only the National Aeronautics and Space Administration had completed testing the broker and revised its data files accordingly. Treasury also collects data from the four shared service providers that are helping to manage data submissions for their agency clients. As of October2016, two of these shared service provider reported to Treasury that they have completed testing all of their files in their broker. The broker is available to agencies so they can begin testing theirData. In January 2016 we reported that ensuring that data definitions are generally consistent with leading practices is important. We also reported that although the standardized data element definitions issued by OMB largely adhered to leading practices for establishing data definitions, several definitions had limitations that could lead to inconsistent reporting. In May 2016, in response to our prior recommendation, OMB released additional guidance on reporting financial and award information required under the act. While OMB’s additional guidance addresses some of the limitations we identified, it does not address all the clarity issues we identified. In June 2016, OMB directed the 24 CFO Act agencies to update their initial DATA Act implementation plans that they submitted in response to OMB’s and classified data. One agency also reported ongoing issues with inconsistent quality of data submitted from their financial systems. A lack of complete and accurate agency data increases the risk that agencies may not be able to meet the DATA Act reporting requirements within the mandated timeframes. Such transitions may disrupt the momentum for meeting implementation timeframes or cause the government to fail to continue to build on previous accomplishments. of the DATA Act. These efforts include issuing three memoranda providing implementation guidance to federal agencies. OMB and Treasury met with each of the 24 CFO Act agencies to discuss their implementation timelines, risks, and mitigation strategies, and took steps to address issues that could affect successful implementation. The Data Standards Committee to develop and maintain standards for federal spending; and developing and executing the Section 5 pilot. Through these meetings, OMB staff learned that 19 of the24 CFO act agencies expect that they expect that the Act will be implemented. 21 of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported costs to date and future estimated costs to implement the DATA Act reporting requirements. Total estimated cost reported by agencies to implement DATA Act includes costs for systems integration and modernization. It is important to note that the estimated total costs reported are relatively small when compared to the almost $81 billion spent on information technology in fiscal year 2016 alone. See appendix III for more details about the information that OMB required C FO Act agencies to include in their implementation plan updates. challenges reported by agencies that may impede their ability to effectively and efficiently implement the DATA Act. These include systems integration issues, lack of resources, evolving and complex reporting requirements, and inadequate guidance. See table 4 in appendix III, which describes the categories of challenges and the number of CFO Act agencies reporting challenges in each category. Some of the challenges reported by the C FO Act agencies in their updates include the following: systems integration. staffing issues or funding constraints. Reporting. Data quality. the lack of timely and consistent guidance, agencies may need to continuously update or change their processes, which could adversely affect their ability to meet the DATA Act requirements. Some agencies are at increased risk of not meeting the May 2017 reporting deadline because of these challenges. In addition, inspectors general for some agencies, such as the Departments of Labor and Housing and Urban Development, have issued readiness review reports that also indicate their respective agencies were at risk of failing to meet this deadline. The CFO Act requires agencies to report to Congress by May 31, 2017. 11 of the 24 CFO Act agencies highlighted challenges related to the guidance provided by OMB and Treasury in their implementation plan guidance. One of the commonly cited challenges concerned complications arising due to the iterative nature or late release of the guidance. For example, one agency reported that developing its implementation plan was highly dependent upon the concurrent development of the schema version 1.0 and technical guidance being developed by Treasury. This agency stated that any delays or changes to these components will significantly affect its solution design, development and testing schedule, and cost estimate. to further understand the implementation challenges reported by agencies in their implementation plan updates. We also met with OMB and Treasury to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our previous recommendations related to agency implementation plans. To assess efforts to date to operationalize government-wide standards, we reviewed OMB policy guidance intended to facilitate agency reporting. To examine the technical structure and specifications for reporting, we assessed Treasury’s processes for developing technical guidance and reviewed applicable technical documentation related to the schema version, 1.0 and 1.1. as a result of the aggressive implementation timelines specified in the act and the complexity associated with linking hundreds of disconnected data elements across the federal government, they made the decision to use an iterative approach to provide incremental technical guidance to agencies. The report is being sent to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the Treasury; the Director of OMB; the Chief Executive Officer of Treasury; and other key stakeholders. According to Treasury, among other things, the report enabled agencies to provide feedback and contribute to improving the technical guidance. indicate their respective agencies are at risk of not meeting the reporting deadline. As discussed further below, the technical software requirements for agency reporting are still evolving. Any changes to the technical requirements over the next few months could also affect agencies’ abilities to meet the deadline. In August 2016, in response to our prior recommendation, OMB established procedures for reviewing and using agency implementation plan updates that include procedures for identifying ongoing challenges. OMB’s document also states that it has worked to address these challenges and provide both policy and technical guidance. The final guidance, OMB M-17-04, was issued on November 4, 2016. OMB staff told us that they received feedback from 30 different agencies and reviewed over 200 comments on the draft guidance. Although OMB has made some progress with these efforts, other data definitions still needs to be addressed to ensure agencies report consistent data, the authors say. For example, officials from USDA, one of our case example agencies, told us they are waiting for guidance on insurance and indemnity reporting. Eight agencies reported that if policy or technical guidance continues to evolve or be delayed, the agencies’ ability to comply with the May 2017 reporting deadline could be affected. Some agencies also reported concerns about the requirement for SAOs to certify the data reported quarterly. Because of the lack of timely and consistent guidance, agencies may need to implement appropriate validation steps needed to give assurance over the data. For example, if guidance clarifying certification procedures is delayed, one agency reported that it may not have time to implementappropriate validation steps. enterprise resource planning (ERP) vendors assisting federal agencies with technical implementation. To obtain specific information on how agencies use the technical guidance, we selected three agencies based on whether they were in compliance with existing federal requirements for federal financial management systems. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), the Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the Corporation for National and Community Service (CNCS) were chosen. Although the information obtained from the vendors was obtained from a public source, the information was based on a request for information. OMB plans to only include data collected up to June or July 2017 in order to allow for sufficient time to analyze the results and incorporate them into the report’s findings. Staff said that that they plan to continue to collect data through the procurement portion of the pilot until they obtain a full 12 months of contractors’ experiences with centralized payroll reporting. Afterwards, OMB will analyze this data, compare it to the smaller data set produced for the August 2017 report to Congress and, if necessary, make any needed revisions to the findings. certified payroll reporting to other types of FAR-required reporting. The current design lacks a plan for integration. This is of particular concern given the diversity of reporting requirements contained in the FAR. We provided a draft of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the Treasury; the Director of OMB; and the Secretary of the Treasury. The draft report has been sent to the Department of the Interior, the Secretary for the Treasury, the Department for the Agriculture, the Treasury and the State Department. OMB staff and GSA officials informed us that they decided to delay launching the portal to conduct the procurement portion of the pilot in order to ensure that security procedures designed to protect personally identifiable information (PII) were in place. OMB staff said that despite the security-related delay, they still plan on collecting 12 months of data through the procurement pilot as required by the act. GSA said they needed to issue a System of Records Notice and redesign the certified payroll reporting platform so that it conforms to agency security procedures. The portal is expected to begin collecting data between late January 2017 and late February 2017. GSA’s 18F completed a prototype for the procurement portion of the Section 5 Pilot at the end of May 2016. HHS officials reported e-mailing almost 8,000 potential participants and plan on emailing additional prospects, if needed, to reach an established minimum number of participants for each test model. 18F's role was to explore how an electronic certified payroll reporting portal could reduce contractor burden for federal Davis-Bacon contracts. In August 2016, GSA”s Federal Acquisition Service, the implementation lead for the pilot, presented a prototype to OMB. GSA’s Federal Acquisition Service, the implementation lead for the pilot, awarded NuAxis the contract to build the prototype from information obtained as a result of the 18F prototype process. GSA officials told us that starting in September 2016, Nu Axis began developing a web-based reporting interface that will allow users to centrally enter and submit certified payroll data. They plan to make this interface compatible with other existing systems, such as the System for Award Management (SAM) and Wage Determination Online (WDOL)