the advice and consent of the Senate; and inferior officers, whose appointment Congress may vest "in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments" In Edmond , the Court noted that "[g]enerally speaking, the term 'inferior officer' connotes a relationship with some higher ranking officer or officers below the President" The Court's decisions appear to focus on the extent of the officer's discretion to make autonomous policy choices and the authority of other officials to supervise. The most thorough elucidation of the definition of "Officers of the United States" can be found in judicial interpretations of the Appointments Clause. In interpreting the Clause, the Court has made clear distinctions between "Officers" whose appointment is subject to the requirements of the Clause and non-officers, also known as employees. The amount of authority a president has to appoint an officer is a key issue in impeachment proceedings. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the issue by the end of the year. as employees, whose appointment is not. The amount of authority that an individual exercises will generally determine his classification as either an officer or employee. As established in Buckley v. Valeo , an officer is "any appointee exercising significant authority pursuant to the laws of the United States" Employees are viewed as "lesser functionaries subordinate to the officers of the U.S," who do not exercise "significant authority" The Supreme Court has further subdivided "officers" into two categories: principal officers and inferior officers. The Constitution explicitly makes "[t]he President, Vice President and all civil Officers of the United States" subject to impeachment and removal. Congress has seemingly shown a willingness to impeach Presidents, federal judges, and Cabinet-level executive branch officials. A question which precedent has not thus far addressed is whether Congress may impeach and remove subordinate, non-Cabinet level executive branch Officials. In all of American history, only three members of the executive branch have been impeached: two Presidents and a Secretary of State. branch have been impeached: two Presidents and a Secretary of War. While it seems that executive officials of the highest levels are "civil Officers," historical precedent provides no examples of the impeachment power being used against lower-level executive officials. One must, therefore, look to other sources for aid in determining precisely how far down the federal bureaucracy the impeachmentPower might reach. The general purposes of impeachment may assist in interpreting the proper scope of "civil officers of the United States" The congressional power of impeachment constitutes an important aspect of the various checks and balances that were built. Early interpretations suggest the impeachment power was arguably intended to extend to "all" executive officers. But who is an officer? The most thorough elucidation of the definition supervise and to remove the officer. The remaining question is whether inferior officers, or those officers who exercise significant authority under the supervision of a principal officer, are subject to impeachment and removal. This view would permit Congress to impeach and remove any executive branch "officer," including many deputy political appointees and certain administrative judges. There is some historical evidence, however, to suggest that inferior officers were not meant to besubject to impeachment. ignorance to suppose that every officer, however trifling his office, is to be impeached for every petty offense ... I hope every gentleman ... must see plainly that impeachments cannot extend to inferior officers of the United States." Governeur Morris, member of the Pennsylvania delegation to the Constitutional Convention, arguably implied that inferior officers would not be subject to impeachment. "certain great officers of State; a minister of finance, of war, of foreign affairs, etc. ... will be amenable by impeachment to the public justice" Early constitutional commentators also arguably suggest a broad interpretation of "civil Officers of the United States" Joseph Story addressed the reach of the impeachment power in his influential Commentaries on the Constitution. Story: All officers of the U.S. who hold their appointments under the national government are properly civil officers within the meaning of the constitution, with the exception of officers in the army and navy. The separation of powers and good government. The role of the judiciary in a democracy. The duties of judges and prosecutors. A conviction on an article of impeachment requires a two-thirds vote of those Senators present. If the respondent is convicted on one or more of the articles against him or her, the Presiding Officer will pronounce the judgment of conviction and removal. No formal vote is required for removal, as it is a necessary effect of the conviction. The Senate may subsequently vote on whether the impeached official shall be disqualified from again holding an office of public trust under the United States. If this option is pursued, a simple majority vote is needed. individuals—all federal judges—were convicted by the Senate. The House of Representatives shall chuse their Speaker and other Officers; and shall have the sole Power of Impeachment. —Article I, Section 2 The President, Vice President and all civil Officers of the United States, shall be removed from Office on Impeachments for, and Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors . —Article II, Section 4.  impeachment applies only to the "President, Vice President, and all civil Officers of the United States" The grounds for impeachment are limited to "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" The decision to impeach an individual rests solely with the House of Representatives. The House has the power to remove an individual from office if it so chooses. The impeachment process can take up to two years. The Senate has the option of impeaching an individual for up to 10 years. individual rests solely with the House of Representatives. Conviction of an individual requires a two-thirds majority of the present Senators on one of the articles brought by the House. When conducting the trial, Senators must be "on oath or affirmation," and the right to a jury trial does not extend to impeachment proceedings. The immediate effect of conviction upon an article of impeachment is removal from office, although the Senate may subsequently vote on whether the official shall be disqualified from again holding an office of public trust under the United States. offense, known as articles of impeachment. The House has impeached 19 individuals: 15 federal judges, one Senator, one Cabinet member, and two Presidents. If the Senate, by vote of a two-thirds majority, convicts the official of the alleged offenses, the result is removal from office of those still in office. The Senate has conducted 16 full impeachment trials. Of these, eight individuals—all federal judges—were convicted by the Senate. This report briefly explores the history of impeachment in the United States. The Constitution sets forth the general principles which control the procedural aspects of impeachment. Both the Senate and the House have designed procedures to implement these general principles. This section provides a brief overview of the impeachment process, reflecting the roles of both the House and the Senate during the course of an impeachment inquiry and trial. Impeachment proceedings may be commenced in the House of Representatives by a vote of the House of Representatives. The Senate has the power to impeach in the Senate, while imbuing the Senate with the power of trying impeachments. may be commenced in the House of Representatives by a Member declaring a charge of impeachment on his or her own initiative. The impeachment process may be triggered by non-Members, such as when the Judicial Conference of the United States suggests that the House may wish to consider impeachment of a federal judge. A Member presenting a memorial listing charges under oath, or a Member depositing a resolution in the hopper, which is then referred to the appropriate committee. An independent counsel advises the House. of any substantial and credible information which he or she believes might be relevant to impeachment. The focus of the impeachment inquiry is to determine whether the person involved has engaged in treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors. Usually an initial investigation is conducted by the Judiciary Committee. However, it is possible that this investigation could be carried out by a select or special committee. If a subcommittee or task force is charged with investigating a possible impeachment, the Members can vote to recommend articles of impeachment. If the full committee, by majority vote, determines that grounds for impeachment exist, a resolution impeaching the individual in question can be passed. substantial and credible information which he or she believes might constitute grounds for impeachment, by message from the President, by a charge from a state or territorial legislature or grand jury, or by petition. Resolutions regarding impeachment may be of two types. A resolution impeaching a particular individual, who is within the category of impeachable officers under Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution, is usually referred directly to the House Committee on the Judiciary. At the conclusion of debate, the House may consider the resolution as a whole, or may vote on each article separately. The House may vote to impeach even if the House Judiciary Committee does not recommend impeachment. H.Res. 803 authorized the House Judiciary Committee to investigate fully whether sufficient grounds existed for the House to impeach President Nixon. It specified powers which the Committee could exercise in conducting this investigation, and addressed funding for that purpose. The resolution was agreed to by the House of Representatives and signed into law by President Richard M. Nixon on June 25, 1974. The House of Representative voted to impeached Nixon on July 18, 1974, a vote that was followed by a vote to censure him on July 25, 1978. of the Constitution, a vote to impeach by the House requires a simple majority of those present and voting, upon satisfaction of quorum requirements. In recent practice, managers have been appointed by resolution, although historically they occasionally have been elected or appointed by the Speaker of the House pursuant to a resolution conferring such authority upon him. The House will also adopt a resolution in order to notify the Senate of its action. The Senate, after receiving such notification, will then adopt an order informing the House that it is ready to receive the managers. The Senate will issue a writ of summons to the respondent, informing him or her of the date on which appearance and answer should be made. On the date established by the Senate, the respondent may appear in person or by counsel. In the latter event, the proceedings progress as though a "not guilty" plea were entered. The respondent may demur, arguing that he or she is not a civil official subject to impeachment, or that the charges listed do not constitute sufficient impeachment. When pleadings have concluded, the Senate will set a date for trial. The Senate will determine questions of competency, relevancy, and materiality. The Senate has not adopted standard rules of evidence to be used during an impeachment trial. Presiding Officer possesses authority to rule on all evidentiary questions. Final arguments in the trial will be presented by each side, with the managers for the House of Representatives opening and closing. When the presentation of evidence and argument by the managers and counsel for the respondent has concluded, the Senate as a whole meets in closed. Under Article I, Section 3, clause 6 of the Constitution, the Chief Justice presides over the Senate impeachment trial if the President is being tried. The full Senate may receive evidence and take testimony, or may order the Presiding Officer to appoint a committee of Senators to serve this purpose. If the latter option is employed, the committee will present a certified transcript of the proceedings to the full Senate. The Senate will determine questions of competency, relevancy, and relevency. The House of Representatives impeached President Clinton for perjury and obstruction of justice. The Senate acquitted President Clinton on both charges. The House Judiciary Committee report argued that perjury by the President was an impeachable offense. The report rejected the notion that conduct such as perjury was "more detrimental when committed by judges and therefore only impeachable when commits by judges" The two articles of impeachment were approved by the House, the Senate acquitted Clinton onboth charges.. A number of individuals have also been impeached for behavior incompatible with the nature of the office. this behavior, and making false and misleading statements to agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation about the activity. Judge Kent resigned before the Senate trial was completed. Finally, one might classify some of the articles of impeachment brought against President Clinton as grounded on alleged behavior considered incompatible with the nature of the office of the Presidency. Both the first article, for allegedly lying to a grand jury, and the second, for alleged obstructing justice by concealing evidence in a federal civil rights action brought against him, noted that by doing this, "William Jefferson Clinton has undermined the integrity of the presidency" by doing this, "William Jefferson Clinton has undermined the integrity of his office, has brought disrepute on the Presidency, has betrayed his trust as President, and has acted in a manner subversive of the rule of law and justice" A number of individuals have been impeached for official conduct for an improper purpose. The first type of behavior involves vindictive use of the office. For example, in 1826, Judge James Peck was impeaching for charging a lawyer with contempt, imprisoning him, and ordering his disbarment for criticizing one of his clients. The House has impeached several individuals for abusing or exceeding the powers of their office. In 1868, amidst a struggle over Reconstruction policy, the House impeached President Andrew Johnson on allegations that he violated the Tenure of Office Act. President Johnson was acquitted by a margin of one vote in the Senate. In 1974,. the House Judiciary Committee recommended articles of impeachment against President Richard Nixon on the theory that he abused the powers. and purpose of the office; and (3) misusing the office for an improper purpose or for personal gain. The articles alleged that the President, "using the powers of his high office," attempted to obstruct the investigation of the Watergate Hotel break-in, conceal and protect the perpetrators, and conceal the existence of other illegal activity. President Nixon resigned before the House voted on the articles. One of the articles of the Articles of impeachment alleged that he used the power of the office of the Presidency to violate citizens' constitutional rights, "impair" lawful investigations, and "contravene" laws applicable to executive branch agencies. President Andrew Johnson and President Richard Nixon were impeached and convicted for perjury and false statements in matters distinct from their official duties. In contrast, the minority views from the report opposing impeachment reasoned that "not all impeachable offenses are crimes" The minority emphasized that the President was not impeachable for all potential crimes, no matter how minor. impeachment was reserved for "conduct that constitutes an egregious abuse or subversion of the powers of the executive office," the report said. The minority did not explicitly claim that the grounds for impeachment might be different. House on 16 articles, including involvement in a conspiracy to accept bribes in return for lenient sentences for defendants. Judge Hastings was convicted by the Senate on eight articles. In addition, Judge Walter L. Nixon Jr. was convicted in a criminal case on two counts of perjury to a grand jury concerning his relationship with a man whose son was being prosecuted. He was subsequently impeached in 1989 for his behavior, including making false statements to the grand jury and lying about the underlying events at his criminal trial. In Nixon v. United States, the Supreme Court ruled that a challenge to the Senate's use of a trial committee to take evidence posed a nonjusticiable political question. Judge Walter L. Nixon had been convicted in a criminal trial on two counts of making false statements before a grand jury and was sent to prison. He refused, however, to resign and continued to receive his salary as a judge while in prison. The House of Representatives adopted articles of impeachment against the judge and he was impeached. Secretary of War William W. Belknap was impeached in 1876 for allegedly receiving payments in return for appointing an individual to maintain a trading post in Indian Territory. Judge Charles Swayne was also impeached by the House and acquitted by the Senate. In 1912, Judge Robert W. Archbald was impeaching and convicted for using the office to acquire business favors from both litigants in his court and potential litigant. And the impeachments of Judges English, Louderback, and Ritter all involved "misusing their power to appoint and set the fees of bankruptcy receivers for personal profit" any President, Vice President, or other civil officer of the United States has been impeached by the House solely on the basis of conduct occurring before he began his tenure in the office held at the time of the impeachment investigation. It appears that federal officials who have resigned have nonetheless been thought to be susceptible to impeachment and a ban on holding future office. Secretary of War William W. Belknap resigned two hours before the House impeached him, but the Senate nevertheless conducted a trial in which BelKnap was acquitted. Senate nevertheless conducted a trial in which Belknap was acquitted. The Senate voted in favor of jurisdiction. That said, the resignation of an official under investigation for impeachment often ends impeachment proceedings. For example, no impeachment vote was taken following President Richard Nixon's resignation after the House Judiciary Committee decided to report articles of impeachment to the House. And proceedings were ended following the resignations of Judges English, Delahay, and Kent. The Constitution sets forth the general principles which govern impeachment proceedings in the United States. Judge Harry Claiborne was impeached for providing false information on federal income tax forms. Report: perjury by the President was "just as devastating to our system of government" Report: Both JudgeClaiborne and Judge Nixon were impeached and convicted for perjury and false impeached. The report concluded that judges are only impeachable for behavior incompatible with the nature of the office they hold. and therefore only impeachable when committed by judges."It is "devastating" for the judiciary when judges are perceived as dishonest," the report said. a violation of the "public trust" —conduct that is unlikely to be barred via statute. Many of the impeachments approved by the House of Representatives have included conduct that did not involve criminal activity. Less than a third have specifically invoked a criminal statute or used the term "crime" For example, in 1803, Judge John Pickering was impeached and convicted for, among other things, appearing on the bench "in a state of total intoxication" In 1912, Judge Robert W. Archbald was impeaches and convicted. for abusing his position as a judge by brought the "judiciary into disrepute, thereby undermining public confidence in the integrity and impartiality of the administration of justice" Judge John Pickering was impeached and convicted in 1803 for, among other things, appearing in court "in a state of intoxication and using profane language" Judge Mark H. Delahay was impeaching in 1873 for his "personal habits," including being intoxicated on and off the bench. He resigned before he could be removed from office. In 1936, Judge Halstead Ritter was impeached and convicted for conduct that "br[ought] his court into disrepute" And a number of judges were impeached for misusing their position for personal profit. Some have suggested that the standard for impeaching a federal judge differs from an executive branch official. While Article II, Article I, and Article II of the U.S. Constitution provide for the impeachment of federal judges, they do not provide for their removal from office. being intoxicated on and off the bench. Various other activities incompatible with the nature of an office have merited impeachment procedures. In 1862, Judge West H. Humphrey was impeached and convicted for neglecting his duties as a judge and joining the Confederacy. In 1926 Judge George English was impeaching for showing judicial favoritism which eroded the public's confidence in the court. And in 2009, Judge Samuel B. Kent was impeaches for allegedly sexually assaulting two court employees, obstructing the judicial investigation of this behavior and making false and misleading statements to agents. Judge Archbald was impeached by the House and tried by the Senate in the 62 nd Congress. He was convicted on four articles alleging misconduct in his then-current positions as a circuit judge and Commerce Court judge. Judge G. Thomas Porteous is the first individual to be impeached and convicted based in part upon conduct occurring before he began his tenure in federal office. The articles of impeachment brought against him alleged misconduct in those positions as well as his previous position as U.S. District Court Judge of the Middle District of Pennsylvania. In 2010, Judge G. Thomas Porteous Jr. was impeached for participating in a corrupt financial relationship with attorneys in a case before him. The Senate convicted Judge Nixon on two of three articles. Judge Nixon was found guilty of making false statements to the grand jury about whether he had discussed a criminal case with the prosecutor and attempted to influence the case, as well as for concealing such matters from federal investigators. He was sentenced to 10 years in prison and 10 years of probation, plus a $100,000 fine. Most impeachments have concerned behavior occurring while an individual is in a federal office. However, some have addressed, at least in part, conduct before individuals assumed their positions. For example, in 1912, a resolution impeaching Judge Robert W. Archbald and setting forth 13 articles of impeachment was reported out of the House Judiciary Committee and agreed to by the House. The Senate convicted Judge archbald in January the following year. At the time that Judge ArchBald was in office, he was accused of helping bondsman develop corrupt relationships with state court judges. or undermine the integrity of office and even the Constitution itself. "[O]ther high crimes and misdemeanor[s]" are not limited to indictable offenses, but apply to "serious violations of the public trust" Congressional materials indicate that the term "Misdemeanor ... does not mean a minor criminal offense as the term is generally employed in the criminal law," but refers instead to the behavior of public officials. Similarly, the judiciary subcommittee charged with investigating Associate Justice Douglas of the Supreme Court concluded that "misconduct that damages the state" in federal office. Article IV alleged that Judge Porteous made false statements to the Senate and FBI in connection with his nomination and confirmation to the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana. Articles I and II each alleged misconduct beginning while he was a state court judge as well as misconduct while hewas a federal judge. On December 8, 2010, he was convicted on all four articles, removed from office, and disqualified from holding future federal offices. On the other hand, it does not appear that any President, Vice President, or other civil officer of the United States of America has ever been convicted of misconduct. than the full Senate. The decision was vacated on appeal and remanded for reconsideration in light of Nixon v. United States. The district court then dismissed the suit because it presented a nonjusticiable political question. The case is still pending in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York, which covers New York City, New Jersey, New York state, and New Jersey. The trial is expected to begin in the coming weeks, with the jury set to begin deliberating in early June. The Court noted that while Article I, Section 5, does provide that Congress shall determine the qualifications of its Members, Article I,. Section 2, delineates the three requirements for House membership. Representatives must be at least 25 years of age, have been U.S. citizens for at least seven years, and inhabit the states they represent. Therefore, the Powell Court concluded, the House's claim that it possessed unreviewable authority was defeated by this separate provision specifying the only qualifications which might be used. this separate provision specifying the only qualifications which might be imposed for House membership" In other words, finding that the House had unreviewable authority to decide its Members' qualifications would violate another provision of the Constitution. The Court therefore concluded in Powell that whether the three requirements in the Constitution were satisfied was textually committed to the House, "but the decision as to what these qualifications consisted of was not" The Nixon Court noted that here, in contrast, leaving the interpretation of the word "try" with the Senate did not. distinguish the situation from Powell v. McC ormack , a case also involving congressional procedure where the Court declined to apply the political question doctrine. That case involved a challenge brought by a Member-elect of the House of Representatives who had been excluded from his seat pursuant to a House Resolution. The precise issue in Powell was whether the judiciary could review a congressional decision that the plaintiff was "unqualified" to take his seat. That determination had turned, the Court explained, "on whether the Constitution committed authority to the House to judge its Members' qualifications" aspect of the various checks and balances that were built into the Constitution to preserve the separation of powers. It is a tool, entrusted to the House and Senate alone, to remove government officials who either abuse their power or engage in conduct that warrants their dismissal from an office of public trust. At least one commentator has suggested that the Framers recognized, particularly with respect to executive branch officials, that there would be instances in which it may not be in the President's interest to remove a "favorite" from office. interest to remove a "favorite" from office, even when that individual has violated the public trust. As such, the Framers "dwelt repeatedly on the need of power to oust corrupt or oppressive ministers whom the President might seek to shelter" If the impeachment power were meant to ensure that Congress has the ability to impeach and remove corrupt officials, it would seem arguable that the power should extend to officers exercising a degree of authority, the abuse of which would be harmful to the separation of powers and good government. Some have argued that only criminal acts are impeachable offenses under the United States Constitution. Alexander Hamilton, in justifying not, however, comport with historical practice. According to this reasoning, impeachable conduct could include behavior that violates an official's duty to the country. Indeed, in the past both houses of Congress have given the power to try impeachments to the House of Representatives, rather than the Senate, for the first time in 1787. The debate during the Constitutional Convention indicates that criminal conduct was encompassed in the "high crimes and misdemeanors" standard. The Constitution bars the President from using the pardon power to shield individuals from impeachment or removal from office. In considering the use of the impeachment power, Congress confronts at least two preliminary legal questions bearing on whether an impeachment inquiry against a given official is constitutionally appropriate. The question is whether the individual whose conduct is under scrutiny holds an office that is subject to impeachment and removal, and second, whether the conduct for which the official is being impeached is the same one for which he or she has been convicted. could support an impeachment charge. Grounds for impeachment include abuse of the particular powers of government office or a violation of the "public trust" The purpose of impeachment is not to inflict personal punishment for criminal activity. Instead, impeachment is a "remedial" tool; it serves to effectively "maintain constitutional government" by removing individuals unfit for office, writes Julian Zelizer, a professor of constitutional law at the University of California, Los Angeles, and author of the book "Impeachment: The Power to Impeach" The Constitution gives Congress the authority to impeach and remove the President, Vice President, and other federal "civil officers" A determination that such officers have engaged in treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors. Impeachment is one of the various checks and balances created by the Constitution, and is a crucial tool for potentially holding government officers accountable for violations of the law and abuse of power. Rooted in various constitutional provisions, impeachment is largely immune from judicial review. When considering impeachment matters, Members of Congress have historically examined the language of the Constitution and past precedents. The Constitution describes the grounds of impeachment as "treason, bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" While treason and bribery are relatively well-defined terms, the meaning of "high Crimes" is not defined in the Constitution or in statute. It was adopted from the English practice of parliamentary impeachments, which appears to have been directed against individuals accused of non-criminal conduct. In accordance with the understanding of " high" offenses in the English tradition, impeachable offenses are "constitutional wrongs that subvert the structure of government, or undermine the integrity of office" Congressional materials have cautioned that the grounds for impeachment "do not all fit neatly and logically into categories" The remedy of impeachment is intended to "reach a broad variety of conduct by officers that is both serious and incompatible with the duties of the office," the materials say. Congressional precedents reflect three broad types of conduct thought to constitute grounds for impeachment. They are improperly exceeding or abusing the powers of the Office; behavior incompatible with function and purpose of office; and misusing the office. a federal judge could be impeached for perjury or fraud because of the importance of trustworthiness and impartiality to the judiciary. The same behavior might not constitute impeachable conduct for an executive branch official. The impeachment and acquittal of President Clinton illustrates this difficulty. It is uncertain if conduct meriting impeachment and conviction for a judge would fail to qualify for a non-judicial officer. The House's rejection of nonpublic behavior as sufficient grounds for impeachment for the President appears to conflict with the past impeachment of federal judges on just this basis. Article III, Section 1, of the Constitution provides that federal judges "hold their Offices during good behaviour" One argument posits that judges can be impeached and removed from office if they fail to exhibit good behavior or if they are guilty of "treason, bribery, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" The House Judiciary Committee's Impeachment Inquiry asked whether the "good behavior" clause provides an additional ground for impeachment of judges and concluded that "[i]t does not" Congress appears to be that the phrase "good behavior" simply designates judicial tenure. Under this reasoning, rather than functioning as a ground for impeachment, the " good behavior" phrase simply makes clear that federal judges retain their office for life unless they are removed via a proper constitutional mechanism. For example, a 1973 discussion of impeachment grounds released by the House Judiciary Committee reviewed the history of the phrase and concluded that it was not a grounds for impeachment in the early 20th century. The phrase is still used today. interpretation of the word "try" with the Senate did not violate any "separate provision" of the Constitution. In addition, several other aspects of the impeachment process have been challenged. Judge G. Thomas Porteous brought a suit seeking to bar counsel for the Impeachment Task Force of the House Judiciary Committee from using sworn testimony the judge had provided pursuant to a grant of immunity. The impeachment proceedings were initiated after a judicial investigation of Judge Porteous for alleged corruption on the bench. to the Special Investigatory Committee under an order granting him immunity from that information being used against him in a criminal case. Judge Porteous argued that the use of his immunized testimony during an impeachment proceeding violated his Fifth Amendment right not to be compelled to serve as a witness against himself. The court rejected his challenge, reasoning that because theUse of such testimony for an impeachment proceedings fell within the legislative sphere, the Speech or Debate Clause prevented the court from ordering the committee staff members to refrain. Judge Alcee L. Hastings sought to prevent the House Judiciary Committee from obtaining the records of a grand jury inquiry during the Committee's impeachment investigation. Judge Hastings' argument was grounded in the separation of powers: he claimed that permitting disclosure of grand jury records for an impeachment investigation risked improperly allowing the executive and judicial branches to participate in the impeachment. Although ultimately acquitted, Judge Hastings had been indicted by a federal grand jury for a conspiracy to commit bribery. The House of Representatives voted to impeach President Barack Obama. House of Representatives adopted articles of impeachment against the judge. The Senate invoked Impeachment Rule XI, a Senate procedural rule which permits a committee to take evidence and testimony. Both sides then presented briefs to the full Senate and delivered arguments, and the Senate then voted to convict and remove him from office. The judge thereafter brought a suit arguing that the use of the committee totake evidence violated the Constitution's provision that the Senate "try" to find a solution to a problem. The case was settled out of court. take evidence violated the Constitution's provision that the Senate "try" all impeachments. The Supreme Court noted that the Constitution grants "the sole Power" to try impeachment "in the Senate and nowhere else" The Court reasoned that the "Senate alone shall have authority to determine whether an individual should be acquitted or convicted" In addition, because impeachment functions as the " only check on the Judicial Branch by the Legislature," the Court noted the important role of the Senate in the impeachment process. Judicial Branch by the Legislature. Court noted the important separation of powers concerns that would be implicated if the "final reviewing authority with respect to impeachments [was placed] in the hands of the same body that the impeachment process is meant to regulate" The Court was careful to distinguish the situation from Powell v. McC ormack , a case in which the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the impeached President. The lack of finality and the difficulty of fashioning relief weighed against adjudication of the case. the executive and judicial branches to participate in the impeachment process. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit rejected this "absolutist" concept of the separation of powers. "A merely generalized assertion of secrecy in grand jury materials must yield to a demonstrated, specific need for evidence in a pending impeachment investigation," the appeals court said. The decision was vacated on appeal, and the case is now back in the Senate for a hearing on whether to impeach President Obama. The committee concluded that, at least with regard to federal judges, impeachment was appropriate in several circumstances. The committee left unresolved whether non-criminal conduct outside of the judicial function could support an impeachment charge. The purposes underlying the impeachment were also left unresolved. The Committee concluded that the impeachment of a federal judge was appropriate if the conduct was connected with the judicial office or the exercise of judicial power. The purpose of the impeachment was to remove the judge from office for a period of time. The impeachment of the judge was not to remove him from office.