Jensen and Kletzer's most offshorable category accounted for 27.4% of all employment in services occupations in 2005. Service occupations having a larger percentage of bachelor's degree holders were ranked as more vulnerable to offshoring. Despite their vulnerability to being offshored, employment in these occupations grew slightly faster than overall service-providing employment in the 2001-2007 period. The skills and education of this most vulnerable group range widely: Fifteen are office and administrative support occupations with relatively low education or training requirements. professional services. They examined the task content of 457 service occupations to rank their relative vulnerability to being offshored. The measures of task content they used include whether the job requires face-to-face contact with others, is telecommutable or involves an IT-enabled work process. Jensen and Kletzer estimated that the following occupational groups had a large share of employment within their most offshorable category: computer and mathematical; architecture and engineering; legal; life, physical, and social sciences. Blinder estimated that a majority of occupations (533) and employed persons (92.6 million in 2004) are non offshorable. He considered the two categories, which included 22.2% of U.S. workers in 2004, too conservative an estimate. Blinder added to the conservative estimate those occupations in category III he ranked as most susceptible to being offshored to create a moderate estimate totaling 25.6% of all workers. His aggressive estimate includes all of category III and totals almost 40 million workers or 29.0%. More offshorable occupations are not low-end jobs, whether measured by wages or by education. The correlation between skill and offshorability is almost zero. Blinder and Krueger used three alternative survey methods to try to determine how many of the jobs that workers held in 2008 were vulnerable to being moved overseas. All three methods found that about one in four U.S. jobs are potentially Offshorable. This is about the same as Blinder's moderate estimate based on an entirely different approach (see the immediately preceding paragraph) 9.4% of total U.S. employment in 2000 was found to be in offshorable industries, according to one of their estimates. Both manufacturing and professional services industries were estimated to have above-average percentages of vulnerability to offshoring. Over 12% of employment in the case of manufacturing, and almost 14% in theCase of professional services. Moines, IA; Omaha, NE; and Wilmington, DE). Jensen and Kletzer developed a different geographically based approach to estimate the share of tradable (offshorable) and nontradable (nonoffshoring) jobs. Forrester Research, Inc. was the source of perhaps the first and most commonly cited statistics on offshoring of service sector jobs. Although 3.4 million jobs may sound like a large number, Forrester's forecasted loss of some 300,000 jobs per year on average through 2015 represents a very small share of the jobs typically created and destroyed each year in the United States. Researchers have mostly focused on determining which jobs are susceptible to being moved abroad and then on estimating U.S. employment in these potentially offshorable activities in a given year. A comprehensive regularly collected data series does not exist on the number of U.S. workers who have lost their jobs to offshore outsourcing. Empirical analyses have focused on determining those jobs with characteristics that make them susceptible to movement beyond U.s. borders. This approach may overstate the. number of jobs that actually have been or will be lost to offshoring because. it does not consider other factors that may affect employers' decisions about the. location in which work is performed. of jobs in 246 metropolitan areas that might be lost due to services offshoring over the 2004-2015 period. Five metro areas might lose somewhat more jobs (between 3.1% and 4.3%) by 2015: Boulder, CO; Lowell, MA; San Francisco, CA; San Jose, CA. Another 23 areas might have between 2.6% and 3.0% of their jobs offshored. Those metropolitan areas estimated to be affected by services off shoring. No database exists that provides a comprehensive answer to the question of how many workers have lost their jobs to offshoring. Technological change and deunionization appear to have accounted for relatively more of the so-called polarization of wages that occurred during the 1980s and 1990s. Relatedly, research suggests that the extension of task fragmentation to service activities accounts for the greater relative contribution to increased wage dispersion (inequality) in the United States in recent decades. The only data available on jobs lost to the out-of-country relocation of work is from the U.S. government. a given year. More than 14 million jobs in 49 service occupations, representing about 11% of total U.S. employment in 2001, have attributes that could allow them to be sent overseas. These attributes include no in-person customer servicing required; an IT-enabled work process that can be accomplished via telecommuting. A fairly wide gap between a job's pay in the United States compared to in a destination country. A destination country having few language, institutional, and cultural barriers. and a destination country having few language, institutional, and cultural barriers. The occupational groups identified as being vulnerable to offshoring include office support, auditors and tax preparers, computer programmers and software engineers. They are concentrated in such industries within the service sector as information, finance and insurance, and professional and business services. A study released by the Brookings Institution built upon the work of Bardhan and Kroll, Forrester Research, and others to develop projections of the share of jobs in 246 metropolitan areas that might be lost. Those metropolitan areas estimated to be most vulnerable to services offshoring tend to be very populous, having 1 million or more inhabitants. They generally have high concentrations of IT jobs (e.g., Boulder, CO; Huntsville, AL; and Lowell, MA) or IT-enabled back-office jobs such as data-entry keyers and telemarketers. Jensen and Kletzer: The U.S. needs to do more to protect jobs in the United States from being offshored. service activities may be its chief beneficiaries, using the profits gained from lower input costs to increase dividends to shareholders, raise stock prices through buybacks, and undertake more mergers and acquisitions. Still others note that the movement of services jobs to other countries may have different implications for the labor market and public policy. Factory workers (e.g., textile machine operators) have predominantly had less than 12 years of schooling or attained at most a high school diploma. Administrative support and professional workers much more. Administrative support and professional workers much more often have taken some college courses or obtained at least a bachelor's degree. The change in the skill (educational) level of jobs being moved abroad has led some to wonder whether the offshoring of service, unlike production, activities will result in a dwindling supply of entry-level jobs. They also question whether the existing trade adjustment assistance programs can satisfactorily meet the needs of comparatively low-skilled workers.high school diploma. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. workers that produce goods to the jobs of workers that provide services. Jobs at risk of being offshored thus are both those held by information technology (IT) workers and IT-enabled workers. One such event was addressing the so-called Y2K crisis: U.S. firms, in response to a tight supply of computer programmers in the United States, sought to offshoring programmers in other countries, such as Australia and New Zealand, to meet the demand for computer programmers. With English the language of the computer industry worldwide, IT services can be provided from many non-English-speaking, comparatively low-wage nations. Taken together, these developments have allowed U.S.-based companies to increasingly fragment tasks across borders in both manufacturing and information and business services. Firms no longer just ship goods between countries. They can now also locate intangible production tasks, such as research, design, management, and IT support across a number of different countries. Of the countries that provide IT services: Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, China, Czech Republic, Hungary, Jordan, Lithuania, Mexico, Slovenia, Russia, and Ukraine. In response to a tight supply of computer programmers in the late 1990s, turned to companies principally located in India to make the code fixes needed to avert problems with computer systems. Another development was the educational systems of low-wage foreign nations graduating an abundant supply of well educated (sometimes English-speaking) individuals. In some cases, the number of persons with IT and accounting skills reportedly exceeded the immediate needs of their local economies (e.g., China, Eastern Europe, India, and) Offshoring, also known as offshore outsourcing, has been taking place for decades. The extension of offshoring from U.S. manufacturers to service providers that became apparent in the past decade has heightened public policy concerns about the extent of job loss and foregone employment opportunities. The report synthesizes the information (both empirical and anecdotal) released since the early 2000s on offshore outsourcing's impact on U.s. employment to help policymakers evaluate the adequacy of the nation's retraining and income support programs for workers displaced by greater global economic integration. Many economists agree that trade and other forms of globalization can cause painful dislocations for those workers. Some question whether this scenario applies to services offshoring, however. Milberg et. al. suggest that companies engaged in off shoring of service activities may be its chief beneficiaries, using the profits to invest in new products and services. The study was published in the journal of the International Institute of Economics and Finance (IIE) and is published by the London-based Institute for International Economics. encourage U.S. firms to expand employment domestically rather than abroad. While some members of the public policy community also support the adoption by other countries of trade and labor policies, still others advocate for limited government intervention as the best means of promoting economic growth. This report does not attempt to sort through all the issues raised above, some of which are addressed in the above-referenced CRS reports. Instead, it begins by briefly examining the development of outsourcing by U.s. companies to provide context for the report. potential market for offshoring global IT and business processes work was realized through 2006. Some, therefore, are cautious about the future pace of moving abroad potentially vulnerable U.S. jobs. For example, Deloitte Consulting concluded that outsourcing will lose "holy grail" status. In the future, companies will not outsource because it is the latest management fad. Organizations will carefully define core, strategic, and "thought-leadership" functions and will outsource to protect them. will carefully define core, strategic, and "thought-leadership" functions and will keep those inhouse. Some organizations will decide to outsource only short-term. Many organizations will also engage in large scale re-insourcing thereby further eroding the outsourcing market. Dell, for example, returned some help services to the United States due to customer dissatisfaction. Other U.S. firms reportedly had to employ IT service providers to fix software produced abroad. Still other companies have begun returning call center operations and legal support work to the US. Since 2004, BLS has asked firms that let go at least 50 workers in layoffs that lasted 31 or more days whether the firms moved the laid-off workers' jobs out of the United States. In the third quarter of 2012, when more than 100,000 workers were separated in extended mass layoffs, firms told BLS that they let go fewer than 1,600 workers in actions involving the movement of work. Not surprisingly, then, the BLS series is better at picking up losses at manufacturers than at service providers. physical separation of design and production personnel; and a lack of safeguards on intellectual property outside the United States. Caterpillar, National Cash Register, Wham-O, Otis Elevator, and Buck Knives are examples of companies that have returned production and jobs to the U.S. Offshore providers of IT services, for example, were able to allay fears about security shortly after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Despite 9/11, U.s. firms still offshoring jobs. Despite 9/11, U.S. airline carriers have continued their outsourcing of maintenance jobs overseas. Concern periodically has arisen among U.s. outsourcers over unrest in some regions. Global providers of software services have responded by placing more of their clients' work in a variety of countries, including the "near-shore" markets of Canada and Mexico. Some individual U.K. employers also reportedly reportedly have increased outsourcing of work to other countries, such as Singapore, Brazil and the Dominican Republic. legal support work to the United States, specifically to firms located in rural low-cost areas. Some have credited "reshoring" for part of the sector's employment rebound since the 2007-2009 recession's end. Among U.S. manufacturers that responded to recent surveys, Perry found that about one-fifth had brought production back from overseas in 2011. He attributed what he regards as a nascent trend to "China's shrinking manufacturing wage and cost advantages" as well as "long delivery times and rising shipping costs" Short- and long-run labor market implications of offshore outsourcing remain unclear. Some observers claimed that the business practice explained much of the "jobless recovery" from the 2001 recession. Some within the public policy community have again asserted that offshoring is contributing to the slow rebound of the labor market from the 2007-2009 recession. While acknowledging that trade and other forms of globalization can cause job loss, they also acknowledge that the link between economic growth and job creation is still intact. The U.S. unemployment rate remains high more than three years after the end of the December 2007-June 2009 recession. opened facilities abroad during the 1970s and 1980s. U.S. companies reacted to the back-to-back recessions of the early 1980s by focusing on their core missions. Firms also restructured their operations by outsourcing jobs to employees of temporary help agencies, professional and business services establishments, and independent contractors located in the United States. The persistence of these changes over the years has been difficult to measure. But they have continued to have a positive impact on the economy and the economy as a whole. The 2001 recession prompted U.S. employers to achieve further efficiencies by taking advantage of technological innovations. The persistence of these changes over time indicates that domestic outsourcing of formerly in-house functions is a permanent reorganization of how work is performed in the United States. The now widespread dissemination of technologies that enable relatively low cost, good quality, and high speed transmission of voice and data communications has allowed U.s. firms to extend offshoring beyond the jobs of workers that produce goods. adjustment assistance programs can satisfactorily meet the needs of comparatively well-educated office workers. Congress historically has tried to promote U.S. job growth and assist workers who lose jobs through no fault of their own. The notion that offshoring depresses job growth in the United States appears to underlie support among some policymakers for measures meant to encourage firms to expand employment domestically rather than abroad. It is unclear whether the proposed measures would have the desired effect of increasing U.s. employment.