Historically, Central Valley spring-run Chinook were found throughout the Central Valley. By the late 1940s, operation of Friant Dam caused long stretches of the San Joaquin River to dry up. Fall and late-fall Chinook salmon continue to spawn in small numbers in the SanJoaquin River tributaries such as the Mokelumne, Stanislaus, Tuolumne and Merced Rivers. These fish spawn at lower elevations and have been less affected by dam construction. Historically, Central California's San Joaquin River supported large Chinook salmon populations. Since the 1940s, much of the river's water has been diverted for agricultural uses. In 1988, a coalition of conservation and fishing groups advocating for river restoration sued the Bureau of Reclamation (hereafter referred to as Reclamation), which owns and operates the Friant Dam on the river. As a result, approximately 60 miles of the River is dry in most years, making it impossible to support Chinook Salmon populations in the upper reaches. Historical spawning runs may have exceeded 200,000 fish annually, ascending the river as far as Mammoth Pool. For several years after Friant Dam was in place, spring Chinook successfully spawned in habitat below the dam. However, the spring-run Chinook population had declined from historic levels before construction and full operation of the Friant unit of the Central Valley Project. It appears from California Department of Fish and Game records that a viable spring- run population existed well into the 1940s with returns ranging from 2,000 to 56,000. The Settlement states that if legislation is not enacted by December 31, 2006, the Settlement may become void at the election of a party. To date, no party has officially elected to void the Settlement. Title X of H.R. 146 (the 111 th Congress) contains a revised version of this legislation. Revisions address direct spending and restoration flow provisions (§§ 10004 and 10009) The parties hoped implementing legislation would be enacted prior to adjournment of the 109 th Congress. However, numerous entities who were not party to the Settlement objected to the legislative proposal. The Settlement bills were reintroduced in the 110 th Congress as H.R. 24 and S. 27. Hearings were held in both houses of Congress; however, the legislation was not enacted. Implementation of the Settlement calls for construction of numerous projects and other activities that could cost between $250 million and $1.1 billion. Federal funding for these projects and activities is sought by the parties and the federal government. No action was taken on the bills before adjournment of the 109 th Congress. Friant Division serves irrigation and water districts in the Fresno, Kern, Madera, Merced, and Tulare counties. By the late 1940s, Reclamation's operation of Friant Dam had caused long stretches of the river to dry up. Portions of the San Joaquin River upstream of its confluence with the Merced River remain mostly dry today, except during flood events. The diverted water helped develop and continues to support a diverse agricultural economy from north of Fresno to Bakersfield. Friant Dam is one of the largest federal dams of the Bureau of Reclamation's Central Valley Project (CVP) in California. The Settlement calls for new releases of water from Friant Dam to restore fisheries in the San Joaquin River and for efforts to mitigate water supply losses due to the new releases. Full implementation of the Settlement would require congressional authorization and appropriations. Title X of H.R. 146, which passed the Senate March 19, 2009, contains a SanJoaquin River Restoration Settlement party issues. The Friant Dam was built on the San Joaquin River by Reclamation in the early 1940s. The CVP is a multi-unit, multi-purpose reclamation project administered by the Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) under federal law. Reclamation delivers the impounded water to two canals for irrigation and other purposes. It stores the SanJoaquin River's flow in Millerton Lake, the reservoir behind the dam, from which water for irrigation is diverted into canals. The Settlement Agreement and subsequent implementing legislation are the culmination of nearly two decades of discussion, argument, and study on whether and how to restore fisheries below Friant Dam. The most recent actions relate to a court decision on October 23, 2006. If Congress does not act on the legislation, some fear that the court will order a remedy, which may differ from the Settlement and which may have more severe consequences for some area water users and third parties. The Settlement calls for numerous actions, some of which need congressional authorization and appropriations. The San Joaquin river restoration is an effort to respond to fisheries economic and ecological damage begun 60 years ago. For the court, it is a matter of Friant Dam operations comporting with state law. For others the potential of reduced water supplies for off-stream use is a breach of promises made 60 years. ago.others who then made financial and livelihood decisions based on those policies. In the eyes of many, the restoration is a response to the damage done by the dam. Litigation resulting in the most recent Settlement can be traced to a 1988 lawsuit. During the late 1980s the Friant Division water users sought renewal of their long-term water service contracts with Reclamation. Beginning in 1988, a coalition of environmental groups and anglers led by the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) challenged the contract renewals in federal court on a number of environmental grounds. In addition to claims that the process under which Reclamation had begun contract. renewals violated the National Environmental A U.S. District Court judge has since ruled that operation of Friant Dam violates state law because of its destruction of downstream fisheries. Faced with mounting legal fees, considerable uncertainty, and the possibility of dramatic cuts to water diversions, parties agreed to negotiate a settlement instead of proceeding to trial on a remedy regarding the court's ruling. Most long-term water service contractors who receive the diverted water were added to the case shortly thereafter as defendant intervenors. In September the parties reached a settlement. Delta confluence with San Francisco Bay (Bay-Delta) Hydrologically, the Friant Division Service Area extends into the Tulare basin. Agriculture in these areas is highly dependent on irrigation; much of the irrigation water is surface water. Many growers also use groundwater, conjunctively managing their surface and groundwater supplies. This conjunctive management improves seasonal and multi-year water reliability for growers. The SJV, an eight-county region extending 250 miles from Stockton in the north to Bakersfield in the south, is both rapidly growing and economically depressed. economically depressed. Yet, the 27,280 square mile SJV is home to five of the nation's ten most agriculturally productive counties. The Friant Division Service Area includes four of these counties: Fresno, Tulare, Kern, and Merced. The SJV faces significant environmental and natural resource challenges, including the court-ordered restoration of the San Joaquin River discussed in this report. The CVP is a multi-unit, multi-purpose reclamation agency. It is based in Fresno. users and third parties. A key legislative issue is how to finance Settlement implementation, specifically how to resolve congressional Pay-As-You-Go (PAYGO) issues. Other challenges are how to achieve the Settlement's dual goals of fisheries restoration and water management, and how to address concerns of stakeholders not party to the Settlement. This report provides a brief overview of the Settlement, its legal history, and the legislative context in which implementing legislation is being considered. For more information on fisheries restoration, water management and funding, see CRS Report RL34237, San Joaquin River Restoration. Settlement Agreement. San Joaquin River restoration Settlement legislation was first introduced in early December 2006 ( H.R. 6377 and S. 4084 ); however, no action was taken on the legislation. An agreement was reached to address certain third party interests; in exchange, these third parties agreed to support new legislation. Although many parties who had opposed the draft legislation in September 2006 supported the new legislation, other parties emerged that were not part of the new agreement, resulting in further opposition to Settlement legislation. Direct spending funding mechanisms included in the legislation would typically require a budgetary offset under congressional PAYGO rules. While short-term (10 year) direct spending in H.R. 146 has been reduced substantially compared with earlier versions of the legislation, the budget effects of the Legislation in its entirety are still at issue for some. An overall complication for Congress in considering San Joaquin Settlement legislation is that although the Settlement aims to end a 19-year lawsuit and is sought by the parties, it is contemplated under the Settlement. March 19, 2009, contains a San Joaquin River Restoration Settlement implementation provision. The legislation had previously been considered and passed the Senate as Title X of S. 22. Under the Settlement, increased water flows for restoring fisheries would reduce diversions of water for off-stream purposes, such as irrigation, hydropower, and municipal and industrial uses. The quantity of water used for restoration flows and the quantity by which water deliveries would be reduced are related, but the relationship would not necessarily be one-for-one. although the Settlement aims to end a 19-year lawsuit and comports with a court ruling, the Settlement would affect others outside the Friant Division Service Area. Changes embodied in H.R. 146 aim to resolve concern about the introduction of restoration flows. Another complication is the prospect that funding for the San Joaquin River Settlement may divert funds from salmon restoration projects in other river basins. Lastly, other recent events potentially limiting water exports from the Sacramento and SanJoaquin Rivers Delta confluence could significantly affect implementation of the recirculation portion of the water management goal. San Joaquin River management ties into other CVP management decisions, as well as state and local water systems. Recent court decisions regarding the health of threatened Delta Smelt have constrained water exports and may constrain future exports. The degree to which some of the water management goals identified by the CVP can be achieved is an issue. An issue prior to, or absent, such a settlement would be how the San Joaquin river is managed in the future. The CVP and State Water Project (SWP) are operating under regulations that limit the amount (and timing) of water that can be exported south out of the Bay-Delta. Claims have been litigated in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California. The most recent actions relate to a court decision that Reclamation is operating the dam in violation of California state fish and game code. The implications of this decision are far reaching for California water management and for both the directly affected water users and the indirectly affected communities, landowners, and water users. These issues partially derive from constraints imposed by the pressure to react to a settlement responding to a judicial ruling, as opposed to managing or legislating on an issue prior to, or absent, such a settlement. which Reclamation had begun contract renewals violated the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and that the lack of water in the river violated the ESA. The state law that is at issue here is California Fish and Game Code § 5937. Section 5937 provides as follows:. Reclamation will act in conformity with state laws "relating to the control, appropriation, use or distribution of water used in irrigation" The plaintiffs argue that Reclamation has violated Section 8 of the Reclamation Act of 1902 (43 U.S.C. § 383) The court did not declare what amount of water was necessary to satisfy the law or declare any other type of relief. The court set a 2006 trial date to determine a proper remedy. Faced with the prospect of a court-imposed remedy, and mounting legal challenges, Reclamation decided to appeal the decision. The appeal was denied and the court ruled that Reclamation had violated the state law. The case was heard in front of the California Supreme Court in San Francisco. The decision was handed down on November 14, 2005. of the wettest years, flood water releases could provide a significant amount of the restoration flows, thereby lowering the reduction in deliveries to agricultural and municipal users. Under the Settlement, no water would be released for restoration purposes in the driest of years. In some years, restoration flows released in late winter and early spring may free up space for additional runoff in Millerton Lake, potentially minimizing reductions in deliveries later in the year—assuming Millerton lake storage is replenished. Consequently, the Settlement could reduce deliveries to Friant contractors in those years. later in the year—assuming Millerton Lake storage is replenished. How deliveries to Friant water contractors might be reduced in any given year would depend on many factors. Regardless of the specifics of how much water might be released for fisheries restoration vis-à-vis water diverted for off-stream purposes, there will be impacts to existing surface and groundwater supplies in and around the Friant Division Service Area. Although some opposition to the Settlement and its implementing legislation remains, the largest and most directly affected stakeholders are environmental, fisheries, and local economies. the majority of Friant water contractor organizations, and environmental, fisheries, and community groups) support proceeding with the Settlement Agreement. For some groups, going to trial risks considerable uncertainty and expense; others may be more willing to take such risks. Congressional authorization and appropriations are required for full implementation of the Settlement. If Congress does not act on the legislation, some fear that the court will order a remedy, which may differ from the Settlement, and which may have more severe consequences for area water users and third parties. Faced with the prospect of a court-imposed remedy, and mounting legal fees in preparation for trial, the parties began a series of settlement negotiations in late 2005. The terms of the Settlement were then vetted with selected stakeholders, finalized, and presented to Congress in September 2006. The Settlement Agreement was accepted by the District Court on October 23, 2006, and was approved by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eastern District of California on October 30, 2006. It is the only settlement of its kind in the history. with primarily Class II supplies, or in the driest of years. The future of water resource management in the Central Valley is not just conjunctive water management, but multi-year management with the financial resources to make it happen. Whether Congress addresses this issue—in California and elsewhere—given current water resource authorization and appropriations practices and a restrictive budgetary climate remains to be seen. While the issues discussed here have confronted prior Administrations and Congresses, a Settlement Agreement was not reached until the U.S. District Court acted. was not reached until the U.S. District Court acted, ultimately resulting in the difficult choices facing Congress today. This is a common dilemma for resource agencies implementing projects and programs which are based on societal and political trade-offs made decades ago. It is hard to say what is fair or just when such significant trade-off were made, causing harm to some, but providing benefit to others who then made financial and livelihood decisions based on the trade offs. The decision was ultimately made by the Supreme Court.