Food safety activities are divided into the following program functions. Monitoring/Surveillance: activities related to the monitoring of foodborne illness or disease. Inspection/Enforcement: activities to ensure compliance with agency food safety regulations. Education/Outreach: Activities related to communicating food safety- related information or guidance to the public, industry, or agencies’ other clients. Research: activities relating to the study of foodSafety-related topics, which support agency policy decisions. Risk assessment: activities that evaluate the likelihood and severity of an adverse event (e.g., illness or death) regulatory framework to enhance communication and coordination among the existing agencies. The Grocery Manufacturers of America said that the food safety system must be flexible enough to allow resources to be directed toward identifying and addressing serious food safety problems. Other stakeholders believe that the system needs to be modernized through statutory changes to make it more science and risk based. The Consumer Federation of America believes that a risk-based system should consider not only the risk posed by the food but also the history of the plant. the Future stated that the current food safety laws undermine a successful food safety system. That is, the laws do not build prevention into the farm-to-table continuum and divide responsibility and accountability for food safety among federal agencies. Further, USDA’s carcass-by-carcass organoleptic inspections exemplify the outmoded requirements of the currentFood safety system, the report said. The report added that such inspections waste resources because new technologies are more efficient and effective. resources because new technologies are more efficient and effective. Some stakeholders, including the Institute for Food Technologists, believe that modernizing the food safety system could be accomplished by rewriting food safety statutes. Some of the stakeholders that cited the need for modernization also believe that these changes should be made in a more transparent and accountable way. The Institute for food Technologists is a non-profit organization that promotes food safety in the U.S. and around the world. For more information, go to www.foodtechnologists.org. more effectively and efficiently control current and emerging food safety hazards. The stakeholders we contacted disagree on whether federal agencies’ food safety functions overlap, specifically with regard to inspections. Stakeholders’ views included (1) minor changes to improve coordination among the food safety agencies, (2) statutory changes to make the system more science and risk based, and (3) consolidating federal foodSafety functions into a single agency. Some large industry associations saw the need for only minor changes within the existing regulatory framework. Third, the transition costs to a single agency would be higher in the short term, experts say. Fourth, current agency employees would be concerned that a consolidation would adversely change their working lives. Finally, some stakeholders, including the Consumer Federation of America, said that some congressional committees may be reluctant to lose jurisdiction over food safety functions. The Congress has recognized this possibility in the Bioterrorism Act by authorizing FDA to commission other agencies’ officials to conduct FDA’s food safety inspections. GAO: Federal framework for food safety is based on a patchwork of numerous laws. Table 6 lists the 30 laws that we have identified as the principal federal laws related to food safety. Table does not provide an exhaustive list of all food safety-related laws and amendments, nor does it detail all of the food safety provisions for those laws listed. GAO: We disagree with USDA’s assertion that our report overly simplifies food safety regulatory functions within USDA and FDA and that it exaggerates the extent of regulatory overlap. Many federal agencies, as well as state and local entities, play a part in the U.S. food safety regulatory system. The federal agencies regulate the food production chain from farms to food manufacturers. State and local agencies primarily regulate food safety in retail food establishments. In addition to their established food safety and quality responsibilities, following the events of September 11, 2001, these agencies began to address the potential for deliberate contamination of agriculture and food products. The Department of Homeland Security provides overall coordination on how to prevent deliberate contamination. In commenting on a draft of this report, HHS raised concerns about our terminology regarding overlapping activities. We disagree with HHS comment that our report’s title should substitute the word duplication for overlap. Given the definitions we lay out in the report, if we modified the title as HHS suggests, we would risk implying that the agencies are undertaking many duplicative efforts. We are fully aware that under the current statutory framework the agencies do not exactly replicate food safety activities. The full report is available in appendix V. need for modernization also believe that these changes should be accompanied by consolidation of federal food safety programs into a single agency. Consolidation of functions could allow a single food agency to manage the safety of the whole food chain, not just its parts. Food companies tend to prefer the inspection process that is known to them, according to the Food Marketing Institute. Some industry associations say a transition to asingle agency could create a period of uncertainty, as limited resources are diverted from the existing programs, and could therefore cause vulnerabilities in the food supply. substantial savings in terms of administrative efficiency and overall consistency in the application of policy. The legislative changes needed to accomplish consolidation could also be used as the vehicle for modernizing the food safety statutes. The stakeholders we contacted also identified a number of roadblocks to changing food safety laws and regulations. The Center for Science at the Public Interest and Resources for the Future are two of the groups we spoke to about food safety reform. They are: The Center forScience at the public interest and Resources For The Future, and The Food Marketing Institute. which more than one agency performed similar activities. In some instances, the agencies estimated budget and staffing levels, or they were unable to separate budget data into specific categories. Some agencies did not provide expenditures and staffing data for categories such as administration, food security, and rulemaking. The agencies’ officials explained that these expenditures are distributed among more thanOne of the other categories. To examine the extent to which federal food safety agencies are using interagency agreements to leverage existing resources to reduce any such overlaps, we requested that agencies provide copies of all active interagency deals. that agency may need to coordinate their activities. We believe that some economies of scale would be derived from combining overlapping activities. For example, with a single food safety agency, the federal government would not need to have two separate food inspection workforces or two separate training programs. We acknowledge that some elements of the 1999 interagency agreement on dual jurisdiction establishments have been implemented. However, we continue to believe that the agreement could be better implemented. We further disagree that the report does not mention the need for a single agency. different authorities, the activities they perform under these authorities are similar in nature. We question why the federal agencies must continue to spend resources on overlapping, and sometimes duplicative, food safety activities. We disagree with USDA’s assertion that the agencies’ inspection activities are vastly different. Our recommendations address specific areas where the agencies could improve coordination to better leverage resources, the authors say. They say the report examines inspection activities, not inspection authorities, and certainly does not identify “significant” overlaps in authorities. To identify overlaps that may exist in the federal food safety system, we collected fiscal year 2003 budget data for food safety-related activities from the U.S. Department of Agriculture. We defined overlaps as similar activities being performed by more than one agency, such as training food inspectors. In contrast, we defined duplication as essentially identical activities performed by many agencies. We used categories of food safety activities contained in the National Academy of Science’s 1998 report Ensuring Safe Food to group the agencies’ foodSafety activities. rule-making and standard-setting activities under their respective statutes. While the rulemakings USDA and FDA undertake vary under those statutes, there are some similarities. For example, FDA requires seafood-processing facilities to address contaminants that are likely to be found in seafood, such as Vibrio vulnificus (a bacteria found in raw seafood, particularly in oysters). USDA requires food processors to incorporate certain sanitation processes into their HACCP systems. The rules are based on the same model, though applied to the different food products each agency regulates. modified our report to indicate, as USDA suggests, that FDA currently requires HACCP plans for seafood and juice products only. We disagree that our report oversimplifies or inaccurately describes federal food safety functions at ports of entry. For example, USDA noted that in order for meat and poultry and egg products to be eligible for import to the United States, foreign food safety regulatory systems must employ equivalent sanitary measures that provide the same level of protection against food safety hazards as is achieved domestically under USDA regulations. FDA estimates that it spent between $650,000 and almost $1 million to issue its seafood HACCP rule in 1995. NMFS officials said they spent $5 million to support the FDA rule by developing a model seafood surveillance project. USDA was unable to calculate how much it spent to issue the HAC CP rule. The agency says it has no estimate of how much the rule-making process cost to develop and implement. The rule requires all meat and poultry processing facilities to address contaminants, such as E. coli and salmonella. USDA and FDA inspections. At jointly regulated facilities, USDA and FDA inspectors also verify that HACCP systems are in place. Under the Bioterrorism Act, FDA could allow USDA inspectors, who are present every day at these jointlyregulated facilities, to inspect FDA-regulated food. FDA could reduce overlapping inspections and redirect resources to other facilities for which it has sole control. The regulations require the facility to maintain separate HAC CP plans for each product and to develop separate analyses of critical control points. two agencies refers to the fact that both agencies have issued HACCP regulations that are based on a similar model. We have modified our report to indicate that, short of consolidating all inspection functions, consolidating inspections of the similar elements in the agencies’ plans would reduce overlap. We further note that USDA’s HAC CP rule applies to both meat and poultry products, although these products present different hazards. We believe it is possible to issue broad regulations based on common principles that can then be applied to specific products. daily presence at hundreds of these facilities. FDA could make more effective use of its resources if it redirected its inspectors to other facilities for which FDA has sole jurisdiction. We continue to believe that USDA and FDA could consolidate HACCP-based inspections at these jointly regulated facilities. To provide further clarification on what commodities are currently subject to HAC CP regulations, we modified our report to indicate, as USDA suggests, that FDA should focus its inspections on those facilities that are not subject to the regulations. not provide for exchanges of funds. FDA refers to agreements that involve exchanges of money, personnel, or property as interagency agreements. We did not consider this type of agreement in our analysis. HACCP plans are different as they address different risks associated with different products (i.e., seafood, juice, meat, or poultry). Our report’s identification of HAC CP requirements as another area of overlap between the two agencies refers to the fact that both agencies have both agencies. We have made minor modifications in the report to avoid confusion regarding HACCP principles and HAC CP plans. We indicate that different risks are associated with different food products and, therefore, require different HACC plans.products. In addition to those named above Lawrence J. Dyckman, Katheryn Hubbell, Jane Kim, Sara Margraf, Carol Herrnstadt Shulman, Michele Fejfar, Amy Webbink, and Katherine Raheb made key contributions to this report. conduct inspections by entering into an agreement with the Department of Homeland Security’s Customs and Border Protection (CBP) Under the Meat and Poultry Products Inspection Acts, the Secretary of Agriculture is required to certify that countries exporting meat and poultry to the United States have equivalent food safety systems. FDA officials said these agencies do not share information from their overseas visits because their different statutory responsibilities make such information of little advantage. Both agencies train inspectors on sanitation requirements, good manufacturing practices, and HACCP. FDA should commission USDA inspectors to carry out FDA’s inspection responsibilities for food establishments that are under the jurisdiction of both agencies. To better use FDA's limited inspection resources and leverage NMFS's resources, we recommend that the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration and the Under Secretary of NMFS enter into an agreement. If appropriate and cost effective, the agreement could be implemented by the end of the year. If you or a family member have been affected by foodborne illness, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. USDA and FDA spent $884 million in fiscal year 2003 on inspection and enforcement activities. Neither USDA nor FDA has estimated the total costs associated with inspecting jointly regulated facilities. FDA spends about 7 times as much on import inspections because it is responsible for about 80 percent of the U.S. food supply, including imports from about 250 countries. USDA’s responsibility for inspecting imports that come from 34 countries is less than half that of FDA. Both agencies are not leveraging inspection resources at these ports of entry. USDA and FDA each visited Brazil, Costa Rica, Germany, Hungary, Mexico, and Canada last year. USDA spent almost $500,000, and FDA spent nearly $5 million, on its foreign country visits in fiscal year 2003. USDA and FDA officials said these agencies do not share information from each other. For example, FDA at times conducts inspections in the same countries that USDA has evaluated. The agency does not use that information when deciding which countries to visit, officials said. For more information, go to CNN.com/Heroes. would risk implying that the agencies are literally duplicating efforts in every instance. We disagree with HHS’s efficient use of both agencies’ resources—has not been maximized. We further disagree that our report inaccurately characterizes the Bioterrorism Act. As we state in the report, FDA is authorized under the act to enter into an agreement to commission other agency officials, including USDA officials, to carry out inspections on its behalf—for FDA-regulated foods. It also makes it clear that USDA and FDA inspections vary depending on whether the product is a USDA- or FDA- regulated food product. USDA and FDA are not making better use of each other’s inspection resources, authors say. The agreement was to reduce overlap and duplication of effort, they say. Depending on the type and layout of the inspection facilities, the amount of overlap can be much higher, they write. The authors conclude that the agreement has not been maximized to improve public health protection, they add. It was signed after the 2003 discovery of a cow infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) USDA appears to have misinterpreted the focus of this report, and we disagree with USDA’s characterization. This report examines overlapping activities rather than the regulatory framework that allows these activities. While we recognize that the agencies operate under different authorities, the activities they perform under these authorities are similar in nature, leading us to question why the federal agencies must continue to spend resources on overlapping, and sometimes duplicative, activities. The report contains a clear and accurate acknowledgment that the agency operate under a statutory framework that gives them different authorities. agencies’ split jurisdiction, they are each responsible for inspecting different food products at jointly regulated facilities. As a result, both agencies send inspectors into these facilities—USDA on a daily basis and FDA less regularly. USDA maintains a daily presence at hundreds of these facilities, FDA could make a significant savings by not sending inspectors there as often. We agree with USDA that the number of jointly regulated establishments may be a relatively small portion of all regulated food establishments, but USDA and FDA had great difficulty identifying the current number. The magnitude of potential savings is difficult to calculate. develop consumer guidance on chemical food contaminants such as pesticides, dioxin, and mercury. In some cases, the agencies collaborate in the early stages of rulemaking. For example, USDA and FDA participated in a joint Listeria monocytogenes (listeria) risk analysis of ready-to-eat foods. But the agencies will promulgate separate listeria rules for the products under their jurisdiction. The principal food safety agencies have entered into 71 interagency agreements to coordinate the full range of their food safety activities. Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere identify and inventory all active interagency food safety-related evaluate the need for these agreements and, where necessary, update the agreements. We provided USDA, HHS, EPA, and NOAA with a draft of this report for their review and comment. USDA expressed serious reservations about the report, asserting that it oversimplifies food safety regulatory functions within USDA and EPA. We received written comments on the report and its recommendations from USDA and HHS. EPA provided minor technical comments. The agencies’ food safety authorities stem from 30 principal laws related to food safety. As a result of this division of responsibility, the federal food safety system is fragmented. Both USDA and FDA inspect food-processing facilities that produce foods under the regulatory responsibility of each agency, referred to as dual jurisdiction establishments (DJE) DJEs are those that manufacture or process food products that contain ingredients regulated by more than one federal agency. The frequency of their inspections varies, but generally, USDA inspectors have a more regular presence at DJEs. To obtain the views of regulated industry and other stakeholders regarding opportunities to reduce overlap by consolidating federal food safety functions, we contacted a total of 35 stakeholders from food industry associations, food manufacturers, consumer groups, and academic experts. We conducted our review from May 2004 through March 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We asked agencies within USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS to provide all expenditures and staffing levels, in FTEs, for each facility. In selecting which food manufacturers to interview, we used Food Processing’s Top 100 Companies to identify the largest food manufacturers. USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS are involved in key program functions related to food safety. Examples of activities include inspecting domestic food-processing facilities and imported food items at U.S. ports of entry. Industry associations, food- processing companies, consumer groups, and academic experts disagree on the significance of overlapping activities. Most of these stakeholders agree that the laws and regulations governing the system should be modernized so that science and technological advancements can be used to more effectively and efficiently control current and emerging food safety issues. The majority of stakeholders we contacted said they believed that the federal food safety system needs to be modernized. The quality assurance manager at a dual jurisdiction establishment with whom we spoke said he liked having a “second pair of eyes” inspecting the facilities for food safety. The company produces smoked salmon, a high-risk food, and the manager noted that having inspections by FDA and NMFS helps to ensure that products are safe and of high quality. It is unclear what direction this modernization will take. Because of their split jurisdiction, each agency is responsible for inspecting different food products at these facilities. The agencies’ inspections have common key elements, including verifying the facilities’ compliance with sanitation standards and good manufacturing practices. Figure 5 summarizes some of the common elements of USDA and FDA inspections. At jointly regulated facilities, USDA and of paperwork for each food that the company processes in order to meet USDA and FAA HACCP and sanitation requirements.and poultry. If the facility also produces canned soups containing beans or seafood, FDA inspects it every 1 to 5 years. FDA has the authority to commission federal officials to conduct inspections at jointly regulated facilities. In 2003, FDA exercised this authority by entering into an agreement with the Department of Agriculture. USDA inspectors have no authority to inspect FDA-regulated products, although USDA inspectors are present at these ports more often than FDA inspectors. As a result, some FDA- regulated products may remain at the facility for some time awaiting inspection. The agencies are not leveraging inspection resources atThese ports. USDA officials told us that FDA- unregulated, imported foods are sometimes stored in USDA- approved inspection facilities. FDA regulates an egg farm as a “food factory” within its area of jurisdiction. USDA regulates plants that process eggs into products such as powdered eggs. FDA’s inspections place more responsibility for food safety on the company, a plant manager says. The most effective inspection strategy would be to combine elements of both agencies’ inspections into a single inspection program, the authors say. They say this would be the most cost-effective way to ensure food safety in the U.S. Safety of food and therefore are not significant. Other stakeholders, including the U.S. Tuna Foundation and the American Meat Institute, reported that they do not think the federal agencies’ programs overlap because USDA and FDA have specific, defined areas of responsibility for their industries. The U.s. Poultry and Egg Association added that the regulatory delineations do not always make sense, citing the split jurisdiction between USDA and FAA over the regulation of eggs. The USDA inspects fruits and vegetables to be included in school lunches; and the companies, already subject to FDA inspections, incur additional. conduct risk assessments of foodborne pathogens that can contaminate food products under their respective jurisdictions. The agencies also conduct joint risk assessments when addressing the same pathogen or the same food product. In the case of eggs, regulatory responsibility shifts as eggs make their way from the farm to the table. In 2004, FDA issued a proposed rule that would require shell egg producers to implement measures to help prevent salmonella from contaminating eggs on the farm. However, the agencies have not issued a joint rule to help eliminate foodborne illnesses caused by salmonellas in eggs. USDA and FDA developed the “Fight Bac’ program to educate the public about safe food handling. FDA and EPA issued a joint consumer advisory about mercury in fish and shellfish for the first time in 2004. However, the joint advisory recommends different consumption levels, depending on whether the mercury is in the fish or the shellfish. and industry representatives to their consumer hotline about FDA-regulated food products. These agencies have made some efforts to reduce overlaps in their consumer education activities. Joint advisory recommends different consumption levels, depending on whether the fish is commercially caught (regulated by FDA) or recreationally caught. EPA said that the consumption guidance differs due to different mercury levels in recreationally and commercially caught fish. For fish purchased from a store, the guidance recommends up to 12 ounces per week. However, if the fish was caught recreationally, EPA recommends that women consume up to 6 ounces perweek. The FDA and USDA engage in rule-making and standard-setting activities under their respective statutes. Center for Toxicological Research, and Office of Regulatory Affairs provided data. EPA’s Office of Pesticide Prevention, Office of Water, as well as the NMFS’S Seafood Inspection Program also provided information. To assess the reliability of the staffing and expenditure data, we questioned knowledgeable agency officials and reviewed existing documentation regarding the data and the systems that produced them. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of identifying overlaps, and contacted agency officials to determine what activities were linked to the expenditure and staffing. NMFS to provide all expenditures and staffing levels, in FTEs, related to food safety activities they conducted in fiscal year 2003. As table 3 shows, inspection and enforcement-related spending accounts for most of these expenditures. Most agencies were able to identify expenditures and. staffing levels related to inspection and. enforcement, research, risk assessment, education and. outreach, and monitoring and surveillance. Many were unable to provide expenditures linked to rulemaking and. standard setting, food security, and administration. determine what activities were linked to the expenditure and staffing data. We categorized expenditures and staffing and asked agency officials if they considered our categorizations to be appropriate. We adjusted our categorization when agency officials told us it was inaccurate. In some cases, the agencies’ preferred categorization of the same activity varied. For example, FDA considered inspector training as an education/outreach activity, whereas USDA considered it an inspection- related activity. These discrepancies are noted in appendix II. After we categorized the budget and staffing level data, we identified cases in which more than one agency performed similar activities. USDA and FDA are responsible for most federal food safety resources. In fiscal year 2003, the four federal agencies spent nearly $1.7 billion on food safety-related activities. The agencies’ expenditures vary by program function (as shown in fig. 3). For example, USDA’s inspection/enforcement expenditures made up almost three-quarters of the total spent by these agencies for that program function. In contrast, FDA accounts for more than half of the agencies' expenditures for food safety education/outreach programs. As a result of the multiple laws and regulations governing food safety, several federal agencies conduct activities that can serve overlapping, if not identical, purposes. During fiscal year 2003, the agencies spent over $245 million on these types of activities. In some cases, these efforts target the same food safety topic. For example, USDA, FDA, and EPA each develop consumer guidance on chemical food contaminants such as pesticides, and spent more than $107 million on education and outreach on food safety in 2003. safety policy decisions, development of regulations, and administration of regulatory review processes. We obtained actual expenditures and staffing level data in full- time equivalents (FTE) from the following USDA units: Agricultural Marketing Service, Agricultural Research Service, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service. We also obtained data from theFollowing FDA units: Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Center for Veterinary Medicine, National Center for Toxicological Research, and Office of Regulatory Affairs. FDA data to inform EPA’s risk assessments on human exposure to pesticides. In 2003, FDA analyzed 11,331 food samples for pesticides and chemical contaminants to help estimate the dietary intake of pesticide residues. According to EPA officials, USDA data are their primary source of information. However, FDA provides additional information on a greater range of foods and chemicals that EPA also uses to form its decisions. USDA and FDA also both conduct risk assessments of foodborne pathogens that can contaminate food. The overlap in data collection and analysis adds value. until 30 days from the report date. This report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Agriculture, the Acting Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, and the Acting Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. If you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report, I can be reached at (202) 512-3841, or robinsonr@gao,gov. FDA officials said they do not rely on NMFS inspections for two reasons. FDA officials believe that NMFS has a potential conflict of interest because companies pay NMFS for these inspections. NMFS officials disagree with FDA’s viewpoint, stating that their fee-for-service structure does not affect their ability to conduct objective inspections. If FDA were to recognize the results of NMFS inspection findings in targeting its resources, it could decrease or eliminate inspections at facilities NMFS inspectors find are in compliance with sanitation and reasons. FDA rarely provides notification of seizure actions it takes against NMFS-inspected plants. NMFS communicates its inspection results to FDA, but FDA does not share its results with NMFS. FDA has not used NMFS inspection resources under the terms of the fishery products agreement, nor has the agency used its authority under the Bioterrorism Act to commission NMFS officials. FDA officials said the agency has not yet considered using the act to enter into similar agreements with other federal agencies.  NMFS officials disagreed with FDA’s reasons for not using NMFS inspection results. FDA collects product samples for testing, it does not report test results in a timely fashion. According to the manager, NMFS inspections are preferable because the agency is able to provide test results more rapidly. The American Frozen Food Institute noted that USDA and FDA inspections and their complementary expertise provide value to the industry. on November 14, 2005, at 10:30 a.m. ET, CNN.com will feature a look at some of the activities of the FDA and NMFS in the U.S. Food Inspection Service. FDA and NMFS may meet periodically and, when appropriate, with industry to promote better communication and understanding of regulations, policy, 2005. NMFS readily provided us with a list of the firms it was inspecting when we spoke with officials during the course of our review. FDA is not implementing the agreement, but the agency has recognized the potential benefits of working with NMFS to leverage resources. The then-Commissioner of Food and Drugs proposed ways that the two agencies could enhance coordination, including commissioning NMFS inspectors. minimum training on seafood temperature controls, he could inspect this section of the plant as well. USDA officials at headquarters said the agency's inspectors are capable of taking on FDA’s inspection responsibilities at jointly regulated facilities. A 1974 agreement between FDA and NMFS recognizes the two agencies’ related responsibilities for inspecting seafood facilities and standardization activities. If either agency believes that a particular violation is occurring in several seafood- processing plants, it may request a meeting with the other agency to consider investigative steps.  NMFS currently inspects approximately 275 domestic seafood facilities that FDA also inspects. NMFS inspectors verify sanitation procedures, HACCP compliance, and good manufacturing practices. FDA is to (1) request information about NMFS-inspected products when FDA is considering an enforcement action, and (2) provide timely notification to NMFS of any products seized from NM FS-inspected plants. FDA does not take into account whether NMFS has already inspected a particular facility in its inspections. NOAA provided written comments and agreed with the report’s recommendations that pertain to NMFS. NOAA also commented that our report does a fair and thorough job of describing the food safety activities of NM FS. NOAA stated that the positions expressed in GAO's previous work continue to be germane to the issue of coordination with FDA on inspections of seafood. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly release the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. not want the company to paint its sterilization equipment because they determined that paint chips could contaminate the food. FDA inspector said it would be easier to identify sanitation problems on lightly painted equipment than on the dark-colored metal. The manager of the facility said the company had to paint and then remove the paint from equipment in order to satisfy both the USDA and FDA inspectors. In addition, at a seafood-processing plant that is inspected by both NMFS and FDA, the manager said that when FDA HHS agreed with three of the report’s seven recommendations. HHS disagreed with our recommendation regarding joint training of USDA and FDA food inspectors. HHS took no position on our recommendation for using the Bioterrorism Act authorities by more than one agency. We also disagree with HHS’S comment that our report overstates similarities in USDA and. FDA inspections vary, depending on whether the product is a USDA- or FDA- regulated food product, the report says. The training programs are vastly different. designed to reduce or eliminate duplication and overlaps, leverage existing resources, and enhance coordination efforts among the principal federal food safety agencies. We recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture and the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration work together to ensure the implementation of the interagency agreement. Despite HHS’s disagreement with our recommendation that the agencies examine the feasibility of establishing a joint training program for food inspectors, we continue to believe that such an examination has merit. In its comments, USDA agreed that there is merit in examining the viability of conducting joint training activities when commonalities can be found. The agreement has helped agency coordination and communication, officials say. USDA and FDA held 28 joint training sessions during the first year of the agreement’s implementation. No additional training has been provided since then, the report says. The report highlights several deficiencies, even as it gives the agencies credit for improved communication in times of crisis, such as during major recalls. inspectors are often the first agency staff to become aware of deficiencies at a plant. effective sharing of this type of information depends upon those inspectors being adequately trained. leverage inspection resources, as we are recommending. USDA’s comment that it shares the results of its overseas equivalency determinations contradicts what USDA and FDA officials told us during the course of our review. Any successful consolidation of inspectors’ training would of course require work. However, we continue to believe that there is merit in examining the feasibility of conducting joint training activities when workable commonalities can be found. Our findings are consistent with those of the Food and Drug Administration and the European Food Safety Authority. USDA spent $7.8 million, while FDA spent about $1.5 million, during fiscal year 2003 to train their food inspection personnel. FDA’s comparatively lower training costs reflect a contractual agreement with a private firm that has produced an online curriculum. This curriculum includes over 106 courses that address topics common to both USDA and FDA—ranging from foodborne pathogens, HACCP requirements, and good manufacturing practices, to courses that are specific to each agency. The training programs have a common foundation but there are differences, as each agency applies these principles to the specific foods it regulates. The USDA estimates that it spends an average of about $900,000 per year on training-related travel. A joint USDA-FDA training program could reduce duplication in developing training materials and in providing instruction. Other federal agencies have consolidated training activities that have a common purpose and similar content. For example, in 1970, the Consolidated Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (the Center) brought together the training programs of 75 federal law enforcement agencies. The Center is still in existence today and provides training for food inspectors. NMFS uses 74 of these online courses to train its own seafood inspectors. USDA officials said they are exploring the possibility of entering into an agreement with the company that developed FDA’s online curriculum. In addition to the costs associated with developing inspector training programs, USDA estimates that it costs about $1 million a year to run the training programs. The training includes courses that are specific to FDA's regulations and enforcement authorities.and good manufacturing practices, to courses that were developed for the FDA. The Center provides standardized programs for criminal investigators and uniformed police officers across the federal government. While standardizing basic training, the Center also offers specialized courses for individual agencies to address their particular needs. In addition, according to the Center, the interaction with students from other agencies promotes greater understanding of other agencies’ missions and duties, and therefore provides for a more cooperative federal law enforcement system. We identified overlapping activities in the areas of food safety research and risk assessment, consumer and food safety. Exchange of information will permit more efficient use of both agencies’ resources. The agreement was to be the first step toward allowing USDA’s FSIS inspectors to conduct FDA's inspections at DJEs. In 2000, USDA and FDA evaluated the agreement and concluded that the experience had been largely successful because the agencies learned about each other's operations. However, the evaluation also included recommendations to maximize use of federal resources without loss of inspection coverage for FSIS-regulated foods. It was developed in response to a 1997 report by the President's Food Safety Council, which recommended increased cooperation. redirect resources to other facilities for which it has sole jurisdiction. FDA officials said that the savings would be somewhat offset because FDA would likely have to reimburse USDA for the costs of those inspections. USDA officials commented that their inspectors are fully occupied and that they would need to be redirected to other areas of the FDA's portfolio. FDA said that they do not currently plan to pursue this option and have not conducted any analyses of the costs or savings associated with authorizing USDA officials to conduct FDA inspections at these facilities. cooperate more effectively. However, the evaluation also included recommendations to strengthen, clarify, or otherwise improve the agreement’s implementation. The evaluation cited the potential for significant resource savings over time as the agreement is implemented. Since the 2000 evaluation, officials at USDA and FDA said they have not again monitored the agreement's effectiveness, nor have they implemented their recommendations. The agreement is expected to be in place by the end of the first quarter of this year, according to the evaluation. It is not clear when the agreement will be fully implemented. their counterpart district offices and for the agency receiving a finding of noncompliance to track and use that information in its program evaluation, work planning, and consideration of whether action against the facility is warranted. The agreement also calls for the receiving agency to inform the notifying agency of the disposition of the notification, including any actions that it plans or takes, within 30 days. We conducted site visits to three USDA and FDA field offices to obtain information related to implementation of the agreements. The site visits included USDA district offices in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Boulder, Colorado. headquarters officials identified instances of major enforcement actions. FDA investigators learned that a sample of chicken salad tested positive for listeria and alerted USDA, resulting in a voluntary recall. In a second case, USDA and FDA exchanged information on a severe rodent infestation at a DJE. The seizure of millions of pounds of USDA- and FDA-regulated product led to the recall of beef and beef products, the agency said in a statement. The FDA and USDA were able to assist each other during the recall, the statement said. FDA field inspection personnel are not routinely communicating these findings of mutual concern. Because FDA inspectors visit DJEs less frequently than USDA inspectors, we believe that FDA staff could benefit from the compliance information that USDA inspectors collect. Third, the agreement calls for the agencies to explore the feasibility of granting each other access to appropriate computer-monitoring systems. However, the inspectors with whom we spoke continue to be largely unaware of a facility’s past history of compliance with inspection rules, the authors say. work or Internet searches. USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service maintained a database that allowed it to readily identify all the agreements it was party to. The other agencies did not have such databases. EPA officials said that, without such tools, they had difficulty identifying the agreements they have entered into. Officials also said they are planning to develop an electronic system to identify and track these agreements. If developed, this system could offer one means of identifying and tracking these agreements, EPA said. again monitored the agreement’s effectiveness, nor have they implemented their own recommendations to realize resource savings. We found that the agencies are not systematically exchanging information about DJEs, as called for in the agreement. As a result, the agencies had great difficulty identifying the current number of DJEs to which this agreement pertains. In December 2004, FDA headquarters officials provided us a list of 1,451 known DJEs and the agency is verifying approximately 400 establishments that may be added to the list. largely unaware of a facility's past history of compliance with the other agency's regulations. Fourth, the agreement calls for the agencies to develop and provide appropriate training in the inspectional techniques and processes of each agency. In addition, the 2000 evaluation found that more training was needed, particularly at the field level, to achieve the results of the agreement. Although the agreement was signed in 2000, it has not yet been implemented in the U.S. because of a lack of congressional support. on inspection findings between agencies’ inspection personnel. Lack of a system to track and exchange information when each agency finds instances of noncompliance. Agency efforts to develop and provide training on each other’s inspection techniques and processes did not continue past the first year of the agreement. We continue to believe that the stated purpose of. the agreement—to facilitate an exchange of information permitting more efficient use of. both agencies' resources—has not been maximized. We also found that the agencies' efforts to. develop and provided training onEach other”s inspection methods and processes didn’t continue after the first. year. agreements have ceased to exist because of internal reorganizations. Agencies may not be actively monitoring the status and relevance of these agreements. Some agreements have not been updated to account for changes in a signatory’s responsibilities since they were signed. For example, NMFS and FDA on education programs to assist livestock and poultry producers in using animal drugs has not been modified to reflect the fact that USDA’S Science and Education Administration no longer exists. The agreement was signed in 1978. better implemented. We disagree that the report does not identify the distinct difference between FDA interagency agreements and memoranda of understanding. The report includes a footnote to indicate that FDA makes a distinction, which the other agencies do not. The footnote explains that, according to FDA, FDA memoranda. of understanding do not provide for exchanges of funds. FDA refers to agreements, while the report refers to memoranda, which are not interagency. agreements but are part of the same process. We acknowledge that, as used in our report, the term interagency agreement refers generally to Memoranda of Understanding, memoranda Of Agreement, and inter Agency Agreements. If developed, this system could offer one means of tracking and managing information related to, and contained in, interagency agreements. The weaknesses in tracking agreements may also affect the agencies’ ability to determine whether these agreements are still needed and whether specific provisions are still in effect. About one-third of the agreements we identified were created decades ago and may no longer be relevant to current needs. Technological and scientific advances have made some provisions of these agreements obsolete. Some agencies that were party to the agreements have ceased to exist. position on our recommendation for using the Bioterrorism Act authorities. HHS partially concurred with two other recommendations dealing with the implementation of two interagency agreements. EPA did not provide official comments, but it provided minor technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate. NOAA provided written comments and agreed with our recommendation on the use of the Bipartisan Policy Center’s information technology resources. NOAA also provided technical comments which we incorporated in our report, as appropriate, and our detailed response is contained in appendix VI. Of the 71 interagency agreements we identified, the largest proportion (43 percent) reflect the agencies agreement to increase cooperation on inspection and enforcement activities. Other agreements address activities such as education/outreach, food security, and monitoring/surveillance related to food safety and quality. 24 agreements specifically highlight the need to reduce duplication of effort by clarifying responsibilities, reducing overlaps, and/or making efficient and effective use of resources. In some instances, the agencies entered into multiple agreements to coordinate and ensure the safety of a single type of food. USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS do not have adequate mechanisms to track interagency food safety agreements. Agency officials did not agree on the number of food safety-related agreements they have entered into. Only 7 of the 71 agreements that we ultimately compiled were identified by all signatory agencies. Forty-one additional agreements were identified to us by only one of the multiple signatories. In addition, we found three agreements—through our prior work or Internet searches—that none of the agencies had identified. identified seven agreements that focus on seafood inspection and enforcement activities. Signatories to one or more of these agreements include USDA, FDA, NMFS, the Department of Defense, and the Interstate Shellfish Sanitation Conference. Agency officials also noted that they informally cooperate and a signatory’s responsibilities since they were signed. To strengthen management controls and maximize the effectiveness of interagency agreements, we recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture, the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration and the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere identify and inventory all active agreements. In 1999, USDA and FDA signed an interagency agreement to facilitate the exchange of information about food-processing facilities that they both inspect. The agreement stated that the exchange will permit more efficient use of agency resources. We categorize the agreements according to primary program function. We also independently categorized the agreements using information from their introduction and/or background to ensure consistent categorization across the agencies. If the agencies’ categorization differed with ours, we considered their rationale and changed the categorization as appropriate. authorizing FDA to commission other agencies’ officials to conduct FDA’s inspection activities. Other avenues are open to the agencies as well. For example, the two interagency agreements that we examined in detail, could address problems in duplicative inspections if they were more effectively implemented. We are making seven recommendations designed to reduce or eliminate duplication and overlaps, leverage existing agreements and make the system more efficient and effective. For more information, go to FDA.gov/Inspections.