after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees and subcommittees. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report or wish to discuss it further, please contact me at (202) 512-6906 or Casey Keplinger, Assistant Director. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through GAO's Web site (www.gao.gov) Each weekday, GAO posts newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence on its Web site. To have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products, e-mails us at jennifer.smith@dailymail.co.uk. have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products every afternoon. Go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to Updates” to get the latest from the GAO. For more information, go to: http://www.gaO.gov/news/press-releases/2014/05/05-05/gao-e-mailing-you-a-list-of- newly-posted- products-every- afternoon.  weaknesses can result in uncontrolled spending of taxpayer dollars, misplaced or unaccounted for property, and challenges in producing financial statements. FEMA’s auditors reported seven internal control weaknesses for fiscal year 2002, including weaknesses in information security controls over its financial systems environment; financial system functionality; financial reporting. Weaknesses such as these have existed for several years and contribute to INS's systems continuing inability to substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA. Although the weaknesses did not interfere with the agency’S ability to obtain an unqualified opinion on its financial statement audit, they did result in the need for extensive manual effort to prepare reliable financial information. weaknesses specifically contributed to FEMA’s systems’ failure to substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA. These weaknesses resulted from FLETC not having adequate policies and procedures in place to ensure that funds obligated were proper and that costs for construction in progress were recorded properly. Further, auditors found that FLE TC was not taking the steps necessary to be in compliance with certain Office of Management and Budget requirements. Many of these weaknesses lead to FLETTC’‘s inability to substantially complying with FFM MIA. were unable to provide an opinion on other financial statements for the 7 months ending September 30, 2003. For fiscal year 2002 and prior to its transfer to DHS, Customs’ auditors reported nine internal control weaknesses. DHS’s auditors also found significant deficiencies at the Coast Guard and Secret Service, preventing them from being able to express an opinion. FEMA, Customs, and TSA each had weaknesses at the time of theirTransfer to DHS. However, in the 2003 audit report, these weaknesses were classified as observations and recommendations. TSA is a relatively new agency formed after the September 11, 2001, terror attacks. Auditors reported six internal control weaknesses. These weaknesses contributed to Customs’ systems inability to substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA, auditors said. The weaknesses can result in the agency's inability to comply with FFMia requirements, the report said. It added that the weaknesses could leave Customs' information vulnerable to unauthorized access, and the necessity of extensive manual procedures and analyses to process routine transactions. receivable are determined and recorded on a timely basis. In order to resolve several weaknesses at FLETC and TSA, various policies and procedures were implemented. TSA has hired additional staff, thereby resolving its weaknesses of not having a sufficient number of qualified accounting personnel. In addition to the 7 material weaknesses and 7 reportable conditions reported in the 2003 financial statement audit, DHS reported 12 additional weaknesses that affect the department’s full compliance with certain objectives of 31 U.S.C. 3512(c), (d) When DHS was created in March 2003 and merged with 22 diverse agencies, there were many known financial management weaknesses and vulnerabilities in the inherited agencies. Auditors were unable to opine on the consolidated statements of net costs and changes in net position, combined statement of budgetary resources, and consolidated statement of financing. The auditors reported 14 reportable conditions on internal control, 7 of which were considered to be material weaknesses. Most of the 22 components that transferred to DHS had not been subjected to significant financial statement audit scrutiny prior to their transfer. substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA. Nine of the 30 internal control weaknesses identified in prior component financial statement audits have been closed as of September 30, 2003. The remaining 21 issues represent continuing weaknesses that have been reported in DHS’s first Performance and Accountability Report. The department's independent auditors classified the remaining 7 weaknesses as lower level observations and recommendations. The total number of reportable conditions for DHS for fiscal year 2003, 7 of which were considered to be material weaknesses. The Coast Guard and Strategic National Stockpile had weaknesses in financial oversight. Financial reporting process was complex and labor-intensive at the Coast Guard. Several DHS bureaus lacked clearly documented procedures, making them vulnerable if key people leave the organization. The auditors found weaknesses across DHS in its entitywide security program management and in its financial systems functionality and technology. The Coast Guard had no specifically attributable reported weaknesses identified in DOT’s financial statement audit. However, newly identified weaknesses were one of the main reasons that independent auditors issued a qualified opinion on the consolidated balance sheet. across DHS in its entitywide security program management and in controls over system access, application software development, system software, segregation of duties, and service continuity. The Coast Guard was unable to support the recorded value of $2.9 billion in PP&E due to insufficient documentation provided prior to the completion of audit procedures. The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) lacked a comprehensive property management system and adequate policies and procedures to ensure the accuracy of itsPP&E records. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) lacked the ability to manage its property, plant, and equipment. Internal controls over physical counts of OM&S were not effective at the Coast Guard. The Secret Service did not record the pension liability for certain of its employees and retirees. When corrected, the auditors had insufficient time to audit the Secret Service. The Coast Guard also had not recently reviewed its OM/S capitalization policy, leading to a material adjustment to its records when an analysis was performed. The auditors were unable to verify the recorded value of $497 million inOM&S. when corrected, the auditors had insufficient time to audit the amount recorded. The Coast Guard also was unable to provide, prior to the completion of audit procedures, sufficient documentation to support the recorded value of $201 million in post-service benefit liabilities. DHS lacked controls to verify that monthly financial reports and transferred balances from legacy agencies were accurate and complete. The Bureau of Customs and Border Protection’s (CBP) accounting system lacked automated controls to detect and prevent excessive drawback claims and payments. related information was inconsistent and inefficient. CIS did not perform cycle counts of its work in process that would facilitate the accurate calculation of deferred revenue. Several large DHS bureaus had not developed and adopted effective SOPs or established systems to track, confirm, and reconcile intragovernmental balances. The Coast Guard lacked written standard operating procedures (SOP) to guide the process, primarily as the result of a new financial system that substantially increased the number of reconciling differences. The Department of Homeland Security's budget for fiscal year 2015 was $1.2 billion. FEMA's financial systems were unable to perform certain basic accounting functions efficiently. FEMA’s systems were also unable to accurately track basic accounting information, such as real and personal property and accounts receivable. Many of these weaknesses specifically contributed to FEMA's systems’ failure to substantially comply with the requirements of the Federal Financial Reporting Act of 1974. FEMA also had a lack of a process to evaluate the accuracy of a new claims estimation methodology, which contributed to its failure to meet the requirements. inherited from component agencies. For example, Customs had a previously identified weakness related to the effectiveness of its internal controls over accurate reporting of entry duties and taxes. FEMA’s accounts receivable processes were strengthened to ensure that accounts Receivable are determined and recorded on a timely basis. In the U.S. military, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is responsible for the protection of the nation's national security. The Department of the Homeland Security has responsibility for the security of the country's borders, airports, ports of entry and waterways. or established systems to track, confirm, and reconcile intragovernmental balances and transactions with their trading partners. Strategic National Stockpile (SNS): The SNS accounting process was fragmented and disconnected, largely due to operational challenges caused by the laws governing SNS. A $485 million upwards adjustment had to be made to value SNS in DHS’s records properly. Accounts payable and undelivered orders: CIS and the Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), TSA, and the Coast Guard had weaknesses in their processes. of 31 U.S.C. 3512(c), (d) (commonly known as the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA) FMFIA requires that management ensure that it has an organizational structure that supports the planning, directing, and controlling of operations to meet agency objectives. The standards also define internal control as a key component necessary to ensure that financial reporting information is reliable. Examples of the weaknesses reported by DHS included deficient controls over laws and regulations regarding the border entry process, nonconformance related to system security. The Government Accountability Office is the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress. It exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the American people. The Office is responsible for the audit and evaluation of the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center. It is also responsible for providing oversight of the FBI, the DEA, the Secret Service, and other federal law enforcement agencies. The office is located in Washington, D.C. and has offices in New York, Los Angeles, and Washington, DC. orders. Reportable Condition (Drawback Claims on Duties, Taxes, and Fees) Material Weakness (Financial Systems Functionality and Technology) Reportable condition (Acceptance and Adjudication of Immigration and Naturalization Applications) Reportability Condition (Accounts Payable and Undelivered Orders) Observation & Recommendations to Management Material weakness ( financial systems functionality and technology) Material strongness (financial systems functionability and technology). Reportablecondition (In-bond Movement of Imported Goods) CBP did not have a reliable process of monitoring the movement of ‘in-bond’ shipments. CBP lacked an effective compliance measurement program to compute an estimate of underpayment of related duties, taxes, and fees. The Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services’ (CIS) process for tracking and reporting the status of applications and related information was inconsistent and inefficient. Also, CIS did not prevent excessive drawback claims and payments. The U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) failed to adequately monitor the movements of “in- bond” shipments, which are merchandise that is not subject to duties until it reaches its destination. The CFO Act requires the agency’s CFO to develop and maintain an integrated accounting and financial management system that provides for complete, reliable, and timely financial information. The act also requires that the agency's CFO be qualified, presidentially appointed, approved by the Senate, and report to the head of the agency. FFMIA requires that agencies implement and maintain financial management systems that substantially comply with federal financialmanagement systems requirements, applicable accounting to provide the Congress and agency management with reliable financial information for managing and making day-to-day decisions. it interferes with the enterprise approach or causes significant short-term inefficiencies for agencies that must quickly adapt to other systems. DHS is currently subject to most financial management improvement laws except for the CFO Act and FFMIA. It is too early to tell whether DHS’s planned financial enterprise and costly financial management system that does not provide the information needed by management or meet the requirements of financial management laws. We are making eight recommendations for executive action at DHS that will improve financial management at the department. updated our recommendation accordingly. We applaud the current leadership at DHS for voluntarily complying with some audit provisions of the CFO Act. We continue to strongly support passage of legislation that would statutorily make DHS a CFO act agency. We plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will issue a new recommendation to DHS on how to comply with financial management legislation. The report will be released to the public at a later date. substantially comply with federal financial management systems requirements, applicable accounting standards, and the U.S. Government Standard General Ledger at the transaction level. While not required to comply with provisions of the CFO Act or FFMIA, the Accountability of Tax Dollars Act of 2002, requires DHS to prepare and have audited financial statements annually. It also requires auditors to report whether the agency’s financial management. systems substantially comply with the three requirements of FFM MIA. In identifying improved financial performance as one of DHS obtained a consolidated financial audit for the 7-month period from March 1, 2003, to September 30, 2003. DHS received a qualified opinion from its independent auditors on its consolidated balance sheet. Auditors were unable to opine on the company's financial performance. The company was able to routinely provide timely, accurate, and useful financial and performance information. DHS had neither material internal control weaknesses nor material noncompliance with laws and regulations, and meeting the requirements of FFMIA. The President’s Management Agenda recognized that an unqualified financial audit opinion is a basic prescription for any well-managed organization. Without sound internal control and accurate and timely financial information, it is not possible to accomplish the agenda. The Joint Financial Management Improvement Program (JFMIP) Principals have defined certain measures, in addition to receiving an un qualified financial statement opinion, for achieving financial management success. These additional measures include being a member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. enterprise solution will be accomplished in three phases. Phase I includes defining, acquiring, and testing the planned solution. Phase II involves implementing the solution throughout DHS, and Phase III is ongoing maintenance of the solution. According to DHS, the eMergevendor selection to occur in April or May of 2004. However, vendor proposal requests were issued in June 2004 and selection is to be completed in July 2004. The Business Automation Initiative is an interim project to be developed by contractors during 2004. DHS considered system proposals to automate purchase requests and streamline employee entry/exit process. Instead of pursuing this interim solution, DHS plans to include it in the requirements of the eMerge initiative. DHS has obtained approval of the requirements from various high-level DHS officials. However, these documents were not provided to us until 2004.2004. DHS issued a request for proposal (RFP) was issued by DHS for the e merge initiative, but it was not provided until 2004, when we obtained the documents. Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the District of Columbia Courts (DC Courts) to acquire new information systems. NASA is on its third attempt in 12 years to modernize its financial management process and systems. DC Courts began its system acquisition in 1998 and has struggled in its implementation. One of the key impediments to the success of integration efforts at NASA was the failure to involve key stakeholders in the implementation or evaluation of system improvements. As a result, new systems failed to meet the needs of NASA. a result, new systems failed to meet the needs of key stakeholders. DC Courts struggled in developing requirements that contained the necessary specificity to ensure the system developed would meet its users’ needs. To avoid similar problems, it is important, among other things, that DHS ensure commitment and extensive involvement from top management and users in eMerge. Although we did not perform audit procedures to determine the impact of these reductions, reduction of service providers prematurely, without considering the provider’s reliability, or without an overall consolidation plan, could be negative. internal control weaknesses, some of which are scheduled to be completed by the end of fiscal year 2004. DHS has begun working with a contractor to design and implement a tracking system for outstanding weaknesses identified during the department’s independent financial audits. While this system is still being developed by the OCFO, with assistance from contractors, it is not yet fully functional and does not include information on all reported weaknesses. Until such time that it does, it will provide limited oversight and information on the status of corrective actions to address weaknesses at DHS. produce relevant and reliable financial information. DHS’s CFO testified that the department is committed to resolving the remaining weaknesses and has developed a plan to do so. corrective actions will be developed by each applicable bureau or directorate and submitted to the OCFO. According to this document, corrective action plans of varying levels of detail are in place to address 12 of the 14 internal control weaknesses. Some of the corrective actions are scheduled to be implemented in the near future, the CFO said. that the Secretary of Homeland Security direct the Under Secretary for Management to do the following: Continue to maintain strong involvement of key stakeholders and top management throughout the acquisition and implementation of the eMerge. Maintain a tracking system of all auditor-identified and management- identified control weaknesses. We obtained written comments on a draft of this report from DHS’s Chief Financial Officer. The comments DHS provided to us are reprinted in appendix IV. DHS generally agreed with the overall findings and recommendations. However, in response to our recommendation to incorporate all internal. The original intent of our recommendation was to encourage DHS to track and resolve all auditor reported material weaknesses. DHS felt the recommendation was too broad and suggested that we change the language to reflect tracking of all auditor-identified and management-identified internal control weaknesses. We fully support DHS including all management- identified control weaknesses as well, and have updated our recommendation accordingly. Additionally, DHS commented on its commitment to tracking and resolving material weaknesses, reportable conditions, and observations and recommendations, similar to those discussed throughout this report. It is too early to tell whether DHS’s planned financial enterprise solution will meet the requirements of financial management laws it is currently not subject to. DHS has implemented a commercial-off-the-shelf tool called Dynamic Object Oriented Requirements System (DOORS) to track requirements of various laws, regulations, and circulars place on the development of the system. It would certainly make good business sense to do so given DHS's size and mission. It is also important that DHS be proactive and incorporate the requirement of the CFO Act and FFMIA. DOORS is intended to be DHS’s repository of all applicable system, process, technological, data, or other requirements. DHS estimated that several thousand compliance requirements will be tracked using DOORS once analysis is completed. After the repository is complete, requirements reports are to be printed directly from DOORS and attached to future RFPs to ensure that contractors are aware of the legislative requirements of the systems to be developed. A system to record, track, and link all legislative requirements as a financial management system is being developed. legislative requirements as a financial management system is being developed is important. Also important is that DHS be statutorily required to comply with the CFO Act and FFMIA. Meeting these financial management improvement requirements will help produce timely and useful financial and business information. Through the eMerge initiative, DHS has plans to integrate and consolidate its financial andBusiness systems. But without such things as continued active oversight from top-level management, DHS could find itself in the same position as other federal departments. as high risk based on three factors: (1) the implementation and transformation of DHS is an enormous undertaking that will take time to achieve in an effective and efficient manner, (2) components to be merged into DHS already face a wide array of existing challenges, and (3) failure to effectively carry out its mission would potentially expose the nation to very serious consequences. One of the department’s key challenges is integrating the components’ respective financial management systems, many of which were outdated and had limited functionality. classified as observations and recommendations, a much less serious classification. Lower classification within DHS does not mean that the issues are now somehow less severe, it merely refers to the materiality of a component within DHS. Resolving all previously reported internal control weaknesses, regardless of the current designation at DHS, is key to DHS’s ability to produce relevant and reliable financial information. The issues by themselves were relatively more significant than when considered in the context of the much larger consolidated operations of DHS as a whole. The Homeland Security Act of 2002 merged 22 federal agencies and organizations into DHS. DHS’s missions include preventing terrorist attacks within the United States. The department has the third largest budget in the federal government, about $40 billion for fiscal year 2005. In January 2003, we designated implementation and transformation of the new Department of Homeland Security as high risk based on three factors: (1) the implementation as well as addressing weaknesses from the inherited components, and (2) the integration of DHS with other federal agencies. key in ensuring that the necessary resources are available to address the weaknesses and to ensure that they are resolved in a timely manner. DHS intends to acquire and deploy an integrated financial enterprise solution and reports that it has reduced the number of its legacy financial systems. The acquisition is in the early stages, and continued focus and follow through, among other things, will be necessary for it to be successful. DHS expects the acquisition and implementation to take place over a 3-year time period and cost approximately $146 million. DHS’s OCFO needs to establish financial reporting roles and responsibilities, assess critical needs, and establish standard operating procedures (SOP) for the department. These conditions were not unexpected for a newly created organization, especially one as large as DHS. We performed our review from October 2003 through June 2004 in Washington, D.C., in accordance with U.S. generally accepted government auditing standards. We requested comments on this report from the Secretary of Homeland Security or his designee. Written comments were received from the department's Chief Financial Officer. the U.S. Secret Service, the Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services (CIS), and five directorates, each of which is headed by an Under Secretary. Within the Management Directorate is DHS’s Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO), which is assigned primary responsibility for functions, such as budget, finance and accounting, strategic planning and evaluation. OCFO is also charged with ongoing integration of these functions within the department. The CFO Act requires the agency's CFO to develop from the OCFO’s Office of Financial Management and OIG staff. In addition to items already mentioned, we reviewed planned corrective actions developed by the department to address its fiscal years 2002 and 2003 material weaknesses and reportable conditions. We conducted a walk-through to review the system DHS is developing to track planned corrective action. We have not reviewed system requirements or other recently developed plans because these were completed and obtained after our fieldwork was completed. We requested comments from the Director of the RMTO and other officials. and other staff in this office. We also reviewed testimony of DHS’s current and former CFO and DHS”s OIG related to financial management at the department. We reviewed documentation detailing the reduction of financial service providers. However, substantial documentation related to the eMerge initiative was not provided to us until after we completed our fieldwork. We did not include analysis or evaluation of such information in this report. To determine whether the planned cuts were positive or negative for the department, we did not complete audit procedures. initiative. However, these documents were not provided to us until after we completed our fieldwork. We are unable to determine if DHS, through the RMTO, is developing a financial enterprise solution that will be in alignment with departmentwide information technology plans. Nevertheless, we have found that similar projects have proven challenging and costly for other federal agencies. We have reported on the efforts of National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the District of Columbia (D.C.)