We reported in 2008 that DB plan investments in hedge funds and private equity have grown, but such investments are generally a small portion of plan assets. According to a Pensions & Investments survey, the percentage of large plans (as measured by total plan assets) investing in Hedge funds grew from 11 percent in 2001 to 60 percent in 2010. Data show that larger plans are more likely to invest in hedge Funds and private Equity compared with midsize plans. The average allocation to hedge funds among plans with such investments was a little over 5 percent. positions and trading tactics in order to achieve a desired return as changing market conditions warrant. It is difficult for plans to independently ascertain the value or fully assess the degree of investment risk. As with hedge funds, valuations of private equity investments are uncertain during the investment’s long duration, which often lasts 10 years or more. Some hedge funds have improved disclosure and transparency about their operations because of the demands of institutional investors. Several pension plans cited limited transparency as a prime reason they had chosen not to invest in hedge funds. Unlike investments that are traded and priced in public markets, plan officials have limited information on the value of private equity investments until the underlying holdings are sold. While any plan investment may fail to deliver expected returns over time, hedge fund investments are more likely to do so. The investment’s long duration, which often lasts 10 years or more, is a key factor in assessing a private equity fund's value. In some cases, private equity funds estimate the value. of the fund by comparing the. value of companies in their portfolio with thevalue of comparable publicly traded assets. transparency, valuation procedures, redemption provisions, and degree of leverage employed. Pension plans may want to ensure that they will not pay a performance fee unless the value of the hedge fund investment passes a previous peak value. Key contract terms for private equity may also include fee structure and valuation procedures. One plan sponsor noted the ability to negotiate favorable contract terms is limited when investing in top-performing funds, because investing in such funds is highly competitive. Due diligence and ongoing monitoring, beyond those required for traditional investments, are also required. For hedge funds, due diligence can be a wide-ranging process including study of a hedge fund’s investment, valuation, risk management processes, and compliance procedures. As with hedge fund investments, plans take additional steps to mitigate the challenges of investing in private equity through extensive and ongoing monitoring, beyond that required for traditional investments. Plan representatives said these steps include regularly reviewing reports on the performance of the underlying investments of the private equity fund and having periodic periodic reviews of the hedge fund's performance. Plan official may not be able to obtain timely information on the value of assets owned by a hedge fund. Hedge fund managers may decline to disclose information on asset holdings and the net value of individual assets. Even if hedge fund managers were to provide detailed positions, these managers may seek to profit through complex and simultaneous positions and can abruptly change their positions and trading tactics in order to achieve a desired goal. The release of such information could compromise their trading strategy, according to the plan official's report. its investments—and can often require additional capital over the life of the investment. A private equity fund cycle typically follows a pattern known as the J-curve, which reflects an initial period of negative returns during which investors provide the fund with capital. Pension plans investing in hedge funds are also exposed to operational risk because of inadequate or failed internal processes, people, and systems, or problems with external service providers. Operational problems can arise from a number of factors, including a lack of confidence in the investment process. Operational problems can arise from a number of sources, including inexperienced operations personnel. Many hedge funds engage in active, complex, and sometimes heavily leveraged trading. A failure of operational functions, such as processing or clearing one or more trades, may have particularly grave consequences for the overall position of the hedge fund. Pension plan officials we spoke to said most investments can pose some type of operational risk, according to a report by an investment consulting firm. The report was based on interviews with hedge fund executives and pension plan officials. Pension plan officials cited attaining returns superior to those attained in the stock market as a reason for investing in hedge funds. Hedge funds and private equity are also relatively illiquid investments. One plan official noted that as long as hedge funds add value net of fees, they found the higher fees acceptable. But these constraints also pose certain disadvantages to plan sponsors, such as inhibiting a plan’s ability to limit a hedge fund”s investment loss.net investment returns. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Hedge fund and private equity investments pose investment challenges beyond those posed by traditional investments. Both managers may use leverage to potentially increase an investment’s return. Although registered investment companies are subject to strict leverage limits, a hedge fund or private equity fund can make relatively unrestricted use of leverage. Leverage can magnify profits, but can also magnify losses to the fund if the market goes against the fund”s expectations. In addition, a may fail to deliver expected returns over time. Investing through a fund of funds does not relieve plan sponsors of their fiduciary duties. Smaller plans may have only one-or two-person staffs, or may lack the resources to hire outside consulting expertise and may be locked out of top-performing funds. A representative of one pension plan with more than $32 billion in total assets noted that before investing in hedge funds, the plan had to conduct a due diligence review of the firm. The plan sponsors must act prudently in selecting and monitoring funds of funds. Hedge funds and private equity funds can also feature relatively costly fee structures compared with those of mutual funds. Despite these fee structures, pension plan officials to manage a portfolio of hedge funds. investing through a fund of funds may provide a plan better access to hedge funds or private Equity funds than a plan would be able to obtain through direct investment. The returns for such concentrated, undiversified funds are highly susceptible to the success or failure of each underlying company and related market sector conditions. The market goes against the fund’s expectations. The extent to which these smaller plans invest in hedge funds and private equity is unclear. Pension plan officials take a number of steps in an attempt to mitigate the risks and challenges. Plan sponsors emphasize defining a clear purpose and strategy for their hedge fund investments. Several sources stated that private equity investments have greater risks. The full report is available at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/27/pension-plan-investments-in-hedge-funds-and-private-equity-report. underlying investments of the private equity fund and having periodic meetings with fund managers. Investing in a fund of funds provides investors with diversification across multiple funds, which can mitigate the effect of one manager’s poor performance. A fund of private equity funds can allow plans to invest in a variety of managers, industries, geographies, and year of initial capital investment. In some cases, plans participate on the advisory board of a private Equity fund, which provides a greater opportunity for oversight. Investors must invest with top- performing funds in order to achieve long-term returns in excess of those of the stock market. Plan sponsors and others also cited the importance of negotiating key terms of investments in hedge funds and private equity. Such terms can include fee structure and conditions, degree of transparency, valuation procedures, redemption provisions, and degree of leverage employed in the case of hedge funds, they said. In private equity investments, there is greater variation in performance among funds, particularly among venture capital investments. equity market volatility, it is reasonable to expect that the number of plan sponsors making such investments will increase in the future. Such assets may serve useful purposes in a well-thought- out investment program, offering plan sponsors advantages that may not be as readily available from more traditional investment options. However, investments in such assets place demands on plan sponsors that are significantly beyond the demands of more traditional asset classes. These challenges can be daunting even for large plan sponsors. Accordingly, we believe that, as we recommended in 2008, take to address these challenges. Labor’s Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) could outline the implications of a hedge funds’ limited transparency on the fiduciary duty of prudent oversight. While EBSA is not tasked with offering guidance to public sector plans, such plans may nonetheless benefit from such guidance, the authors say. They say smaller plans might not have the resources to take actions consistent with the best practices, and thus would be at risk of making imprudent investments in hedge funds. guidance to public sector plans, such plans may nonetheless benefit from such guidance. Labor generally agreed with our recommendation, but said the lack of uniformity among these investments could complicate the development of comprehensive guidance for plan fiduciaries. To date, Labor has not acted on this recommendation. As plan sponsors seek to better ensure adequate return on assets under management, recent trends suggest that investments in alternative assets such as hedge funds and private equity are becoming more commonplace. In light of these trends and ongoing public equity market volatility, it is reasonable to expect that the In 2008, the ERISA Advisory Council recommended that Labor publish guidance to clarify the role of ERISA fiduciaries in selecting, valuing, and accounting for hard-to-value assets. In 2009, the Investor’s Committee published a report in January 2009 on the best practices for hedge fund investors. The report acknowledged that hedge fund investments are not necessarily suitable for some investors and provided many recommendations for investors selecting and monitoring their Hedge Fund investments, such as obtaining a written statement of the fund's valuation policies and procedures. $32 billion in total assets noted that before investing in hedge funds, the plan would have to build up its staff in order to conduct the due diligence necessary during the fund selection process. Department of Labor (Labor) can play a role in helping to ensure that plans fulfill their Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) fiduciary duties. For example, in 2006, the ERISA Advisory Council recommended that Labor publish guidance about the hedge fund investment process. In 2011, the council concluded that Labor should publish guidance on hedge funds and private equity. sponsors. We believe that, as we recommended in 2008, the Secretary of Labor should provide guidance regarding investing in hedge funds and private equity specifically designed for qualified plans under ERISA. In particular, we believe that a discussion of the challenges that such investments pose to small plan sponsors would be beneficial. This concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to answer any questions that the council may have. For further questions on this statement, please contact me at (202) 512- 7215. statement include Michael Hartnett, Sharon Hermes, David Lehrer, and Amber Yancey Carroll. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.