difficult tasks for USDA, such as reengineering business processes and establishing reliable and secure methods of transmitting and storing all electronic records. USDA officials working on these activities believe that these tasks can be accomplished by the December 18 deadline. E-File Act requires USDA to continue providing services in the traditional way to customers who choose not to use the Internet. CBAs must support dual service delivery functions--one electronic and one paper-based. identified how much funding and staff resources will be needed to fully implement the act. Our objective was to review measures being taken by the department to implement the provisions of the Freedom to E-File Act. On November 15, 2000, we briefed your staff on the results of our review up to that point. We performed follow-up work to update USDA’s progress implementing the act through December 31, 2000. The results of all of our work are summarized in this report. We continue to believe that having a senior-level official vested with sufficient accountability and authority is important to the success of the e-file implementation efforts. the e-file effort, was still in production at the end of December 2000. USDA agreed that it had problems meeting the act’s initial December 18, 2000, deadline for deploying electronic forms on the Internet. USDA also stated that successful implementation of the act will require continued funding, along with understanding and support of the USDA's programs or “owners” of the business being transformed. USDA said that it fully supports reproduced in appendix II of the report by the Office of the CIO. critical to help the department achieve a more consistent approach in its entire e-government transformation. To ensure that USDA fully meets its E-File Act mandates, we recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture assign a senior-level official with overall responsibility, authority, and accountability for managing and carrying out implementation. The department also agreed that comprehensive plans must be developed for implementing the Freedom to E- File Act and GPEA. But the department stopped short of describing the extent to which its comprehensive plan will include all the detailed steps we recommended. priorities, and time frames and milestones for their completion. assign task responsibilities to staff and show critical dependencies identify required staff/budget resources for completing the plan. document contingency actions planned to address unforeseen work delays or problems. USDA has not yet developed and documented a comprehensive e-file implementation plan. To ensure that USDA fully meets its E-File Act mandates, the assign a senior-level official with overall responsibility, authority, and accountability for managing and implementing all the separate activities to ensure critical tasks are completed on time and within budget. required staff/budget resources for completing the plan; and document contingency actions planned to address unforeseen work delays or problems. In addition, the comprehensive plan should cover both e-file and GPEA requirements to help better coordinate actions across USDA agencies. The first copy of each GAO report is free. Additional copies of reports are $2 each. A check or money order should be made out to the Superintendent of Documents. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies are required. the Internet and submitting required reports on initial e-file activities and plans to Congress. However, implementing full e-filing capabilities for all its farm service customers by the deadlines set by the act poses a far more complex and difficult challenge. A component critical to the success of any such initiative is the necessary authority and responsibility to manage it across different departmental entities. No single official has been so designated. Also, a comprehensive implementation plan is critical to help the department achieve a more consistent approach possible. USDA is preparing to implement plans in accordance with the GPEA. To address their e-file requirements, the CBAs had two separate interagency teams working together to meet the act’s preparing plans. purchased an on-line common forms software tool for selected a total of 219 forms. The report lacked specifics on activities and milestones, dependencies among USDA activities, and needed resources. It also did not assign a senior-level official with overall accountability for managing and ensuring the implementing disparate e- file activities. with your office, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies to Representative Eva Clayton, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Department Operations, Oversight, Nutrition, and Forestry, House Committee on Agriculture. Senator Richard Lugar, Chairman, and Senator Tom Harkin, Ranking Member, Senate Committee on agriculture. Representative Larry Combest, Chairman,. Representative Charles Stenholm, Ranking minority Member, House committee on Agriculture; Representative Tom Davis, Chairman. Vice Chairwoman, and Representative Jim Turner, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Technology and Procurement Policy, House Committee on Government Reform. We will also send copies to the Honorable Ann M. Veneman, Secretary of Agriculture; the Hon honorable Mitchell E. Daniels, Jr., Director, Office of Management and Budget; and other interested parties. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. Should you have any questions on matters discussed in this article, please contact us at tips@cnn.com.  Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders by mail: U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Orders by visiting: Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using the phone number below. from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. Web site: http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/f fraudnet.htm e-mail: fraudnet@gaO.gov 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system) or call the toll-free number at (1-800) 456-6000. two separate interagency teams working together to meet the act’s December 18, 2000, deadline. CBAs purchased an on-line common forms software tool for creating electronic forms, selected forms to post on the Web, and designed and begun implementing a common Internet Web site. At the time of our November briefing, the CBAs still needed to obtain OMB approval for each electronic form, complete testing of the Web page, train county-based field staff in the new e-file procedures. OMB had not approved these forms because some forms appeared to be for the department’s internal use, did not have clear and user-friendly instructions, or did not include forms instructions. As of December 31, 2000, RD had not resubmitted any of its forms for OMB review. A marketing brochure, being developed by the CBAs to promote public awareness of the e-file effort, was still in production at the end of 2000. The CBAs expected to have deployed on the Web site by the deadline were available. Final OMB approval for each of the contractor testing of the Web page design was scheduled to be completed December 15, the last workday before the deadline. Some key technical staff who were implementing web farm hardware, software, and security had other full-time duties and had no replacements should they be assigned elsewhere. plans still needed to be established to train county-based field office staff in the new e-filing procedures and in available forms. to be done to meet the December 18 deadline. USDA selected 219 forms (57 from FSA, 6 from NRCS, and 156 from RD) to post on the Web. USDA believes customers can complete these on their own with assistance only from form completion instructions. USDA coordinated with OMB to develop a user-friendly format and are working to obtain OMB approval for each new electronic form. Designed and is implementing a common Internet Web site that can utilize a single Internet address to provide user access with common search and retrieval functions. to be done to meet the December 18 deadline. would be required to carry out them out. RMA’s initial efforts focused on establishing and distributing guidelines and policies for crop insurance providers to follow in meeting their e-file responsibilities. USDA has made progress and has partially met initial E-File Act deadlines for providing agricultural producers with access to forms via the Internet. R MA said it expects full implementation, as the act requires, by December 1, 2001. The agency will use the process it will use to ensure that insurance providers comply with the act's e- file requirements. USDA’s CBAs provide services such as farm loans and conservation assistance. Under the E- File Act, these agencies were required to establish an electronic filing and retrieval system by December 18, 2000. RMA is working on a December 1, 2000, plan for allowing agricultural producers the option of obtaining, over the Internet, departmental forms. The E-File Act provides that the Secretary is to reserve, from applicable accounts, not more than $3 million for fiscal year 2001 and $2 million for each subsequent fiscal year. By June 20, 2002, agricultural producers be able to file paperwork electronically with USDA if they choose to do so. RMA administers the federal crop insurance program, which helps protect producers against losses due to drought, flooding, and other unavoidable causes. By December 1, 2000, it was to submit to Congress a plan for enabling producers to obtain forms and information, such as crop insurance applications and production and yield reports, over the Internet. Implementation of the plan is to be completed by December 1,. 2001. NRCS, Rural Development, and County-based Agencies to establish electronic filing and retrieval system. Provides separate requirements for the CBAs and RMA. an Internet-based system enabling agricultural producers to access all forms and shall submit all forms on a request.request. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here.