OMB M-04-04, E-Authentication Guidance for Federal Agencies, addresses federal government services accomplished using the Internet, instead of on paper. This guidance established four levels of identity assurance for electronic transactions requiring authentication. Each level describes the agency’s degree of certainty that a user has presented an identifier that refers to his or her identity. NIST Special Publication 800-63-2, Electronic Authentication Guideline, provides technical guidelines for federal agencies implementing electronic authentication. Successful authentication occurs when an individual proves through the means of authentication that he or she possesses and controls the token. The cryptographic methods used at this level may still allow someone with malicious intent to intercept the transmission of a password through eavesdropping and crack it using a dictionary attack. Approved cryptographic methods should be strong enough to protect against impersonation of the verifying entity. Level 4: Is intended to provide the highest practical remote network authentication assurance, requiring at least two authentication factors. It would not allow the type of eavesdropping attack that is possible at Level 1. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from the government. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. “debilitating impact” systems; developing, issuing, and overseeing the implementation of binding operational directives to agencies. operating the federal information security incident center (the U.S Computer Emergency Readiness Team or US-CERT); deploying technology to continuously diagnose and mitigate threats. In May 2015 DHS issued its first directive, which required all departments and agencies to review and mitigate all critical vulnerabilities on their Internet-facing systems. DHS identifies these critical vulnerabilities in the form of “vulnerabilities’ on the Internet. all critical vulnerabilities on their Internet-facing systems. DHS identifies these vulnerabilities using scanning tools and reports the results to agencies on a weekly basis. Agencies are then required to mitigate the DHS-identified vulnerabilities within 30 days of the report. DHS has also supplied agencies with tools and technologies to assist in protecting against cyber threats and vulnerabilities. For example: Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation Program: Since fiscal year 2013, DHS has provided agencies with the opportunity to use a suite of tools and capabilities. Risks to cyber-based assets can originate from unintentional or intentional threats. Unintentional threats can be caused by natural disasters, defective computer or network equipment, software coding errors, and the actions of careless or poorly trained employees. Intentional threats include targeted and untargeted attacks from criminal groups, hackers, disgruntled employees, foreign nations engaged in espionage and information warfare, and terrorists. These adversaries vary in terms of their capabilities, willingness to act, and motives. These threat sources make use of various techniques—or exploits—that may adversely affect federal information. various techniques—or exploits—that may adversely affect federal information, computers, software, networks, and operations. These exploits are carried out through various conduits, including websites, e-mails, wireless and cellular communications, Internet protocols, portable media, and social media. Further, adversaries can leverage common computer software programs as a means by which to deliver a threat by embedding exploits within software files that can be activated when a user opens a file within its corresponding program. The number of information security incidents affecting systems supporting the federal government is increasing. the opportunity to use a suite of tools and capabilities to identify cybersecurity risks on an ongoing basis. National Cybersecurity Protection System: NCPS is an integrated system-of-systems intended to deliver a range of capabilities for intrusion detection, intrusion prevention, analytics, and information sharing. When deployed on an agency’s connection to the Internet, the system monitors inbound and outbound traffic for malicious activity. In summary, while IRS has made progress in implementing information security controls, it needs to continue to address weaknesses in the system. benefits, and risks of its authentication options. IRS officials told us that this office plans to complete a strategic plan for taxpayer authentication across the agency in September 2016. Under FISMA, the Director of OMB is responsible for developing and overseeing the implementation of policies, principles, standards, and regulations. Until it completes these steps, IRS will lack key information to make decisions about whether and how much to invest in authentication options, officials said. The IRS will not be able to make a decision until it has these steps completed. benefits, and risks of alternatives for better authenticating taxpayers who access its systems. strengthening the security posture of IRS—and other agencies— also depends on the key roles played by OMB, NIST, and DHS in providing oversight and guidance from a government-wide perspective. I would be happy to answer any questions you have. If you have any questions regarding this statement, please contact Gregory C. Wilshusen at (202) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov. Federal law gives OMB the power of enforcement and accountability related to evaluating agencies’ management of their information resources. OMB is empowered to recommend reductions or increases in an agency’s budget and restrict the availability of funds for information resources, among other things. In fiscal year 2015, OMB established the OMB Cyber and National Security Unit (OMB Cyber) within the Office of the Secretary of the Treasury. More details on OMB's budgeting and accountability powers are below. National Security Unit (OMB Cyber) within the Office of the Federal Chief Information Officer. This unit is responsible for strengthening federal cybersecurity through oversight of agency and government-wide programs. OMB has also established the “CyberStat Review” process, which involves evidence-based meetings led by OMB. As required by FISMA, OMB reports annually to Congress on the effectiveness of the CyberStat Review process. The process aims to ensure agencies are accountable for their cybersecurity posture, while assisting them in developing targeted, tactical actions. Federal agencies are to develop, document, and implement an agency-wide information security program. The head of each agency is responsible for ensuring that senior agency officials carry out their information security responsibilities. The act also assigned OMB and the Department of Homeland information security incidents, and guidelines for identifying an information system as a national security system. OMB reports annually to Congress on the effectiveness of information security policies and practices at executive branch agencies during the preceding year and a summary of evaluations conducted by agency inspectors general. The act also assigned OMB and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) oversight responsibilities to assist agencies in effectively implementing information security protections. NIST is responsible for developing standards and guidelines that include minimum information security requirements. IRS's mission is to provide America’s taxpayers top-quality service by helping them to understand and meet their tax responsibilities and to enforce the law with integrity and fairness to all. In carrying out its mission, IRS relies extensively on computerized information systems, which it must effectively secure. to provide the highest practical remote network authentication assurance, requiring the proof of possession of a key through a cryptographic protocol. At this level in-person identity proofing is required. It is otherwise similar to Level 3, except with stronger cryptographic methods in place. Federal law also gives OMB and DHS responsibility and authority for oversight of operational aspects of federal information security. In particular, the OMB Director is charged with overseeing and enforcing agency compliance with information security requirements by taking certain actions authorized by relevant federal law. developing and overseeing the implementation of policies, principles, standards, and guidelines on information security in federal agencies. The director is also responsible for coordinating the development of standards and guidelines by NIST. For its part, NIST is responsible under FISMA for developing security standards for agencies. NIST, Federal Information Processing Standard 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems, requires agencies to categorize their information systems as low-impact, moderate-impact or high-impact. process for selecting the security controls necessary to satisfy these requirements. NIST Special Publication 800-53, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations, provides a catalog of security and privacy controls for federal information systems and organizations. OMB and NIST also have provided guidance to agencies on procedures for authenticating users to federal systems and websites, including the following: OMB M-15-13, Policy to Require Secure Connections across Federal Websites and Web Services, which requires all publicly accessible federal websites and web services to provide service through a secure connection. As technology has advanced, the federal government has become increasingly dependent on computerized information systems. Federal agencies rely on such systems to process, maintain, and report large volumes of sensitive data, such as personal information. Ineffective protection of these systems and information can impair delivery of vital services and result in loss or theft of computer resources, assets, and funds. It can also undermine of agency missions due to embarrassing incidents that erode the public’s confidence in government, the report says. to embarrassing incidents that erode the public’s confidence in government; damage to networks and equipment; and high costs for remediation. Federal law includes requirements intended to improve the protection of government information and systems. These laws include the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014, which among other things, requires the head of each agency to provide information security protections commensurate with the risk and magnitude of harm resulting from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction. The IRS collects and maintains a significant amount of personal and financial information on each U.S. taxpayer. The size and complexity of the IRS add unique operational challenges. The Commissioner of Internal Revenue has overall responsibility for ensuring the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the information and systems that support the agency and its operations. Within IRS, the senior agency official responsible for information security is the Associate CIO, who heads the IRS Information Technology department. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. IRS estimated that it prevented or recovered $22.5 billion in fraudulent IDT refunds in filing season 2014. IRS has taken steps to address IDT refund fraud; however, it remains a persistent and evolving threat. In 2015, IRS reported allocating more than 4,000 full-time equivalent staff and spending $470 million on refund fraud and IDT activities. In addition, IRS received an additional $290 million for fiscal year 2016 to improve customer service, IDT identification and prevention, and cybersecurity. the number of affected individuals as a factor when determining if affected individuals should be notified of a suspected breach. IRS did not document lessons learned from periodic analyses of its breach response efforts. We recommended that IRS correct these weaknesses, but the agency has yet to fully address them. The importance of protecting taxpayer information is further highlighted by the billions of dollars that have been lost to IDT refund fraud, which continues to be an evolving threat, the authors say. They say IRS should develop estimates of the extent of IDt refund fraud to help direct its efforts to identify fraudsters. Fraudsters continue to adapt their schemes to identify weaknesses in IDT defense. IRS officials say fraudsters can create historically consistent returns that are hard to distinguish from one filed by a legitimate taxpayer. IRS can take steps to, among other things, better authenticate the identity of taxpayers before issuing refunds. In January 2015 we reported that taxpayers can obtain an e-file PIN by providing their name, Social Security number, date of birth, address, and filing status for IRS’s e- file PIN application. IRS temporarily suspended the Identity Protection Personal Identification Number (IP PIN) service on IRS.gov. The IP PIN is a single-use identification number provided to taxpayers who are victims of identity theft (IDT) The service allowed taxpayers to retrieve their IP PINs online by passing IRS’s authentication checks. As of April 7, the online service was still suspended. The IRS stated that it was conducting further review of the IP PIN service and is looking at further strengthening the security features. integrity of transmitted or stored data. IRS policies require the use of encryption, and the agency continued to expand its use of encrypting sensitive data. Key systems we reviewed had not been configured to encrypt sensitive user authentication data. Audit and monitoring is the regular collection, review, and analysis of events on systems and networks in order to detect, respond to, and investigate unusual activity. IRS established policies and procedures for auditing and monitoring its systems and continued to enhance its capability by, for example, implementing an automated mechanism to log user activity on its access request. automated mechanism to log user activity on its access request and approval system. IRS had not established logging for two key applications used to support the transfer of financial data and access and manage taxpayer accounts. Physical security controls, such as physical access cards, limit access to an organization’s overall facility and areas housing sensitive IT components. IRS established policies for physically protecting its computer resources and physical security controls at its enterprise computer centers. The agency was not consistently maintaining key system and application audit plans. Identifying and authenticating users provides the basis for establishing accountability and controlling access to a system. IRS established policies for identification and authentication, including requiring multifactor authentication for local and network access accounts. IRS used easily guessable passwords on servers supporting key systems. IRS continued to expand the use of two- factor access to its network. But IRS had not fully implemented unique user identification and. authentication or remote electronic authentication that complies with federal requirements, the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration said. “least privilege,” granting users the least amount of rights and privileges necessary to perform their duties. IRS established policies for authorizing access to its systems, but continued to permit excessive access in some cases. For example, users were granted rights and permissions in excess of what they needed to do their jobs. Cryptography controls protect sensitive data and computer programs by rendering data unintelligible to unauthorized users and protecting the integrity of transmitted or stored data. IRS policies require the use of encryption to protect data. incidents reported by federal agencies to the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) increased from 5,503 in fiscal year 2006 to 67,168 in 2014. According to OMB, agencies reported 77,183 incidents in fiscalyear 2015. For fiscal year 2015, OMB reported that federal agencies spent about $13.1 billion on cybersecurity, and agencies budgeted about $14 billion for cybersecurity for fiscal year 2016. Similarly, the number of incidents involving PII reported byFederal agencies has more than doubled in recent years. budgeted about $14 billion for cybersecurity for fiscal year 2016. This amount may increase significantly, as the president’s fiscal year 2017 budget proposes investing over $19 billion in resources for cybersecurity. Cyber incidents can adversely affect national security, damage public health and safety, and compromise sensitive information. In June 2015, the Commissioner of the IRS testified that unauthorized third parties had gained access to taxpayer information from its Get Transcript application. According to officials, criminals used taxpayer- specific data acquired from non-agency sources to gain access. During fiscal year 2015, IRS collected more than $3.3 trillion; processed more than 243 million tax returns and other forms. IRS employs about 90,000 people in its Washington, D.C., headquarters and at more than 550 offices in all 50 states, U.S. territories, and some embassies and consulates. To manage its data and information, the agency operates two enterprise computing centers. It also collects and maintains a significant amount of personal and financial data for the collection of taxes. used taxpayer- specific data acquired from non-agency sources to gain unauthorized access to information on approximately 100,000 tax accounts. These data included Social Security information, dates of birth, and street addresses. In an August 2015 update, IRS reported this number to be about 114,000. In a February 2016 update, the agency reported that an additional 390,000 accounts had been accessed. The online Get Transcript service has been unavailable since May 2015. In March 2016, IRS stated that as part of its ongoing addition to the 49 outstanding recommendations from previous audits—will help IRS improve its controls for identifying and authenticating users. Table 1 below provides the number of our prior recommendations to IRS that were not implemented at the beginning of our fiscal year 2015 audit. How many were resolved by the end of the audit, new recommendations, and the total number of outstanding recommendations at the start of the fiscal year 2016 audit are listed in the bottom of the page. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. recommendations, and the total number of outstanding recommendations at the conclusion of the audit. In commenting on drafts of the reports presenting the results of our fiscal year 2015 audit, the IRS Commissioner stated that while the agency agreed with our new recommendations, it will review them to ensure that its actions include sustainable fixes. We have also previously reported that IRS can take steps to improve its response to data breaches involving the inappropriate disclosure—or potential disclosure—of personally identifiable information. In December 2013 we reported a dedicated guard force at each of its computer centers. The agency had yet to address weaknesses in its review of access lists for both employees and visitors to sensitive areas. IRS also had weaknesses in configuration management controls, which are intended to prevent unauthorized changes to information system resources. It did not, for example, ensure security patch updates were applied in a timely manner to the agency's IT systems, the report said. The IRS developed policies for managing the configuration of its IT systems and improved some configuration controls. governance of IRS and therefore represented a significant deficiency in IRS’s internal control over financial reporting systems as of September 30, 2015. To assist IRS in fully implementing its agency-wide information security program, we made two new recommendations to more effectively implement security-related policies and plans. We made 43 technical recommendations in a separate report with limited distribution to address 26 new weaknesses in access controls and configuration management. Implementing these recommendations—in addition to the 49 outstanding recommendations from previous audits—will help. backup procedures. The agency established a comprehensive framework for its program, including assessing risk for its systems. However, IRS had not updated key mainframe policies and procedures to address issues such as comprehensively auditing and monitoring access. In addition, the agency had not fully mitigated the risk of unauthorized access to the agency’s mainframe systems, the report says. It says IRS had documented and tested contingency plans for its system and improved continuity of operations controls for several systems. Nevertheless, the control weaknesses can be attributed in part to IRS's inconsistent implementation of elements of its agency-wide information security program. monitoring access. The agency had not fully mitigated previously identified deficiencies or ensured that its corrective actions were effective. IRS told us it had completed corrective actions for 28 of our prior recommendations; however, we determined that 9 of these had not been effectively implemented. The collective effect of the deficiencies in information security from prior years that continued to exist in fiscal year 2015, along with the new deficiencies we identified, are serious enough to merit the attention of those charged with governance of IRS and therefore represented a significant deficiency in IRS governance. In December 2013 we reported on the extent to which data breach policies at eight agencies, including IRS, adhered to requirements and guidance set forth by OMB and NIST. While the agencies in our review generally had policies and procedures in place that reflected the major elements of an effective data breach response program, implementation of these policies was not consistent. With respect to IRS, we determined that its policies and Procedures generally reflected key practices, although the agency did not require considering the number of affected individuals as a factor when determining disclosure. The IRS needs to continue to address weaknesses in access controls and configuration management. IRS also needs to assess the costs, benefits, and risks of alternatives for better authenticating taxpayers who are at risk. Fully implementing key elements of a breach response program will help ensure that when breaches of sensitive data do occur, their impact on affected individuals will be minimized. The risks IRS is exposed to have been illustrated by recent incidents involving public-facing applications, highlighting the importance of securing systems that contain sensitive taxpayer and financial data. security patch updates were applied in a timely manner to databases supporting two key systems we reviewed, including a patch that had been available since August 2012. IRS had established policies for developing contingency plans for its information systems and for testing those plans, as well as for implementing and enforcing backup procedures. The agency had documented and tested contingency plans and backup procedures, the review found. The review also found that the IRS had implemented and enforced backup procedures as required by law, and that information resources were protected.