Data mining is a computer-based control activity that analyzes diverse data for relationships that have not previously been discovered. Data warehouses store tables of historical and current information that are logically grouped. As a tool in managing improper payments, applying data mining to a data warehouse allows an organization to efficiently query the system to identify potential improper payments. For example, in the Medicare and Medicaid program, data on claims are stored in geographically disbursed systems and databases and are not readily available to CMS’s program integrity analysts. Identifying and analyzing the root causes of improper payments is key to developing effective corrective actions and implementing controls. Proactively preventing improper payments increases public confidence in the administration of benefit programs. addressing program design issues that are a factor in causing improper payments may be an important step in the right direction for the federal government to take to reduce and prevent improper payments. In this regard, implementing strong preventive controls can serve as the front-line defense against improper payments, according to the report. The report was published by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention. programs are in the process of implementing preventive controls to avoid improper payments, including overpayments and underpayments. Preventive controls may involve a variety of activities such as upfront validation of eligibility, predictive analytic tests, training programs, and timely resolution of audit findings. Data sharing allows entities that make payments to compare information from different sources to help ensure that payments are appropriate. When effectively implemented, when effective preventive controls are implemented, they can help prevent improper payments and save money in the long run. and beneficiaries, such as for pharmacy providers, to promote best prescribing practices and appropriate prescribing guidelines based on Food and Drug Administration labeling, potentially reducing improper payments. inconsistent program requirements would lend insight to developing effective strategies for enhancing compliance. Although strong preventive controls remain the frontline defense against improper payments, agencies also need effective detection techniques to quickly identify improper payments and to streamline or change eligibility or other program requirements. GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government, GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (Washington, D.C: Nov. 1999). decision of a state, county, or an area committee is final, no action may be taken to recover the amounts found to have been erroneously disbursed. This statute is commonly referred to as the Finality Rule. Another area for further exploration is the broader use of incentives for states to implement effective preventive and detective controls. Agencies have applied limited incentives and penalties for encouraging improved state administration to reduce improper payments. Incentives and penalties can be helpful to create a more efficient state. The Small Business Jobs Act of 2010 requires CMS to use predictive modeling and other analytic techniques. Through such analysis, unusual or suspicious patterns or abnormalities can be identified and used to prioritize additional review of suspicious transactions. The legislation required that contractors selected begin using these technologies on July 1, 2011, in the 10 states identified by CMS as having the highest risk of fraud, waste, or abuse in Medicare fee- for-service payments. These predictive analytic contractors began using these Technologies to screen all fee-for-service claims nationwide prior to payment as of June 30, 2011. as of June 30, 2011, through CMS’s new Fraud Prevention System. Training can be a key element in any effort to prevent improper payments from occurring. This can include training staff on how to prevent and detect improper payments and training providers or beneficiaries on program requirements. For example, the Medicaid Integrity Institute trains state-level staff and facilitates networking by sponsoring free workshops for states. In addition, the MIG sponsors education programs for providers and beneficiaries, such as for pharmacy providers, to promote best practices. not readily available to CMS’s program integrity analysts. CMS has been working for most of the past decade to consolidate program integrity data and analytical tools for detecting fraud, waste, and abuse. The Integrated Data Repository (IDR) program is intended to provide CMS and its program integrity contractors with a centralized source that contains Medicaid and Medicare data from the many disparate and dispersed legacy systems. CMS subsequently developed the One Program Integrity (One PI) program, a web-based portal and set of analytical tools by which these data can be used. to help ensure that payments are appropriate. Data sharing can be particularly useful in confirming initial or continuing eligibility of participants in benefit programs. Analyses and reporting on the extent to which agencies are participating in data sharing activities is another important element needed to advance the federal government’s efforts to reduce improper payments. For example, the Department of Labor (Labor) reported that its Unemployment Insurance Program utilizes HHS’S National Directory of benefits. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) also reported that it uses the National directory of benefits for its Medicaid program. that its Unemployment Insurance Program utilizes HHS’s National Directory of New Hires Databaseto individuals who claim benefits after returning to work. In June 2011, Labor established the mandatory use of the database for state benefit payment control no later than December 2011. In another case, to address the issue of inaccuracy of self-reported financial income on applications for student aid, the Labor Department issued a program letter that included recommended operating procedures for cross-matching activity. to improve the ability to detect overpayments. payment estimated amounts. HHS cited statutory limitations for its state-administered Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program. Despite these limitations, HHS officials stated that they will continue to work with states and explore options to allow for future estimates for the program. For fiscal year 2011, the TANF program reported outlays of about $17 billion. For another program, HHS cited the Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2009 as prohibiting HHS from calculating or publishing any national or state- specific payment. The Department of Education implemented a 6-month pilot version of an IRS data retrieval tool in January 2010 for its Pell Grant Program. The tool allows student aid applicants and, as needed, parents of applicants, to transfer certain tax return information from the IRS directly to Education’s online application. Education reported that nearly 3.5 million students used the data exchange tool, representing approximately 21 percent of the applications submitted for the 2011 - 2012 academic year. The analytic technologies used in the tool include predictive analytic technologies. The Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 required CMS to implement a national Medicare recovery audit contractor (RAC) program by January 1, 2010. In fiscal year 2011, HHS reported that the Medicare Fee-for-Service recovery audit program identified $961 million in overpayments and recovered $797 million nationwide. While internal control should be maintained to help prevent improper payments, recovery auditing is used to identify and recover over payments. Further, the IRS has developed a set of analytical tools by which these data can be accessed and analyzed. $961 million in overpayments and recovered $797 million nationwide. The Medicaid RAC program was established by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Each state must contract with a RAC, which is tasked with identifying and recovering Medicaid over payments and identifying underpayments. Similar to the Medicare RACs, Medicaid Racs will be paid on a contingency fee basis—a percentage of any recovered over Payments plus incentive payments for the detection of under payments. It is important to note that some agencies have reported statutory or regulatory problems. In 2010, the President set goals, as part of the Accountable Government Initiative, for federal agencies to reduce overall improper payments by $50 billion. For fiscal year 2011, OMB reported that governmentwide agencies recaptured $1.25 billion in overpayments to contractors and vendors. Over half of this amount, $797 million, can be attributed to the Medicare recovery audit contractor program which identifies improper Medicare payments in all 50 states. Despite reported progress in reducing estimated improper payment amounts and error rates for some programs and activities, the federal government continues to face challenges in determining the full extent of improper payments. Federal agencies reported improper payment estimates totaling $115.3 billion in fiscal year 2011. Based on the agencies’ estimates, OMB estimated that improper payments comprised about 4.7 percent of the $2.5 trillion in total spending during that year for the agencies' related programs. The decrease in the fiscalyear 2011 estimate is attributed primarily to decreases in the number of improper payments reported by the agencies in the prior year. The estimate is a decrease of $5.3billion from the revised prior year reported estimate of $120.6 billion. the fiscal year 2010 amount of $16.9 billion to $15.2 billion, which represented a decrease in the error rate from 26.3 percent to 23.5 percent. Treasury reported that corrective actions taken to reduce improper payments primarily focused on completing examinations on tax returns that claimed the EITC. HHS reported that it reduced payment errors by continuing to routinely implement controls in its payment system to ensure accurate and timely payments, and implementing three key initiatives, including contract level audits, physician outreach, and Medicare Advantage organization guidance and training. The $115.3 billion in estimated federal improper payments reported for fiscal year 2011 was attributable to 79 programs spread among 17 agencies. Ten of these 79 programs account for most of the reported improper payments. The governmentwide estimate included improper payment estimates for nine additional programs that did not report an estimate in fiscal year 2010. The HHS Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit (Part D) program had the highest estimate of the newly included programs. The agencies’ efforts are a positive step towards increasing the transparency of the magnitude of improper payments, the authors say. from calculating or publishing any national or state- specific payment error rates for the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) until 6 months after the new payment error rate measurement rule became effective on September 10, 2010. HHS plans to report estimated improper payment amounts for CHIP in fiscal year 2012. For fiscal year 2011, the CHIP program reported federal outlays of about $9 billion. As previously discussed, OMB excluded estimated improper payments for two DOD programs from the governmentwide total because those programs were still developing their estimating methodologies. The three excluded programs were the Department of Education’s Direct Loan, Department of Defense”s Defense Finance and Accounting Service Commercial Pay, and DOD's Army Corps of Engineers Commercial Pay. About 50 percent of the total programs reporting improper payment estimates in fiscal year 2011, that reported a reduction in the error rate of estimated improper payments because those programs were still developing their estimating methodologies. In DOD  fiscal year 2011 agency financial report, DOD reported that improper payment Estimates for these programs were based on improper payments detected through various pre-payment and post-payment review processes. GAO and DOD Inspector General have previously reported on weaknesses in DOD’s payment controls. DOD Comptroller testified in May 2011 that DOD assessed its commercial payment program as low risk because DOD management has concluded that it had a highly effective pre-payment examination process. That process includes a software tool that tests for potential improper payments before disbursement. However, the DOD IG has reported that the tool had a false positive rate of more than 95 percent and that its use was not standardized across payment systems. We found that agencies reported the root causes information using the required categories for 42 programs in their fiscal year 2011 PARs and AFRs. Many agencies did not use the three categories to classify the types of errors and quantify how many errors can be attributed to that category. Together, these programs represented about $46 billion, or 40 percent of the total reported $115 billion in improper payment estimates. Of the $46billion, the estimated improper payment amounts were about $15.2 billion. The U.S. Treasury reported that the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) program’s estimated improper Payment amount decreased from the fiscal year 2010 amount of $16.9 billion. of the $115.3 billion of reported improper payments. The 10 programs with the highest error rates had rates ranging from 11.0 percent to 28.4 percent. Since the implementation of IPIA in 2004, federal agencies have continued to identify new programs or activities as risk-susceptible and risk-averse. Since 2004, the U.S. has identified more than $1.2 billion in improper payments, according to a report by the Treasury Department's Office of Inspector General for Financial Management. Not all agencies have developed improper payment estimates for all of the programs and activities they identified as susceptible to significant improper payments. Three federal entities did not report fiscal year 2011 estimated improper payment amounts for four risk-susceptible programs. HHS cited statutory limitations for its state-administered requirements; and, in some cases, fraud. Information on the root causes of the current improper payment Estimates is necessary for agencies to target effective corrective actions and implement preventive measures, the report says. It says additional analysis is needed to assess the root cause of improper payments, a key factor in identifying and implementing effective corrective measures. Agencies cited a number of causes for the estimated $115.3 billion in reported improper payments. These included insufficient documentation, incorrect computations, changes in program requirements, and, in some cases, fraud. Of the $46 billion, the estimated improper payment amounts were spread across the three categories, with documentation and administrative errors being cited most often. For. considered.are a factor in causing improper payments, enhancing incentives for grantees could help increase attention to preventing, identifying, and recovering overpayments. some agencies’ estimating methodologies need to be refined. We have also found that internal control weaknesses exist, heightening the risk of improper payments occurring. Until federal agencies are able to implement effective processes to completely and accurately identify the full extent of improper Payments, the federal government will not have reasonable assurance that the use of taxpayer funds is adequately safeguarded. We are currently working on engagements related to improper payment reporting at both DOD and HHS. Furthermore, as I will discuss later in this statement, additional analysis is needed. Fiscal year 2011 marked the eighth year of implementation of the Improper Payments Information Act of 2002 (IPIA) IPIA requires executive branch agencies to annually review all programs and activities to identify those that are susceptible to significant improper payments. IPERA, enacted July 22, 2010, amended IPIA by expanding the threshold for required recovery audits from $500 million to $1 million. Another new IPERA provision calls for federal agencies’ inspectors general to annually determine whether overpayments have been made. Two agency auditors reported on compliance issues with IPIA and IPERA as part of their 2011 financial statement audits. USDA auditors identified noncompliance with the requirements of IPERA regarding the design of program internal controls related to improper payments. HHS estimated an annual amount of improper payments for some of its risk-susceptible programs, a key requirement of IPIA. HHS did not report an improper payment estimate for its TANF and CHIP programs for fiscal year 2011. A number of actions are under way across the federal government to help advance improper payment reduction goals. Calls for federal agencies’ inspectors general to annually determine whether their respective agencies are in compliance with key IPERA requirements. Under Office of Management and Budget (OMB) implementing guidance, these reports are required to be completed within 120 days of the publication of the agency’s annual PAR or AFR. OMB continues to play a key role in the oversight of the governmentwide improper payments problem. The fiscal year 2011 reports for most agencies due on March 15, 2012. to $1 million and expands the scope for recovery audits to all the oversight of the governmentwide improper payments problem. OMB has established guidance for federal agencies on reporting, reducing, and recovering improper payments. The agency has established various work groups responsible for developing recommendations aimed at improving federal financial management activities related to reducing improper payments, among other things. The work groups are: OMB, Circular No. A-136 Revised, Financial Reporting Requirements (Oct. 27, 2011); OMB Memorandum M-11-16, Issuance of Revised Parts I and II to Appendix C of OMB Circular A-123 (Apr. 14, 2011) Some agencies have reported statutory or regulatory barriers that affect their ability to pursue recovery auditing. OPM reported that financial institutions are barred from providing OPM with the information necessary to recover various overpayments. Only the Social Security Administration, Railroad Retirement Board, and the Department of Veterans’ Affairs may receive the information needed to identify the withdrawer to attempt to recover. The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) reported that it faces regulatory barrier that restrict its ability to recover over payments for its Retirement Program. information necessary to identify the withdrawer to attempt to recover the overpayments because those agencies are the only ones named in the law to receive that type of information from financial institutions. Treasury has drafted language to address the issue and is working to publish a notice of proposed rulemaking to amend its regulation. In another instance, USDA reported that Section 281 of the Department of Agriculture Reorganization Act of 1994 precluded the use of recovery auditing techniques. Section 281 provides that 90 days after the decision of a state, county, or an area committee is. in controls over the Use of Public Funds and Related Improper Payments. Improper payments: Reported Medicare Estimates and Key Remediation Strategies. Opportunities to Reduce Potential Duplication in Government Programs, Save Tax Dollars, and Enhance Potential Duplicated in Government programs, Save tax dollars, and. Enhance Revenue. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work is a work of the U.S. government, it is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. improper payments. Incentives and penalties can be helpful to create management reform and to ensure adherence to performance standards. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time. For more information regarding this testimony, please contact Beryl H. Davis, Director, Financial Management and Assurance, at (202) 512-2623 or by e-mail at DavisBH@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony. on the last page of this testimony. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony included Jack Warner, Assistant Director; W. Tyler Benson; Francine Delvecchio; Crystal Lazcano; Kerry Porter; and Carrie Wehrly. For our report on the U.S. government’s consolidated financial statements for fiscal year 2011, see U.s. Department of the Treasury. 2011 Financial Report of the United States Government. GAO-12-288T. Washington, D.C.: December 7, 2011 DOD Financial Management: Weaknesses in Controls over the Use of Public Funds. entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.