improvement related to the ability to work is evaluated two different ways, depending on whether the comparison point decision (CPD) was based on a prior disability listing or a residual functional capacity ( RFC) assessment. Meeting or equaling the prior listing: In this case, a disability examiner will determine if the beneficiary’s same impairment(s) still meets or equals the previous listing. A disability examiner the disability examiner proceeds to next step, the fourth step. Unlike step two, the examiner compares the beneficiary's condition to the prior list. A disability examiner compares the beneficiary’s condition with the list of impairments in effect at the time he or she was first awarded disability benefits. If the impairment(s) meets or equals a prior listing, then benefits are continued. If not, then the examiner proceeds with the CDR evaluation. Residual functional capacity assessment: In this case, the examiner compares. the beneficiary's previous functional capacity to the current functional capacity for the same impairment. If functional capacity. for basic work activities has improved, then. the examiner finds that the medical improvement is related to listing. capacity to the current functional capacity for the same impairment. If functional capacity has improved, the improvement is related to the ability to work. If the current assessment does not show improvement, then the disability examiner proceeds to step five. The fifth step is to determine whether an exception to medical improvement applies. The law provides for certain limited situations when the DDS may discontinue a recipient’s benefits even though medical improvement has not occurred. The specific group I exceptions are (a), (b), (c) and (d) has not occurred. The individual is the beneficiary of advances in medical or vocational therapy or technology (related to the ability to work) If an exception applies, the examiner continues through to step six. If evidence shows that any prior determination or decision was in error, the expert continues through to the next step. If the individual’s impairment(s) is not as disabling as it was considered at the time of the CPD, the examer continues to step seven. The eighth step is to determine if the beneficiary has the ability to do other work. At this step, the disability examiner considers the complete vocational profile (the beneficiary’s age, education, and past relevant work experience) together with the beneficiary's RFC. If he or she does not have the ability, disability benefits are discontinued. If the beneficiary is able to do the work, the evaluation continues to the eighth step. The eighth step of the disability evaluation is the final step. It is the time when the examiner decides whether or not the beneficiary can continue to receive disability benefits.  assessing medical improvement may be more difficult in cases that involve certain types of psychological impairments, such as depression. Evidence of these impairments is generally more subjective than evidence of many physical impairments. According to some of these officials, an assessment of functionality is more subjective because it relies more on the beneficiaries’ account of their own conditions than on laboratory findings. Some officials reported that the severity of psychological. impairments can fluctuate over time, making it difficult to assess whether improvement has. taken place. support psychological impairments, such as evaluations for depression, rely less on laboratory findings and more on clinical judgment. Certain tests for physical impairments tend to be less open to interpretation. The potential difficulty of assessing medical improvement in beneficiaries whose disability is based on certain types of psychological impairment is especially relevant, given that the proportion of all individuals in the disability programs whose disability has grown in recent years. SSA is responsible for assuring the safety and security of people with disabilities in the U.S. list of disabilities that SSA maintains. The list describes impairments that, by definition, are so severe that they are disabling. If the individual’s current impairment(s) does not meet or equal a current listing, then the DDS proceeds to step three in the evaluation process. The third step is to determine if improvement in the individual's medical condition has occurred. This improvement is any decrease in the medical severity of the impairment(S) that was previously listed. If this improvement is not found, the individual continues to receive benefits. starting point for conducting a CDR and requires examiners to find evidence of medical improvement since this last decision. Some DDS directors reported that it may be difficult to assess medical improvement in cases where the prior disability decision was based on incomplete or poorly documented evidence. For example, in one of the CDR cases we reviewed, a beneficiary had his benefits continued because the rationale for the prior Disability Decision was vague, according to the examiner who reviewed the case with us. As a result, medical improvement could not be shown and benefits were continued. examiner conducting the initial CDR determined that medical improvement was shown and discontinued the individual’s benefits. On appeal to reconsideration 6 months later, a different DDS examiner conducted a review using the same medical evidence as the original examiner. The examiner conducting the appeal concluded that the beneficiary continued to experience pain consistent with the back condition. However, we had no basis for determining which decision was correct. The amount of judgment involved in the decision-making process increases when the process involves certain types of impairments that are difficult to assess. we interviewed noted that, in an effort to process cases in a timely manner, ALJs sometimes issue quick decisions in which most of the evidence is on tapes that are not transcribed or placed in the beneficiary’s case file. In such instances, it is unlikely that the DDS examiner would have complete information for conducting a CDR and determining if medical improvement had taken place. Several officials told us that guidance instructs ALJs to include enough information in their decisions so that the decisions will be legally sufficient. the guidance does not specifically instruct ALJs to include all of the evidence that will be needed to assess medical improvement at a future CDR. SSA is developing requirements for training examiners to ensure they understand the information needed to make accurate and adequately documented decisions. The agency has adopted guides for decision writing at the appeals level, and is in the process of developing guides for use at the DDS level. It is also developing guides to be used at the CDR level to help examiners make better decisions. decrease in the medical severity of the impairment(s) that was present at the time of the most recent favorable medical decision. If improvement has not occurred, the disability examiner skips to the fifth step in the evaluation. If an exception applies, the examiner continues through to step six of the evaluation process. The sixth step is to determine if the current impairments are severe. If the DDS determines that the beneficiary’s current impairment is not severe, benefits are discontinued without further development. In SSA guidance, disability examiners may incorrectly decide to continue or discontinue benefits. SSA does not clearly define the degree of improvement needed for examiners to determine if a beneficiary has improved medically. Other factors, such as inadequate documentation of evidence and the judgmental nature of the decision process for assessing medical improvement may make it more difficult to determine whether a beneficiary remains eligible for benefits, the authors say. The authors say SSA the practice of disregarding minor changes is not an impediment to making a disability determination. Inadequate documentation of evidence and the judgmental nature of the process for assessing medical improvement are two additional factors that make it challenging to assess medical improvement. While these problems raise concerns about the consistency of decisions when determining if medical improvement has occurred, the ultimate impact of presuming that an individual has a disability on CDR decisions is unknown because we were unable to empirically test how the presumption of a disability impacts CDR decision to continue or discontinue benefits. The standard establishes the prior decision as the starting point for conducting a CDR and requires examiners to develop guides for use at the DDS level. standard, and some said this confusion stems from unclear SSA guidance. SSA instructs examiners to disregard “minor’ changes in a beneficiary’s condition. This guidance does not adequately describe what constitutes a minor change, officials say. Some DDSs may be inconsistently defining what constitutes minor change. For example, only changes that would not affect a beneficiary's ability to work should be considered minor. However, this explanation of minor changes is not included in the agency's guidance. be inconsistently defining what constitutes a minor change. Of the 52 DDS directors who answered a question on “minor” changes, 21 reported that the practice of disregarding minor changes is not an impediment. DDSs differed on the extent to which the guidance to disregard minor changes impacts CDRs. In doing so, our review suggests that some D DSs may be inconsistently applying the standard as to what constitutes medical improvement. The review was published in the Journal of the American College of DDS. guidance instructs examiners to ensure a “reasonable relationship” between the amount of improvement and the increase in the ability to perform basic work activities. The guidance does not require a specific amount of increase in functioning. The DDS directors we surveyed reported that they interpret this guidance differently. 17 of 49 directors reported that a large or very large increase in a recipient’s ability to dobasic work activities is required. 24 reported thatA moderate increase is required; and 8 reported that any increase at all is required, we found. agency believed that the report was unclear with regard to whether this part of the recommendation applied only to guidance for determining if there has been any medical improvement. As stated in the draft report, our discussion of medical improvement encompasses both elements (improvement in a beneficiary’s medical condition and its relation to the ability to work). However, we did further clarify this throughout the entire report to minimize any confusion on this matter. Additionally, SSA indicated that clarification of this guidance would be helpful. In survey responses, 31 DDS directors responded that in practice, CDRs are conducted with the presumption that a beneficiary continues to have a disability. Some directors also noted that they make this presumption because the beneficiary was found disabled when initially awarded benefits, and examiners must show medical improvement to remove them from the programs. Since a majority of DDSs are conducting CDRs with a presumption that beneficiaries have a disabilities, some may be evaluated under this higher standard, and some may have their benefits erroneously continued. or low likelihood of medical improvement. In general, beneficiaries with a high score are referred for full medical CDRs. Beneficiaries with lower scores are, at least initially, sent a questionnaire, known as a “mailer.” Full medical CDR involve an in-depth examination of a beneficiary’s medical and possibly his or her vocational status. This may include a review of the recipient's case file, physical and psychological condition, and medical evidence by a disability examiner and physician. A majority of DDSs incorrectly presume that a beneficiary continues to have a disability. This may make it more difficult for examiners to determine if a beneficiary has improved medically. SSA regulations and policy require that CDR decisions be made on a “neutral basis.’ SSA defines neutral basis as a review that neither presumes that a beneficiaries (1) is still disabled because he or she was in the military, or (2) that the beneficiary has not improved in any way. Two DDS directors inaccurately noted that the standard requires that a beneficiary’s improvement be great enough so that it actually enables the individual to work. One of these directors commented that because SSA guidance on this aspect of the standard is open to broad interpretation, it is difficult to document improvement. As a result, some DDSs may be inconsistently applying the standard that could potentially impact decisions to continue or discontinue benefits. However, we were unable to determine how much improvement is required. for SSA when determining whether beneficiaries continue to be eligible for benefits. We asked the directors about particular elements of the standard and how these elements, alone or in combination with other factors, impact CDR outcomes. We determined that the survey data are sufficiently reliable. Because this was not a sample survey, there are no sampling errors. However, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce errors, commonly referred to as nonsampling errors. For example, difficulties in how a particular question is interpreted, in the ensure that CDRs be conducted on a neutral basis. However, it believed that more adjudicator training in this area would likely have little impact on discontinuing benefits. SSA suggested that we provide additional context for some of the statistical information presented in our discussion of the proportion of DDS directors who are incorrectly applying the neutrality standard. We cannot predict the impact. additional guidance and training would have on continuing or discontinuing. benefits. But, as the report points out, there are large numbers of D DS directors. who are wrongly applying the neutral standard and, in our view, would benefit from additional guidance. difficulties in how a particular question is interpreted, in the sources of information that are available to respondents, can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results. We took steps in the development of the questionnaire, the data collection, and the data analysis to minimize these nonsampling errors. For example, social science survey specialists designed the questionnaire in collaboration with GAO staff with subject matter expertise. Then, the draft questionnaire was pretested with a number of state officials to ensure that the questions were relevant and clearly stated. to ensure that the questions were relevant, clearly stated, and easy to comprehend. The questionnaire was also reviewed by an additional GAO survey specialist. Since this was a Web-based survey, respondents entered their answers directly into the electronic questionnaire. This eliminated the need to have the data keyed into a database thus removing an additional source of error. We conducted three pretests of this survey with DDS directors in three different states. We modified the survey to take their comments into account. We also provided SSA with provided additional technical comments, which have been incorporated in the report as appropriate. Unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the date of this report. At that time, we will make copies available to other parties upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http//:www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?rptno=GAO-07-4sp. take their comments into account. We also provided SSA with a copy of the survey and incorporated its technical comments into the final version. To augment information from our state survey, we conducted independent audit work in three states (California, Massachusetts, and Texas) to examine how SSA policies and procedures are carried out in the field. We selected locations for field visits based on the following criteria: (1) geographic dispersion; (2) states with high levels of SSA participation; and (3) state populations. about how frequently this occurs. Of the directors who answered our survey question on insufficient documentation, 33 responded that they encounter cases with insufficient documentation infrequently or very infrequently, and 17 responded that such cases occurred more often. 15 directors commented that cases decided on appeal were the most likely to lack adequate documentation. One possible explanation for this may be streamlined processes at the appeals level. For example, one ALJ we interviewed noted that, in an effort to process cases, in some cases the appeals process is streamlined. SSI serves people with disabilities on the basis of need, regardless of whether they have paid into the Social Security Trust Fund. At the end of calendar year 2005, the SSI program served about 6.8 million people and paid about $36 billion in federal cash benefits throughout the year. These cash benefits are paid from general tax revenues. SSI benefits generally can be discontinued for the same reasons as DI benefits, although they also may be discontinued if a person no longer meets SSI income and resource requirements. Disability Insurance (DI) is an insurance program that provides benefits to workers who become unable to work because of a long-term disability. Workers who have paid into the Social Security Trust Fund are insured under this program. At the end of calendar year 2005, the DI program served about 8.3 million workers with disabilities, their spouses, and dependent children. DI paid out about $85 billion in cash benefits throughout the year. The Social Security Administration (SSA) administers two programs that provide benefits to people with disabilities. June 15, 2006. Social Security Disability Insurance: SSA Actions Could. Enhance Assistance to Claimants with Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Other. Impairments. May 31, 2005. High Risk Series: An Update. January 2005. SSA’s Disability Programs: Improvements Could. Increase the Usefulness of Electronic Data for Program Oversight. December 10, 2004. Disability Insurance. Should Strengthen Its Efforts to Detect and Prevent Overpayments. GAO-04-929. Washington, D.C.: September 10,2004. More Effort Needed to Assess Consistency of Disability Decisions. If he or she does not have the ability to do other work, benefits are continued. The following team members made key contributions to this report: Kelly Agnese; Jeremy D. Cox; Susan E.M. Etzel; Stuart M. Kaufman; Luann M. Moy; George H. Quinn, Jr.; Daniel A. Schwimer; Salvatore F. Sorbello; Wayne T. Turowski; Vanessa R. Taylor; and Rachael C. Valliere. Between fiscal years 1999 and 2005, each year an average of about 311,000 recipients (about 32 percent of all recipients who were removed from the disability programs) died. In addition, about 444,000 beneficiaries (about 45 percent) were removed for other reasons. These include about 54,000 DI beneficiaries who SSA determined had earnings in excess of SGA, and about 379,000 SSI beneficiaries who were taken off the SSI program for all reasons other than death and medical improvement (see fig. 2) In 1981 and 1982, about 45 percent of those individuals who received a CDR had their benefits discontinued. There was no statutory requirement for SSA to show that a beneficiary had improved medically in order to remove him or her from the programs. By 1984 SSA placed a moratorium on all CDRs. To address concerns that some beneficiaries were being inappropriately removed, Congress enacted the Social Security Disability Benefits Reform Act of 1984. The GAO and SSA analyzed data on CDR outcomes over a 7-year period for fiscal years 1999 to 2005. SSA also removes beneficiaries for failing to cooperate during a CDR. For example, a beneficiary may fail to appear for scheduled meetings with disability examiners or physicians. An average of about 13,800 individuals (or 2.8 percent of all CDRs conducted between fiscal years 1999 and 2005) were removed annually because SSA determined that they had improved medically. About 10,300 individuals ( or about 2.1 percent) were removal each year for failure to cooperate with SSA. The percentage of beneficiaries removed from the programs remained fairly constant from 1999 to 2005. the statistical information presented in our discussion of the proportion of beneficiaries removed from the disability programs each year. For example, SSA commented that the disability discontinuation rates in the early 1980s may not have been representative. We revised the report to take into account these suggestions. The Commissioner’s comments have been reproduced in appendix III. SSA also provided additional technical comments, which have been incorporated in the report. The report has been updated to include the comments made by SSA and the Commissioner. Full medical CDRs are the agency’s primary tool to determine whether a beneficiary has improved medically. Between fiscal years 1999 and 2005, an average of about 26,000 individuals each year (about 5.3 percent) were removed from the disability programs as a result of receiving a medical CDR. More people leave the programs when they die, convert to full retirement benefits, or leave for other reasons. Some of the officials we interviewed stated that the medical improvement standard may artificially limit the percentage of recipients who are found to have improved. However, we were unable to identify any empirical data regarding the impact of the standard. total, we conducted in-depth interviews with 80 SSA and DDS managers and line staff responsible for conducting medical CDRs. We documented management and staff views on the challenges associated with applying the medical improvement standard. In particular, we documented views on (1) the impact of the standard on CDR outcomes, (2) the effectiveness of SSA policies and procedures for applying the standard, and (3) the degree to which factors external to the standard create challenges when applying it. To further assess how the standard is applied in practice, we took a nonprobability sample of 12 CDR case files from the DDSs in California and Texas. We asked CDR supervisors to provide several cases that were (1) discontinued for medical improvement, (2) continued because the beneficiary was clearly disabled, and (3) ambiguous cases. These case files serve to illustrate the factors external to the standard that create challenges when determining if a beneficiary has improved medically and is able to work. prior decision was in error. In order to be removed from the disability programs for one of the exceptions, disability examiners must also show that the individual has the ability to engage in SGA. SSA does not conduct CDRs on all beneficiaries each year. At the time beneficiaries enter the DI or SSI programs, DDSs determine when they will be due for CDRs based on their likely potential for medical improvement. The most cost-effective method of conducting a CDR is based on statistical formulas that use data on beneficiary characteristics. the purposes of our study, we only assessed DI and SSI adult beneficiaries who left the programs as a result of receiving a full medical CDR. We did not include children or “age 18 re-determinations” in our analysis. We verified the statistical data on CDR outcomes for internal logic, consistency, and reasonableness. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of the review. We also met with knowledgeable SSA. We concluded that the results of the study were consistent with our expectations. Some studies indicated that many beneficiaries of the disability programs no longer had a disability and could work. To ensure that only eligible beneficiaries remained in the programs, Congress passed a law requiring SSA to conduct continuing disability reviews (CDR) beginning in January 1982. State Disability Determination Services (DDS) examiners began conducting medical CDRs under the same criteria used to evaluate initial disability claims. In 1981 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, the CDR evaluation process for adult beneficiaries began. continue even after the person reaches full retirement age. The Social Security Act’s definition of disability for adults is the same under both programs. People are generally considered to be engaged in SGA if they earn above a certain dollar level. For 2006, SSA considers countable earnings above $860 a to be SGA for that period of time. The SSA defines SGA as ‘substantial gainful activity’ for that time period. For more information, go to: http://www.ssa.gov/sSA/ssa-disabilities/sGA-disability. continued or discontinued. These case files serve to illustrate the difficulties examiners face when determining if a beneficiary has improved medically and is able to work. In addition, we interviewed seven disability policy experts from national disability research and advocacy organizations. We spoke with individuals affiliated with the following organizations American Association of People with Disabilities, Center for Health Services Research and Policy at George Washington Center for the Study and Advancement of Disability. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services website. We spoke with disability experts about the effect of the standard on CDR outcomes. We conducted our work from October 2005 through June 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We spoke with representatives from the National Association of Disability Examiners, the National Council of Disability Determination Directors, and the Social Security Advisory Board. We also spoke with experts from the George Washington Center for the Study and Advancement of Disability Policy, Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities, Disability Law Center, Disability Policy Collaboration. SSA’s Office of Quality Performance conducts quality reviews of disability determination outcomes. If SSA finds that the individual no longer has a disability and discontinues benefits following a CDR, the individual has the right to appeal the CDR decision, first to another reviewer for a reconsideration, second to an administrative law judge, then to the Appeals Council, and finally to federal courts. During these reviews, physicians evaluate the evidence to ensure that the decision adheres to the medical improvement standard. We conducted a national Web-based survey of all 55 Disability Determination Services (DDS) directors in the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the Western Pacific Islands, and the federal DDS. DDSs are the agencies responsible for conducting periodic CDRs to determine if beneficiaries’ medical conditions have improved and if they are able to work. The purpose of this survey was to assess the extent to which the standard impacts outcomes of CDRs and determine if the standard poses any special challenges for SSA. The Social Security Administration generally agreed with our recommendation, but expressed reservations about the need for further guidance on the use of exceptions. SSA should also work with DDSs to ensure that CDRs are conducted on a neutral basis, without a presumption that beneficiaries continue to have a disability. The agency also noted that a broader application of the error exception could lead to a substitution of judgment by an adjudicator for the original finding of disability in instances where a person’s medical condition had not substantially improved. SSA is responsible for assuring that individuals who truly have a disability that prevents them from being able to work continue to receive benefits. SSA has a stewardship responsibility to identify those beneficiaries who have improved medically and are no longer eligible for benefits. The medical improvement standard is intended to help SSA accomplish both of these responsibilities. However, several factors associated with the standard pose challenges for ensuring that the standard is implemented in a consistent and fair manner, the authors say. They say SSA does not clearly define the degree of improvement needed to meet the standard. Congress enacted the Social Security Disability Benefits Reform Act of 1984. The act included a provision requiring SSA to find substantial evidence demonstrating medical improvement before ceasing a recipient’s benefits. SSA resumed CDRs in January 1986 using this standard, which is among the first steps of the CDR evaluation process. Other factors, including inadequate documentation of evidence, are more difficult to address in the short term, the authors say. But SSA is taking actions intended to address some of these problems. This report provides additional details about our analysis of the medical improvement standard (the standard) The standard poses challenges for the Social Security Administration (SSA) when conducting medical continuing disability reviews (CDR) See appendix IV for a listing of major contributors to this report. You or your staff have questions concerning this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7215. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of the report. Disability advocates differ in their views on the clarity of SSA guidance on medical improvement. Clear guidance is especially important in view of the judgmental nature of the disability determination process. SSA indicated that clarification of this guidance would probably have little noticeable impact on the number of cases in which SSA finds that a disability has ended. However, we continue to believe that it is important for DDSs to consistently apply this aspect of the medical improvement standard and that, towards that end, additional guidance would be useful. the examiner finds that the medical improvement is related to the ability to work and proceeds with the CDR evaluation. The act allows SSA to discontinue benefits even when the beneficiary has not improved medically if one of the specific “exceptions’ to medical improvement appliest. In order to be removed to self- report information on their medical condition, treatments, and work activities. SSA will find that disability has ended and discontinues benefits if it determines that the person’s impairments are not severe or the person can do past work or other work. The act provides for exceptions to medical improvement that could result in additional individuals having their benefits discontinued. Most of the disability examiners whom we spoke with on our site visits told us that they were uncertain about when to apply the exceptions. SSA policies allow for various exceptions, including when the prior decision was in error or when persons benefit from education or training programs that could help the individuals work. However, we found that while the examiners and the SSA are aware of the exceptions, they are unsure when they should be applied.