A complex set of provisions has been enacted to regulate competition for consolidation loan refinance business. In effect, some of these provisions constrain borrowers' ability to choose among consolidators. One way to address this situation is through offering borrowers multiple refinanceopportunities. Any added interest benefit for a borrower, however, would likely expand federal subsidycosts. Some FFEL lenders object to making a change in this area, asserting they offersome up front discounts on Stafford and PLUS loans based on the assumption they will be able tohold the loan over its life. Borrowers with less than $7,500 in outstanding loans seeking toconsolidate in FFEL may receive a maximum repayment term of 10 years. A 12-year repaymentterm is available to borrowers with that level of debt in DL. Married persons, each ofwhom has eligible loans, are eligible for a joint consolidation loan. Only one of the borrowers mustmeet the full set of individual eligibility requirements for a new consolidation loan, but each agrees to become jointly and severally liable for repayment. of predictable monthly payments which manyborrowers desire. Others feel that a borrower is better served under a variable rate formula where the borrower is able to take advantage of low market rates when available. It is likely that student loan interest rates will be hotly debated. Part of the debate is likely to focus on enhancing or preserving borrower benefits. There will also likely be concerns about thefederal subsidy cost. This is because, in the FFEL program, lenders are provided with a federal subsidy. the favorable rates currently in effect on their variable rate loans. This has enabled a largenumber of borrowers to secure a valuable refinance benefit. Over the last two years, in which very lowrates have been available, an estimated $63 billion in loan volume has been consolidated. Whenborrowers exercise their option to lock in low rates permanently the federal government is potentiallyexposed to high subsidy costs. In the FFEL program, this is so because the government hasguaranteed the lenders a market rate of return. In the DL program, subsidy costs increasewhen repayment revenue is reduced. Those in favor of the existing fixed rate setting formula assert that in the current low interest environment the fixed rate amounts to a valuable benefit to borrowers. Those opposed to sustaining the existing rate setting formulas suggest it offers an overlygenerous borrower benefit that is costly to the point of placing future aid in jeopardy. The removal of this benefit would amount to dropping a large share of the interest subsidy currently available to borrowers, they say. an extension of the debate on the fixed rate benefit. Borrowers who have lockedin fixed rates through consolidation in high interest periods sometimes miss out on moreadvantageous variable rates. Some borrowers fare worse under the high fixed ratesthey lock in. This raises concern, particularly with regard to those using consolidation for repaymentrelief (i.e., extended repayment) One way to address this situation is through offering borrowers borrowers fixed rates on variable-rate loans instead offixed rates on fixed rates. fixed interest rates of 6.8% for Stafford loans and 7.9% for PLUS loans disbursed thereafter. In the upcoming reauthorization of the HEA it is likely that borrower interest rates will onceagain receive consideration. Some feel that a fixed rate provides the borrower with a set of predictable monthly payments which manyborrowers desire. Others feel that the 6.7% fixed rate set to take effect for new loans made on or after July 1, 2006 is a good rate in comparison to historical borrower rates. would also delay the point at which they begin paying downloan principal. Consolidation loans were originally introduced in the HEA Amendments of 1986 ( P.L.99-498 ). They were initially intended to simplify repayment for borrowers, simplify loan repaymentservicing for lenders, and offer relief in the form of extended repayment to those borrowers seekinglower monthly payments. As the consolidation loan interest rate formula has been modified byCongress, consolidation loans may no longer offer the fixed rate benefit on consolidation loans. the subsidized Stafford loans while the borrower is in school (on at least a half-time basis) and during grace periods and deferment periods. PLUS loans: Variable rate loans available to parentsof dependent undergraduate students. The interest rates on these loans adjust annually, based on astatutorily established, market-indexed, rate-setting formula, and may not exceed9%. Consolidation loans: Loans that provide borrowersrefinancing options. A consolidation loan may be comprised of one underlying loan or multipleunderlying loans. Consolidation loans also enableborrowers to lower monthly payments by extending the repayment period. Borrowers seeking a DL consolidation loan may consolidate anyeligible loans that have been fully disbursed even if the borrowers have not yet entered a repaymentor grace period. This affords borrowers greater opportunity to lock in as permanent favorablevariable rates in effect in years when the interest rates are capped at 8.25%. (4) There are underlying tensions inherent in the current design of the loan programs that affect many of the reauthorization issues considered in this each loan they areseeking to consolidate. is because, in the FFEL program, lenders are provided a federal interestsubsidy payment (discussed later) when the statutorily set borrower rate fails to provide lenders amarket rate of return. In the DL program, where the federal government acts as lender, federalsubsidy costs increase when repayment revenues are reduced. Across both programs, more generousborrower benefits generally increase federal costs. Lenders may opt to pay the fee or a portion of the fee on the borrower'sbehalf in order to secure loan business. programs that affect many of the reauthorization issues considered in this report. It is generally thecase that enhancements to borrower benefits increase federal subsidy costs. For instance, in theFFEL program, where the government insures and subsidizes loans made by private lenders, federalsubsidy costs increase when interest subsidypayments to lenders are increased. In the DL program,where the government acts as lender,Federal subsidy costs are increased when less revenue is derived from borrower fees and when interest subsidies to lenders is increased. government acts as lender, federal subsidy costs are increased when borrower fees orrepayment revenues paid to the government are reduced. Another tension stems from dissimilarities in FFEL and DL program loan terms andconditions. The two programs disburse the same set of loans, but loan terms are notperfectly parallel across the two programs. Some favor promoting parallel terms and conditions, others do not if parallel terms are achieved by reducing a benefit currently available in only one of the programs. (5) Interest Rates on Stafford and PLUS Loans. goes to guaranty agencies to help offset loan insurance costs. Guarantors may wave the fee, and if the fee is assessed lenders may opt to pay the fee or a portion of the fee on the borrower's behalf. In FY2003,borrower origination fees generated approximately $1.3 billion in revenue across the two programs. Also, attention may be devoted to examining the comparability of borrower origination fee rates with other sources of revenue. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The Higher Education Act of 1965 (HEA) is being considered for reauthorization. Title IV of the HEA authorizes the major federal student aid programs. In FY2003, the federal student loan programs provided $45.8 billion in new loans tostudents and their parents. This report discusses issues concerning theStudent loan programs that are likely to be considered during reauthorisation. The report is organized in the following manner. First it provides background informationon the student loan Programs and their loans. Then it provides an overview of many of the issueslikely to receive attention in the reauthoration. Under the FFEL program, loan capital is provided by private lenders, and the federalgovernment guarantees lenders against loss through borrower default, death, permanent disability,or, in limited instances, bankruptcy. Under the DL program, operated through the U.S. Department of Education, the federal government provides the loans to students and their families. The two programs rely on different sources ofcapital and different administrative structures, but essentially disburse the same set of loans. The DL program was intended to help students meet the costs of postsecondary education. loans. The DL program, established in 1993, was intended to streamline the student loan deliverysystem and achieve cost savings. In FY2003, these programsprovided $45.8 billion in new loans to students and their parents. In that year the FFEL programprovided 8,429,000 new loans averaging approximately $4,009 each and the DL program provided2,937,000new loans. Currently both programs areauthorized and the two programs compete for student loan business. averaging approximately $4,009 each and the DL program provided2,937,000 new loans averaging approximately $ 4,075 each. The FFEL and DL programs provide the following types of loans to students and theirparents: Stafford loans (subsidized and unsubsidized): Lowinterest, variable rate loans available to undergraduate and graduate students. To qualify for a subsidized Stafford loan, astudent must establish financial need. The federal government pays the interest on the borrower'sbehalf on the subsidized Stafford loans while the borrower is in school. two programs. attention may be devoted to examining the comparability of borrower fees chargedacross and within the two loan programs. To limit the federal government'ssubsidy costs, and to limit the amount of debt incurred by borrowers, annual and aggregate Staffordborrowing caps have been established. The current caps for undergraduate students, which were enacted in the HigherEducation Amendments of 1992 ( P.L. 102-325 ), are as follows. As Table 1 shows, dependency status is a key factor in determining loan limits.  FFEL borrowers are allowed to choose among standard, graduated, and income sensitiverepayment plans. For new borrowers on or after October 7, 1998, who accumulate (after such date)outstanding loans totaling more than $30,000, a fourth repayment option is available. Income contingent repayment is available to all DL unsubsidized and subsidized Stafford borrowers. In FFEL, all repayment plans offer a 10-year repayment term with the exception of extended repayment under which repayment must occur within a time period not toexceed 25 years. period not to exceed 25 years. Repayment periods forDL extended and graduated repayment plans vary with the size of the loan. Some interest exists in adding a new "interest only"repayment option. Under such an option, a borrower would have low "interest-only" payments intheir initial years after graduation, but would also delay the point at which they begin paying. It is likely that some attention may be devoted to adopting more comparable repaymentoptions across the two programs. Dependency status is a key determinant of a student's personal borrowinglimits. It is assumed thatdependent students and the parents of dependent students will co-finance the postsecondaryeducation of the dependent students. Some have questioned,however, whether dependent students in particular are being provided adequate borrowingopportunities if they have to self finance their studies. In general, those in favor of expanding borrowing opportunities for dependent students are more likely to support the expansion of the federal PLUS program. finance their studies. In general, those in favor of expanding loan limits suggest loan limits have not kept pace withtuition increases and thus constrain students' ability to finance their education. Those opposed suggest it is undesirable for students to incurmore debt, and question whether the expansion of borrowing opportunities will have any positiveeffect on access, choice or persistence. Also at issue arefederal subsidy costs, because as borrowing opportunities are expanded so are federal subsidy costs. Repayment Plans. Issues concerning repaymentplans that surface with some regularity relate to differences point of placing future aid in jeopardy. They alsoquestion whether it is necessary to offer a refinance benefit when the rate is already subsidized onStafford loans. Further they question whether a benefit received in the years after postsecondaryschooling contributes in any way to students' postsecondary access, persistence, or choice. They notethe repayment period subsidy is provided without regard to need, over a lengthy period potentiallyextending up to 30 years beyond schooling, and disproportionately benefits students who attendedfour-year private institutions and/or graduate programs. activities, and improving efficiency. The 1998 amendments adopted a "risk sharing" approach. Under this approach, uses ofreserves are restricted, and guarantors are afforded flexibility in the use of their operating funds. It is likely that some attention will be devoted to the solvency of Federal Funds (i.e., locallyheld federal reserve funds) and the size of Operating Funds -- which can be used to support agencyoperations and also for discretionary student financial aid expenditures. Some concerns have been raised aboutshrinking reserves and robust Operating Funds. these benefits based upon their own status. Concerns have been raised about complications that may ensue for unsuccessful marriages. Guaranty agenciesadminister the federal government's loan guarantee. The role guarantors play within the FFELprogram has evolved a good deal since the program's inception. Initially, the role of the guaranty agencies was limited to guaranteeing the loan amount to be taken out by a single person. Now, they play a much larger role in the program, helping to guarantee loans for families of multiple people. evolved a good deal since the program's inception. Initially, the federal governmentintended to encourage the growth of state loan insurance programs. Over time the federalgovernment assumed the role of providing the insurance and now guaranty agencies service the federal guarantee and perform various program administrative tasks. Changes adopted during the 1998 reauthorization focused on strengthening therelationship between revenues and activities, and improving efficiency. The 1998 amendments adopted a "risk-based" approach to the FFEL program, with the aim of making it more efficient. large proportion of federal SAP subsidies. The Taxpayer-Teacher Protection Act of 2004 ( P.L. 108-409 );signed October 30, 2004, curbs growth in 9.5% loans, for one year. It does not curtail the 9. 5% guaranteeon new loans stemming from any new refinancing of obligations originally issued on orafter October 1, 1980 and prior to October1, 1993. However, there is some debate about how best to phase out theguarantee for nonprofit lenders. 1993. A phase out of the 9.5% guarantee would produce savings in mandatory spending. Thesesavings could be used to offset new expenditures. However, it does not curtail the. 9. 5% guaranteeon new loans stemming from "recycling"of proceeds from outstanding 9.4% loans. These proceedscan be use to finance new 9.3% loans, which are guaranteed by the U.S. government. This would reduce the need for the government to guarantee new loans. This could lead to a reduction in the cost of borrowing. returns (i.e., returns above the market-indexed SAP rate) Some argue that since the SAP is designed to approximate fair market compensation it isunnecessary to compensate lenders at levels that exceed the SAP rate. There seems to bebroad Congressional support for curbing this rate guarantee for future loans. The legislativedevelopments that led to the enactment of the guarantee are briefly described below. As part of an effort to ensure the FFEL program, the federal government provides a guarantee of a minimum 9.5% rate for lenders. 9.5% floor loans comprise a relatively small percentage of all outstanding loans. They have accounted for a very large proportion of federal SAP subsidies. In recent years lenders havebeen using a variety of refinancing techniques, and also invested earnings from existing 9. 5% floorloans to make or purchase new ones. There appear to be a number of ways for banks to finance 9.5%, including by using the proceeds from the sale of existing loans and by using earnings from new loans. guarantor fees for loancollections and defaulted loan rehabilitation work may be too high thus inflating Operating Funds. Excess Interest Provisions. The federal government provides lenders with a loan subsidy known as a special allowance payment(SAP) The SAP amount is determined on a quarterly basis by a statutory formula which is tied to a financial index and ensures lenders receive, at a minimum, a specified level of interest income onloans. The SAP is designed to compensate lenders for the difference between the below-market,statutorily set interest rate charged to borrowers. and a market set interest rate that is intended as fairmarket compensation on the loan asset. In some instances lenders receive interest income from borrowers exceeding the amountcalled for by the SAP calculation. The amount of income lenders receive above the government SAPrate is often called "floor income" The SAP affords lenders necessary protection in high interest environments during which thestatutorily established borrower rate may provide lenders insufficient below-market rate returns. However, in low interest environments, the statutorilyestablished borrower rate has the potential of providing lenders with above-market returns (i.e., returns above the market-indexed SAP rate) The Tax Reform Act of 1976 included provisions to encourage the issuance of tax-exempt student loan bonds. Such bonds are exempt from federal taxation, and are used by states to finance below market interest rate loans for students. In essence, through theissuance of bonds with low tax- exempt interest rates, state authorities are able to raise "low cost"funds, and then re-lend the funds at higher rates. Soon after these provisions were passed, student bond volume began to grow rapidly, andconcerns were raised. were passed, student bond volume began to grow rapidly, andconcerns about the profitability of tax exempt student loans surfaced. The 1980 HEA amendmentstook steps to curb the profitability. of tax-exempt loans by reducing by half the SAP rate on loans. However, to ensure that student loan authoritieswere always able to cover their operating costs, the amendments also established minimum SAPs,for loans disbursed on or after October 1, 1980, which ensure a minimum return of 9.5% on theseloans. tax-exempt student loans continued through the 1980son into the early 1990s. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 ( P.L. 103-66 ) contained a provision eliminating the floor on tax-exempt loans supported through tax- exempt financing forissuances on or after October 1, 1993. These loans were afforded the same SAP rates as wereavailable for taxable loans. However, different provisions were retained with regard to loans made or purchased with tax- exemptedfunds obtained by holders from obligations originally issued on or afterwards. were set to take effect July 1, 1998. The decision to move toward a comparable maturity rate was made in 1993. The interest rate issue was revisited in 2002 with the passage of P.L. 107-139. This measureextended the existing variable rate setting formulas through June. 30, 2003, after which the comparable maturity rates wereonce again set toTake effect. (7) The current formula was initially enacted in the Student Loan Reform Act(SLRA) of 1993, the legislation that created the DL program. As of July 2006, new Stafford and PLUS loans will carry fixed interest rates. The desirability of thisplanned switch has been the subject of considerable debate. Student loan interest rates were a focal issue in the 1998 reauthorization. The statutory ratesetting formulas are used to establish rates for loans disbursed from July 1, 1998 through June30, 2006. The current rate setting formulas were adopted as a result of deliberations that centered on replacing so called "comparable maturity rates" that were set to take effect July 1. 1998.