Liberty RadEx is set to take place April 26-30, 2010, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The exercise is to focus on technical recovery issues involving intergovernmental coordination. There are limitations in federal capabilities to help state and local governments address the interim storage and eventual disposal of the radioactive waste that would arise from RDD or IND incidents. This is due, in part, to current restrictions on accessing possible disposal facilities for the radioactive debris York that was conducted on June 16-17, 2009, and a planning session held in Philadelphia on October 28-29, 2009. the level of environmental cleanup after RDD or IND incidents. The guidance recommends that this process include potential future land uses, technical feasibility, costs, cost-effectiveness, and public accountability. EPA added that it looks forward to the lessons to be learned from the upcoming Liberty RadEx exercise in 2010. Officials believe the exercise should provide lessons that can be applied to RDD and IND incidents in the future, as well as to other environmental cleanup efforts in the U.S. and abroad. purpose is only theoretical at this point. There is little research data on the likely dispersal patterns of concrete, asphalt, and glass that would result from use of an RDD or IND. Some federal agency officials question the need to improve the predictive capabilities of these plume models. For example, the DHS IMAAC director told us that the current state-of-the-art and plume modeling approach is sufficient for its primary purpose in directing the protective actions of first responders. Nevertheless, NNSA officials informed NNSA is working with FEMA on a multiyear program to improve federal capabilities to model the release of material during a radiological or nuclear incident. EPA agreed that characterization of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents would be challenging because existing plume models are not entirely applicable to urban areas. NNSA officials contend that plume modeling will never replace the need for actual measurements for radioactive contamination. EPA added that other types of contamination, such as other radioactive materials, are more difficult to model. The current predictive capability of various plume models is not sufficient, and may never be sufficient to reduce the time necessary to fully characterize the extent of contaminated areas after RDD or IND incidents. According to a senior official at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory’s Interagency Modeling and Atmospheric Assessment Center (IMAAC), the predictive capabilities of existing plumes models are not at the resolution necessary to produce this added value for urban areas. This official told CNN that modeling for this purpose is only theoretical at this point. a limited number of states have access to low-level radioactive waste disposal facilities for waste generated by users of radioactive materials in their states. Another issue is paying for waste disposal. In the Superfund program, EPA can bill the responsible party, if known. However, covering the cost of waste disposal would be complicated in the case of RDD or IND incidents. One additional complicating factor would be the mixing and problematic separation of radioactive, biological, and chemical materials in the debris that would stem from such incidents. and experiences drawn from national and international sources. For example, a Government Decontamination Service official told us that this agency is currently engaged in learning more about how to deal with the disposal of radioactive waste that has no known owner. The issue is not only ownership, but where to put the radioactive debris and how to cover the cost of storage and disposal. In this regard, the United Kingdom has a clearance rule for allowing very low-level radioactive waste to be disposed of in less expensive ways. restrictions on accessing possible disposal facilities for the radioactive debris stemming from such incidents. According to NNSA officials, DOE’s disposal sites currently can only accept low-level and mixed low- level radioactive waste from its own and DOD facilities. EPA is concerned about access to commercial radioactive waste disposal sites in the event of such an incident, according to an EPA decontamination expert. Currently, there is only one low-levels radioactive waste. disposal site located in Utah that could be used by most states for radioactive debris disposal. EPA determined that there was a significant capacity and competency gap in efficiently meeting the laboratory evaluation needs for an RDD scenario. Such an incident could contaminate 3,000 square miles and require potentially millions of samples for laboratory analysis. According to EPA documentation, the gap in laboratory capacity would result in the lack of timely, reliable, and interpretable data. EPA has documented that it is currently establishing an all-media Environmental Response Laboratory Network. It is also conducting a demonstration project to enhance the capacity and capability of public laboratories. There are some limitations in federal capabilities to complete laboratory validation of contaminated areas and levels of cleanup after applying decontamination approaches. FEMA’s proposed process for determining cleanup standards during the recovery phase for RDD and IND incidents has not been fully exercised, although there was a tabletop discussion among government officials in a June 2009 exercise. EPA and FEMA regional office respondents differed somewhat on the need for standard national guidance on the application of approaches for environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials. Many of the federal regionalOffice respondents mentioned the need to conduct recovery exercises that involve state and local governments. sufficient to effectively clean up from RDD or IND incidents because federal agencies have only carried out environmental cleanup of localized areas of radioactive materials. Some limitations exist in federal capabilities to help address the magnitude of the cleanup that would follow these incidents. The current DHS planning guidance for RDD and IND incidents recommends a framework for incident cleanup and recovery using a process called “site-specific optimization” for determining the level of environmental cleanup after RDDor IND incidents. For example, DOE and EPA have substantial experience using various analysis and environmental cleanup methods and technologies to address localized areas. The proper characterization of the quantity, properties, and level of debris contamination and decontamination residue from an RDD can have significant impacts on cleanup costs and restoration timelines. Concerns about limitations in these federal capabilities were expressed by many city, state, and federal regional office emergency managers. EPA officials informed us that its Office of Research and Development is currently developing a suite of decision support tools for the management of waste and debris from a variety of different events, including radiological incidents. In commenting on a draft of the report, EPA officials told us that the agency is working on the issue. magnitude of RDD or IND incidents. For example, DOE has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in research, development, and testing of methods and technologies for cleaning up and decommissioning contaminated structures and soils. Since the passage of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), which established the Superfund program, EPA has undertaken significant efforts to study, develop, and use technologies that can address radioactive contamination. DOD has also played a major role in studying potential applications for innovative technologies for its Superfund sites. Experts say conventional use of high-pressure hosing to decontaminate a building is effective under normal conditions but could be the wrong cleanup approach for an RDD using cesium-137. In this case, the imbibing (absorbing) properties of some porous surfaces such as concrete would actually cause this soluble radioactive isotope to penetrate even further into surfaces. There are also limitations in federal capabilities to help address, in a timely manner, the magnitude of cleanup that would be associated with RDD or IND incidents. EPA has published inventories of radiological methods and technology guidance for contaminated sites, surfaces, and media. During the initial response phase to an incident, responders might rely on fairly simple cleanup approaches. The latter recovery phase might require no additional action or use of complex decontamination technologies depending on the level of desired cleanup. EPA has also published guidance for its On-Scene Coordinators at each regional office to aid in their response to a radiological incident. This guidance covers the full range of Radiological incidents, but its focus is primarily on the early to intermediate phases. Federal agencies’ current approaches to analysis and environmental cleanup have only been applied in localized areas. Decontamination research is currently under way to gain a better understanding of potential applications of current and experimental methods and technologies for primarily RDD incidents. Current research has focused on predicting the effects of radiation release in urban settings through simulation, small-scale testing, and theory. In addition, researchers at EPA’s National Homeland Security Research Center informed us that while there are currently no RDD or IND incidents, there are potential applications. its Superfund sites. As a result of federal agencies’ experience with radioactive materials, there is evidence that the agencies could effectively carry out the analysis and environmental cleanup of localized areas contaminated by these materials. In regard to analysis, DOE’s National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) has developed operational plans, orders, and publications on how to respond to a radiological or nuclear incident. NNSA has developed various FRMAC manuals to guide operational, assessment and monitoring activities. In addition, EPA's National Decontamination Team has published guidelines that provide a framework for how to develop sampling plans to support decontamination efforts. We spoke with subject matter experts at the National Nuclear Security Administration, EPA, and FEMA. We also observed a demonstration of the capabilities of the Interagency Modeling and Atmospheric Assessment Center at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. In addition, we reviewed reports and reports and reviews of incidents and incidents.incidents in the U.S. and around the world. We spoke with experts at DOE’s Lawrence LiverMore National Laboratory, Idaho National Laboratory and EPA”s Andrew W. Breidenbach Environmental Research Center, National Air and Radiation Environmental Laboratory. Homeland Security Research Center: More research is needed to develop standard national guidance for their efficacious application in urban areas and to other RDD or IND incident scenarios. Expert: Without guidance and discussion early in the response phase, a contractor might use a decontamination technology during this phase for no other reason than it was used before in an unrelated situation. The expert told us that this situation has shown that without this guidance, the technology could be used in an unconnected incident in the future. Security experts have raised concerns that terrorists may try to smuggle radiological or nuclear materials into the United States to produce either an RDD or IND. Sealed sources are used throughout the U.S. and are commonly called a sealed radiological source. This radioactive material is encapsulated, or sealed, in metal, such as stainless steel, titanium, or platinum, to prevent its dispersal and is commonly known as a sealed Radiological Source (RDS) or dirty bomb. The RDD is a bomb made from a mixture of nuclear and radioactive materials. Sealed sources are used to diagnose and treat illnesses, preserve food, detect flaws in pipeline welds, and determine the moisture content of soil. Depending on their use, sealed sources contain different types of radioactive material. Chechen separatists placed a canister containing cesium-137 in a Moscow park in the mid- 1990s. Although the device was not detonated and no radioactive material was dispersed, the incident demonstrated that a dirty bomb could be planted in a city. The U.S. government has no plans to use sealed sources in the near future. The dispersal of the polonium by the perpetrators of the crime and the victim resulted in widespread contamination across London and even abroad. The decontamination activities at these sites spanned 19 days, involved a number of methods and technologies, and cost over $1 million. British investigators also identified over 1,000 people who might have been in various ways exposed to thePolonium. Health officials tested 738 of them and found that 137 had reportable levels of this substance, although few of these individuals turned out to have levels that warranted medical attention. In 2006, Alexander Litvinenko, a former officer of the Russian Federal Security Service, was poisoned with radioactive material. No radioactive material was dispersed, but the incident demonstrated that terrorists have the capability and willingness to use radiological materials as weapons of terrorism. In contrast, detonating an IND would require a terrorist group to obtain nuclear weapons material and to have highly sophisticated expertise and equipment to fabricate this material into a weapon. It would also take a group of highly skilled and experienced terrorists to carry out an IND. Within greater London, given the international nature of the event, even though the incident was classified as a hazardous materials event rather then a terrorist incident. According to the recovery planning process, the city selected a contractor from the Government Decontamination Service list of specialized contractors for the remediation work. This model contract contains allowable costs per unit, equipment charges, and charge out rates for the emergency response. Under the contract, the selected specialized contractor agrees to start off with nonaggressive, simple, and less expensive decontamination approaches. of terrorism. For large commercial concerns, the insurance industry offers terrorist insurance that is underwritten by the government. For smaller companies, terrorist insurance is offered for an additional 20 percent surcharge on an existing policy. Other funding is available for local governments if such an event would overwhelm their financial resources, such as applying for grants from the national government or European Union. In regard to its framework of specialized contractors, the service has identified three specialized contractors that have capabilities to address various decontamination scenarios. off with nonaggressive, simple, and less expensive decontamination approaches, and then apply more sophisticated approaches, if necessary, to meet the desired cleanup level. The actual payments for these services were made by the owners of properties, such as a hotel where the perpetrators of the crime had stayed, that were contaminated with polonium. The cleaning up of public premises was a responsibility of the local government. The national government has established ways to help cover the costs of such incidents. This includes insurance coverage for damages resulting from acts of terrorism. capabilities through testing. A specialized contractor is invited to visit the location, receives a briefing on the incident scenario, and is asked to develop a recommended decontamination strategy. The Government Decontamination Service assesses the contractor’s approach and recommendations to identify issues, strengths, and weaknesses. In addition, the service develops improvement plans, backed with exercises, to address identified performance gaps. For example, in December 2007, the government tested and evaluated the capabilities of one of its specialized contractors to analyze and clean up areas contaminated with radioactivity in downtown Birmingham. Established a Government Decontamination Service in 2005. This organization was created out of recognition that it would not be cost-effective for each entity to maintain the level of expertise needed for cleaning up chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear materials, given that such events are rare. The service provides advice and guidance to local governments, maintains and builds a framework of specialized analysis and environmental cleanup contractors, and advises the national government regarding response capabilities. This service implemented its responsibilities by assisting the City of Westminster respond to the analysis and Environmental cleanup needs of the city. We examined the extent to which federal agencies are planning to help cities and states clean up areas contaminated with radiation materials from radiological dispersal device (RDD) and improvised nuclear device (IND) incidents. We interviewed cognizant officials from the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Department of Energy (DOE), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA), and Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) In addition, we are providing information on actions taken in the United Kingdom to prepare for recovering from RDD and IND incidents. our survey to identify which federal agencies they would turn to for help in the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents. They provided inconsistent responses and frequently listed several federal agencies for the same activity. These responses seem to indicate that there might be some confusion among city and state emergency management officials regarding federal agency responsibilities to provide assistance to them. We recommend that the Secretary of Homeland Security direct the Federal Emergency Management Agency Administrator to prepare a national disaster recovery strategy. GAO: States would need to rely heavily on federal government to recover from RDD, IND incidents. States indicated that their technical and financial resources would be overwhelmed by a large RDD incident. Most of these officials reported that they believe they could adequately address a smaller R DD incident. GAO provided DHS, DOE, and EPA with a draft of this report for their review and comment.. DHS and FEMA concurred with the recommendations in the report. DOE, through NNSA, states recover fromRDD and IND incidents, we included the United Kingdom in our scope. the need for intelligence information on RDD and IND threats. They generally said that sharing information with law enforcement agencies is necessary for appropriate planning for RDD or IND incidents. Only half of the respondents indicated that they were getting sufficient intelligence information from law enforcement sources. The EPA and FEMA regional office emergency management officials that responded to our survey also offered a number of suggestions on ways to improve federal preparedness to recover from R DD and IND incidents, generally concurring with the suggestions. The survey was conducted by the National Institute of Standards and Technology. rapidly the federal government could provide this assistance, despite the strengthening of some capabilities since the terrorist attack of September 11, 2001. One state was particularly concerned about current federal capabilities to handle multiple and simultaneous RDD incidents across the country. The National Science and Technology Council’s 2008 report also found that cities and states would need to rely heavily on a strong federal response to a radiological incident. This report identified similar limitations inFederal capabilities to rapidly characterize an incident site and contaminated critical. days, involved a number of methods and technologies, and cost more than $200,000. The estimated total cost of managing this incident, including law enforcement investigation, testing individuals, sampling materials, and cleanup, was $4 million. FEMA has not completed planning to help cities and states recover from RDD or IND incidents as evidenced by not (1) developing a national disaster recovery strategy as required by law and (2) issuing specific guidance to coordinate federal, state, and city planning. initial response to save lives. A faster recovery would help lessen the consequences of RDD and IND incidents. Being fully prepared to recover from such an incident may also serve as a deterrent to those who would do us harm. To date, FEMA has not developed a response plan to help cities and states with the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents, the authors say. The authors say the federal government is not fully prepared for the analysis, cleanup and analysis of contaminated areas. The lack of recovery planning for RDD and IND incidents may be due, in part, to the relatively low priority given to preparing for them by city and state emergency management officials. Most localities would count on the federal government being prepared to carry out analysis and environmental cleanup activities following these incidents. The report claimed that catastrophic effects of RDD or IND incidents could be reduced and the path to recovery shortened with more effective decontamination, mitigation, and rapid recovery operations. The majority of the EPA regional offices indicated that a national disaster recovery strategy was needed to address overlaps and gaps in current government responsibilities. Cities and states lack a framework for developing their own recovery strategies. Few city respondents indicated that their recovery plans included preparations for an RDD incident. Most respondents from cities expressed the need for greater planning interactions with the federal government and more exercises to test recovery plans. Respondents from most cities (11 of 13) and their states (7 of 10) said that they planned to conduct RDD and IND recovery exercises in the future. attacks. 13 cities considered to be at high or medium risk to such attacks; their states and all federal FEMA and EPA regional offices. annexes to the National Response Framework, such as its emergency support function annexes and nuclear and radiological incident annexes. In addition, after speaking with emergency management officials in San Francisco and comparable state officials near Sacramento, California, we developed a semistructured telephone survey instrument. We originally selected 13 high- and medium-risk cities and their 11 states to cover the mostly likely target cities for a terrorist attack and to ensure that that information was available to the public in a timely manner. The cities included Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, Detroit, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Seattle, and St. Louis. While Washington, D.C., is considered a high-risk city, we excluded it from our survey because it is unlike other cities in its reliance on the federal government and agencies that would take over analysis and environmental remediation activities. Emergency management officials representing these cities and their states responded to our survey, except for Washington. expressed by many city, state, and federal regional office emergency management officials who responded to our survey. Respondents representing most of the cities (9 of 13), states (7 of 10), FEMA regional offices (6 of 9), and almost all EPA regional offices expressed concerns about the capabilities of federal agencies. For example, respondents from several cities told us that they were concerned about how rapidly the federal government could provide this assistance, despite the need for rapid response. For more information, visit the EPA website. Denver, and the FEMA regional office in Oakland, to develop questions to survey all 10 EPA and FEMA regional offices. FEMA’s National Exercise Schedule database was used to identify the location and types of RDD and IND response and recovery exercises. We tabulated the yes and no responses to each pertinent question from the city, state, and federal surveys. We conducted a content analysis of the explanatory statements accompanying many of the questions. We found that FEMA region 8 was the only region that did not respond to the survey. cities, like those from their states, want the federal government to consult with them in the initial formulation of a recovery strategy. Respondents representing most cities (10 of 13) and states (7 of 10) also provided specifics on the type of planning guidance necessary. For example, respondents from some of the cities sought better guidance on monitoring radioactivity levels, acceptable cleanup standards, and management of radioactive waste. Most respondents from cities expressed the need for greater planning, including integration and clarification of responsibilities among federal, state, and local governments. cities and their states responded to our survey. Atlanta and the states of Georgia and Massachusetts were dropped from the list. Miami and the state of Florida were added to the list because they are in the same federal region. Because we decided to retain Boston despite receiving no response from Massachusetts, we ended up with 10 states. We also visited EPA regional offices in San Francisco and Denver, and the FEMA regional office in Oakland, to develop the list of cities and states that responded to the survey. The Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act of 2006 requires FEMA to develop, coordinate, and maintain a national disaster recovery strategy. The federal government has placed a higher priority on developing a strategy to respond to domestic incidents, including RDD and IND incidents. The lack of clearly communicated guidance on federal responsibilities and activities has left emergency management officials in the cities and states confused about which federal agency to turn to for assistance, according to a study by the Center for American Progress. The study also found that FEMA has not issued specific guidance to coordinate federal, state, and city recovery planning. FEMA recognizes its responsibility to prepare a national disaster recovery strategy. FEMA plans to seek out opinions of nonfederal stakeholders in developing this strategy. Once completed, the recovery strategy would provide guidance to federal, state, and local agencies in revising their operational plans for recovery activities, including recovery from natural disasters. The previous administration had drafted a “white paper’ addressing this strategy, but the new administration has decided to rethink the entire approach, a FEMA official says. The new administration could not provide a time frame for its completion. and demonstrates the need for development and implementation of a national disaster recovery strategy. EPA indicated that as no single federal department or agency has the sole requisite technical capacity and capabilities to respond to the scope of RDD or IND incidents. FEMA has not issued specific guidance. Nevertheless, EPA stated that our survey results underscore the importance having clear communication and notification among federal agencies. If not addressed, could hamper recovery efforts, if not addressed it could hampering recovery efforts. The draft report is available on the EPA's website. Currently, the limited federal planning guidance related to the recovery from RDD and IND incidents can be found in a number of documents. There are several annexes to the National Response Framework that address, in part, federal agency responsibilities and assets to help state and local governments recover from these incidents. For example, a December 2004 emergency support function annex covering long-term community recovery and mitigation, led by FEMA, provides a framework for federal support to localities to enable community recovery from the long- term consequences of events of national significance. The June 2008 nuclear and radiological incident annex describes federal responsibilities and provides some operational guidance. DHS is identified as the technical lead for recovery activities, but may request support from other federal agencies. According to this annex, the federal government, may request help from EPA and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, that have cleanup and recovery experience and capabilities. The federal government has a significant role in leading cleanup efforts after RDD or IND incidents, in coordination with affected state and local governments. FEMA has not issued specific guidance describing how federal capabilities would be integrated into and support state and local plans for recovery from RDD or IND incidents. According to a senior FEMA official, the agency has delayed issuing this guidance pending the reevaluation of its planning approach by the new administration. FEMA is developing regional support plans, including for RDD and IND incidents, through its regional offices. The agency is already aware that its planning system does not fully recognize the involvement of state andLocal governments. together on this guidance in an attempt to clarify the processes for providing federal cleanup assistance following such an incident. DHS’s guidance was intended to cover the existing operational guidelines for implementing the protective action guides and other response actions, and to encourage their use in developing specific response protocols. In responding to a draft of this report, EPA informed us that DOE had convened an interagency workgroup to address gaps in DHS‘s guidance and had issued a preliminary report, for comment by September 30, 2009. This guidance describes the generic framework for multiagency response and recovery for all levels of government. The guidance emphasizes that recovery should be an integral part of response from the very beginning. No single approach could meet the needs of every affected area, so this guidance is not prescriptive or an operational manual. In 2005, the United Kingdom established a special Government Decontamination Service to address issues. The U.K. took the following actions: Enacted civil protection legislation in 2004;. Established a Government Deconsolidation Service in 2005. The Civil Contingencies Act established a statutory framework of roles and responsibilities for local responders to address the effects of the most serious emergencies facing the country. Guidance issued pursuant to this legislation established an integrated emergency management system. The November 2005 guidance addressing emergency response and recovery covers the principles, practical considerations, operational doctrine, and examples of good practice for these activities. This guidance describes the generic framework for multiagency response. The guidance also describes the principles and practical considerations for each of the six activities. Community risk registers address specific risks identified by representatives from local emergency services and public, private, and voluntary organizations. One of the risk categories is an actual terrorist attack using an explosive device. The national government does not expect communities to directly track these risks, but rather to improve their own preparedness based on a community risk register. Local resilience forums are required to develop and maintain these registers that include a description of potential outcomes, likelihoods, impacts, and ratings for various risk categories and subcategories of events. The United Kingdom has developed a comprehensive program to ensure an effective response to a range of disruptive emergencies. The country uses the term “resilience’ as the ability of organizations to withstand or recover easily and quickly from hardships. Community risk registers have been published by local emergency management planners since passage of the Emergency Act of 2004. The UK has also developed a national disaster response plan. The plan is designed to ensure that the country can respond to major disasters in a timely manner. The U.K. has also created a national emergency response plan for major disasters, such as major flooding. incidents following passage of this act made it clear to the national government that these responders needed more comprehensive guidance than that contained in the 2005 guidance. One such event was the July 2005 subway bombing in London by a terrorist group that killed 52 people. This incident, in conjunction with other events in 2005, such as the Buncefield Fire and severe flooding, prompted the government in 2006 to form a National Recovery Working Group to address the need for additional recovery guidance for multiple risk scenarios. This working group was comprised of a In 2008, the government published a national risk register. This register provides information on the risks facing the country, including malicious attacks such as with an RDD. This threat information was previously held confidential by the government. The government reported that the release of this information is intended to encourage public debate on security and help organizations, individuals, families, and communities that want to prepare for these emergencies. The register is designed to complement community risk registers that have been published by local emergency planners since passage of the 2004 civil protection legislation. planners since passage of the 2004 civil protection legislation. The community risk registers are based on local judgments of risks, as well as from information contained in the national risk assessment. The government reports that while there have been very few examples of attacks such as the 1995 release of Sarin gas in a Tokyo subway, it still recognizes the need to prepare and plan for them. In March 2009, the Nuclear Emergency Planning Liaison group published a UK Nuclear Recovery Plan Template. This document provides generic guidance for a recovery strategy and structures needed to address a radiological release from a civil or defense nuclear reactor. a framework for addressing the release of radiological materials that prompted planning for the recovery from these events. This framework was primarily established through the 2001 Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations and the 2004 Civil Contingencies Act. According to a senior official from the United Kingdom’s Health Protection Agency, the radiation regulations were developed in response to a European Union directive following the 1986 Chernobyl, Ukraine, nuclear power plant accident. These regulations require preparation of on- and off-site emergency management plans for release of radioactive materials. low-level radioactive waste to be disposed of in less expensive and more numerous solid and hazardous waste landfill sites without specific regulatory approval or exemption. The United Kingdom and the United States have agreed to increase the exchange of information and personnel regarding the research, development, testing, evaluation, and development of technical standards and operations to address chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear incidents. While passage of the 2004 Civil Contingencies Act was an important legislative step to further emergency preparedness, the reaction of local responders to several domestic incidents following passage of this act made it clear to the U.S. establishing a government decontamination service. creating online national recovery guidance. updating a recovery handbook for radiation incidents. conducting a full-scale RDD recovery exercise. establishing a community and national risk register system. preparing specific nuclear recovery planning guidance. The UK Nuclear Recovery Plan Template considers recovery to be more than simply the replacement of what has been destroyed and the rehabilitation of those affected. This guidance is based on examples from existing local government recovery plans and experiences. The guidance and associated monitoring templates would have potential application for recovery from RDD or IND incidents. characteristics of an RDD incident, including testing hundreds of people who may have been exposed to radiation. Officials told us that the attention to recovery in their country is rooted in decades of experience with the conflict in Northern Ireland. We found that actions the United Kingdom reported taking to prepare for recovery from RDD and IND incidents are similar to many of the suggestions for improvement in federal preparedness that we obtained through our survey of city, state, and federal regional office emergency management officials in the United States. Westminster respond to the analysis and environmental cleanup needs following the November 2006 polonium poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko. Developed online national recovery guidance in 2007. This guidance reinforces and updates the early emergency response and recovery guidance by establishing, among other things, a recovery planning process during the response phase. The guidance—reviewed every 3 months and updated as necessary—emphasizes the need for training recovery personnel on essential roles, responsibilities, and procedures to test competencies, as well as testing competencies. the United Kingdom in our scope. This country has actual experience with recovery from a radiological incident in an urban area. We interviewed selected central and regional government officials responsible for response and recovery planning and preparation. We visited a decontamination contractor that performed environmental remediation activities in the aftermath of the 2006 radioactive poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko in London. We also reviewed documents provided by these officials and from other sources to obtain a better understanding of this issue. The U.S. is one of the leaders in recovery planning. statutory powers itself, nor does it directly provide analysis and environmental remediation services. Instead, it provides advice and guidance to local governments, maintains and builds a framework of specialized contractors to conduct these activities. In November 2006, the Government Decontamination Service was requested to respond to an incident involving the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko with a milligram of polonium-210. This service was asked to assist the City of Westminster, within greater London, given the international nature of the event. a broader Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group during the recovery phase. The guidance requires that all high-risk cities in the United Kingdom prepare recovery plans. Recovering from RDD or IND incidents would likely be difficult and lengthy. Completing the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials would be among the first steps in the recovery process after the initial response to save lives. The 2006 polonium incident in London showed the value of recovery planning, according to United Kingdom officials. They found that implementing cleanup plans in the poloniam poisoning incident and testing plans in a November 2008 recovery exercise have helped the UK better prepare for larger RDD and IND incidents. The aftermath of the 2006 polonium poisoning incident in London had many of the characteristics of an RDD incident, including testing hundreds of people. FEMA regional office respondents indicated that it would be beneficial to synchronize existing guidance from multiple and disparate sources to ensure that they are complementary and not competing. About half of the EPA regionalOffice respondents expressed the need for guidance on the application of existing approaches for RDD or IND incidents. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. Current handbooks, updated from the 2008 version, include management options for application in the prerelease, emergency and longer-term phases of an incident. Sources of contamination considered in the handbooks include nuclear accidents, radiological dispersion devices, and satellite accidents. Conducted a full-scale RDD recovery exercise in 2008. This exercise, involving several hundred participants, provided a unique developed for the United Kingdom. Member countries of the European Union are currently customizing their handbooks for use at national, regional, and local levels. roles, responsibilities, and procedures to test competencies, as well as to design and conduct recovery exercises. Updated the recovery handbooks for radiation incidents in 2008 and 2009. The handbooks were first published in 2005 in response to the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. The current handbooks include management options for application in the prerelease, emergency and longer-term phases of an incident. Sources of contamination considered in the handbook include food production systems, drinking water, and inhabited areas. industry sectors. The handbooks were developed in response to the need for further recovery guidance following the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. The development of these handbooks was sponsored by six government departments and agencies representing national and local governments. According to a senior official from the Health Protection Agency, the European Union also supported the development of a series of generic recovery handbooks for use by other countries based on the structure, format, and content of the handbook developed for the United Kingdom. This official told us that The National Recovery Working Group found that many organizations had already conducted small-scale recovery exercises and had applied lessons learned from them. One of the lessons identified was the need to exercise the shift from the response phase to the recovery phase. The 2009 version of the UK Recovery Handbooks for Radiological Incidents is considered relevant to radiological releases—accidental and intentional—from the nuclear and nonnuclear industry sectors. The handbooks, first published in 2005 by the UK, were updated in 2009. of comprehensive, state-of-the-art datasheets for around 100 management options. The handbooks can be applied as part of the decision-aiding process to develop a recovery strategy following an incident. In November 2008, Exercise Green Star tested government capabilities to recover from a terrorist attack based on the handbooks. The UK Recovery Handbooks for Radiation Incidents: 2009 can be downloaded for free from the UK Government's official website at: http://www.gov.uk/recoveryhandbooks. exercise, participants looked at immediate cleanup issues, including resource priorities and management responsibilities. On day two, participants considered the longer-term issues of environmental contamination, monitoring strategies, and financial considerations. The use of a real radioactive isotope within the exercise scenario ensured that participants were able to investigate their own and wider mechanisms for obtaining scientific advice. A scientific advisory group was put in place to expedite the recovery process by helping to manage scientific input into the decision-making process. An after-action report was prepared following this exercise to capture lessons learned. discussed during this exercise pertained to the transition of the leadership of FRMAC from the initial analysis of the contaminated area to the later cleanup phase. For example, there are unresolved operational issues regarding the level and quality of the monitoring data. According to EPA officials, while this transitional issue has been discussed in exercises dating back to the development of the Federal Radiological Emergency Response Plan in 1984, it has only recently be discussed in RDD or IND response exercises. Another unresolved issue is the level of monitoring data necessary for EPA to accept the leadership from DOE. concurred with the recommendations in the report. DOE, through NNSA, generally agreed with our report findings and provided technical comments. EPA did not agree or disagree with the report findings, but offered technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies of the report to the appropriate congressional committees as well as to the Secretaries of Homeland Security and Energy. the Secretaries of Homeland Security and Energy; the Administrators of NNSA and EPA; and other interested parties. The report will also be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or aloisee@GAo. Department of Energy. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix IV. from other sources to obtain a better understanding of this system and how it might apply to the United States. Two officials from the United Kingdom who we interviewed during our site visit reviewed a draft of the information contained in appendix III for content and accuracy. We conducted this performance audit from October 2008 to January 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Ned Woodward (Assistant Director), Nancy Crothers, James Espinoza, Tracey King, Thomas Laetz, Jay Smale, Vasiliki Theodoropoulos, and Keo Vongvanith are on the board of directors. The board is made up of seven members: the directors, the executive directors, and the chief operating officers. For more information on the Board of Directors, visit the board's website at: http://www.cnn.com/cnn/2013/01/29/politics/top-stories/topstories/stories/kennel-cnn-kenneline-kenny-lennon.html#storylink=cpy. scheduling system for federal, state, and local exercises. 94 RDD or IND response exercises planned and carried out by these authorities from May 2003 through September 2009. FEMA’s National Exercise Division told us that only three of them actually included a recovery component that exercised activities associated with environmental cleanup. Many response and a few recovery exercises were conducted over the last 6 years that do not appear in FEMA's National Exercise Schedule. According to FEMA officials, a recovery discussion following an RDD and IND response exercise has typically not occurred. Federal agencies and local jurisdictions have used existing federal guidance as a basis for planning RDD and IND response exercises. According to DHS guidance, preparedness is the foundation of a successful national incident management system. The cycle of preparedness for prevention, protection, response, and recovery missions ends with adequate exercising, evaluation, and improvement, the authors say. Their search of FEMA’s National Exercise Schedule—a scheduling system for federal, state, and local exercises—revealed 94 RDD exercises. an RDD or IND response exercise has typically not occurred because of the time needed to fully address the response objectives of the exercise. The most recent RDD response exercise, based in Albany, New York, set aside 2 days (June 16-17, 2009) for federal, state, and local agencies to discuss operational recovery issues. One unresolved operational recovery issue discussed during this exercise pertained to the transition of the of RDD and IND response and recovery exercises. Because we determined in our April 2009 report (GAO-09-369) that this database is unreliable, we asked each city, state and federal regional office in our survey to list RDD, IND, and recovery exercise that had taken place in their jurisdiction. intergovernmental coordination, such as setting environmental cleanup priorities and levels, as well as managing radioactive waste staging and disposal. It is uncertain whether federal capability is sufficient to effectively clean up from RDD or IND incidents. Government capabilities to recover from a terrorist attack based on RDD scenarios are uncertain. This was the first time that complex recovery issues had been considered in a national- level exercise. In this exercise, several hundred participants were wholly focused on recovery issues. The National Exercise Schedule has listed two planned IND response exercises in 2010 that are to have some recovery components. Table 1 provides a brief summary of four RDD exercises, since May 2003, which contained recovery objectives including a planned exercise for April 2010. The United Kingdom provides an example of another country’s efforts to prepare to recover from a terrorist attack using chemical, biological, radioactive, or nuclear materials. This country's attention to recovery needs is reflected in promulgating emergency response and recovery legislation, establishing a government decontamination service, and creating online national recovery guidance. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions. This working group was comprised of a wide range of government departments and agencies, as well as other stakeholders who had been involved in the recovery phase following these events. In 2007, the working group produced a National Recovery Guidance document. This online guidance covers 14 generic issues, such as recovery structures and processes, training and exercises, and a lessons learned process, which are reviewed every 3 months and updated as necessary. This guidance establishes a planning process for involving recovery stakeholders during the response phase to ensure that the potential impact of early advice and actions are explored and understood. Several hundred participants took part in the exercise. The lessons learned from this exercise were incorporated into the United Kingdom’s recovery strategy. One key lesson is the benefit of exercising the handover of government leadership during the response phase to leadership of the recovery phase. Established a recovery strategy for the UK in 2008. 2008. The U.K. launched a recovery plan for the country following the earthquake and tsunami of September 11, 2011. The United Kingdom has a long history of dealing with natural disasters. nuclear weapons and special nuclear materials in transit. It is also considered applicable to recovery from RDD and IND incidents. Among other things, it provides guidance on the formation of a Recovery Advisory Group and Science and Technology Advisory Cell early in the response phase. The Advisory Group would be charged with identifying immediate and high-level strategic recovery objectives. This advisory group would transition into a broader Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group during the recovery phase. It would include experts on health and welfare, environment and infrastructure, and monitoring response and recovery activities. destroyed and the rehabilitation of those affected. It is a complex social and developmental process rather than just a remediation process. The manner in which recovery processes are undertaken is thus critical to their success and, therefore, best achieved when the affected community is able to exercise a high degree of self-determination. The Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group would be supported by specific subgroups. These subgroups would include ones for finance and legal, communications, business and economic recovery, health and welfare, environment and infrastructure, and monitoring. cleanup of the physical infrastructure and natural environment. The guidance suggests that this subgroup consider forming task groups to, among other things, address waste management and disposal. The templates would be referred to throughout the recovery to ensure that the work of the Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group is focused and on track. In addition to the person named above, individuals who made important contributions to this report were Dr. Timothy Persons (Chief Scientist), Ned Woodward (Assistant Director), Nancy Crothers, James Espinoza, Tracey King,