Rebates for volume discounts on governmentwide total quality training costs Fees for over 80 types of applications, statements, and reports filed pursuant to each of the statutes the Commission administers. User fees charged to cover the costs of materials, brochures, and space rental for seminars, workshops, business award events, and others (continued) Ad valorem fees for cargo on vessels going into U.S. ports; interest on Minority Bank investments; fees for observation decks and viewing machines at Eisenhower Lock. pleasure craft and noncommercial tolls for use of the seaway Civil penalties, sale of test tires and vehicles, royalties, FOIA requests, Corporate Average Fuel Economy fine (CAFE) penalties, and user fees. User fees for processing applications to sell ships; operating the computer-aided Operations Research Facility at the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy; making copies of agency rulings, orders, and economic data. Assessment of all federally chartered national banks, corporate applications, examinations, and security filings. Proceedings and compliant and compliant-type declaratory order proceedings (49 C.F.R. 1002) Registration fees from handlers of authorized drugs (doctors, pharmacies, and others) Collection of initial and supplemental registrations for foreign principals. Sale of utilities (electricity, steam, water, and sewage treatment) to Federal Prison Industries, Inc. (Trade name-UNICOR) Sale of meal tickets; rental income from staff housing located at various federal prisons; sale of farm by-products. federal prisons; sale of farm by-products; fees from the care and custody of state prisoners from various states Gift shop sales, tickets, and tours National Archives and Records Management Reproduction services, the sale of reference material, over-the-counter sales (museum and presidential library shops), publication sales, audiovisual sales and rentals, and Presidential library admissions. File search and copying services in association with FOIA and requests made to the Research Division. Duplicating costs under FOIA and thesale of Board publications reports License and inspection fees, annual fees, and other regulatory costs. Law receipts Filing fee from persons acquiring voting securities or assets who are required to file pre-merger notifications (15 U.S.C. 18a) Entrance fees, commodity revenues from grazing, oil and gas, sand and gravel, and other special use fees Tours of Hoover Dam, site rentals of cabins, trailers, and camping and group-use sites, and land-use fees. Public Information products, the review and approval of pipeline rights-of-way, Cenozoic Publication. For the purpose of this assignment, we defined “concessions’ as private or public entities using federally owned/leased property. We excluded day care centers, employee association stores, and services provided by the visually impaired under the Randolph-Sheppard Act. State governments manage Randolph- sheppard concessions that are on federal property. All 75 agencies responded. GSA agreed to include these concessions in its response. We asked agencies not to include concessions services in an agency that were provided under an agreement with GSA. Further, if concessions services were provided by private parties, such as services to either the general public or specific individuals. by state agencies. Total (fees + special accounts) Rate of return (percent) Transportation (including ferry, cruise, tourmobile) Food service operations, lodging, campgrounds, vending machines, retail sales, river running, big game hunting, marinas, ski resorts, transportation, cruise boats, boat docks, coin-operated copiers, and others. Retail sales, marina, beaches, golf courses. Lodging, food service operations,. pools, horseback riding, and firewood sales. and firewood sales Lodging, food service operations, swimming pools, snack bars, marinas, boat docks, horseback riding, and golf courses. Application fees and the sale of patent information Fees for rule reviews, designations, Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), leverage audits, registration, reparations, photocopying, and publications. User fees for the disposal of high-level radioactive waste; timber sales; public hunting; recycling; procurement seminars and procurement solicitation fees; occasional rights-of-way and easement. needed, but they also said it can not always be used. They said some operations could not be competed, such as ski areas where major portions of the operations are located on private land. In such situations, the federal government’s land is usually needed to complete a service, they said. However, they noted that other activities such as river running, jeep tours through scenic areas, and hunting trips, were very profitable to concessioners and the federalgovernment. They also said that some operations were not commercially viable. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. Fifty components from 29 of the 75 federal agencies we surveyed said they received income of $20.5 billion in 1994 from activities that were not concessions. Activities varied and included the sale of hydroelectric power, audiovisual products, coins, medals, and commemorative items; tours of the Hoover Dam; operation of gift shops. New agreements with preferential right of contract renewal resulted in a 3.8 percent rate of return, and those without the preference resulted in 6.4 percent. Most of the $20.5 billion was to be either deposited in Treasury’s special account or retained by the agency for its use. Because of such issues as security and privacy concerns, most of the activities were not conducive to concessions operations. Agency officials estimated that activities generating $175 million, or about 1 percent of the money, could be converted into concession operations. These activities included the sale of hydroelectric power, tours of the Hoover Dam and admission to presidential libraries. The money was intended to be used for a variety of purposes, agency officials said. procurement seminars and procurement solicitation fees; occasional rights-of-way and easement and grazing fees; and sale of crude oil and natural gas. Sale of wholesale power to customers who redistribute to retail customers. Power from 21 multipurpose water resource projects of the Army Corps of Engineers and 9 of the Bureau of Reclamation, plus power from nonfederal generating plants. More than 10,000 megawatts of power (electricity) from 54 hydro power plants. Power generated at 22 U.S. Army bases. Sale of power generated at 22 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers projects located in a 10-state southeastern region (continued) Revenue and fees obtained from contractor parking, fitness dues, interest earned on investments, telecommunications income from billings, earned assessments, provision for assessment credit, exit/ entrance fees, recoverable expenses from the Uniformed Bank Performance Report (UBPR) collections, miscellaneous income from seminars, rents, and others. Collection of civil penalties, the sale of federal campaign disclosure reports and records, and revenues from FOIA. We did our review from January 1995 to November 1995, in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Because it was impractical for us to obtain comments from all 75 agencies, we provided copies of a draft of this report to the heads of the departments of the six land management agencies for comment. The six agencies accounted for over 92 percent of the concessions. On March 25, 1996, we discussed the draft report with officials designated by the departments. Their comments are discussed on pages 16 and 17. concessions operations. These activities included the sale of hydroelectric power, tours of Hoover Dam, the sale. of commemorative items and coins, and collection of user or entrance fees. We did not ask for comments from all 75 agencies in our survey because to do so would have been impractical. The six agencies accounted for over 92 percent of total concessions. On March 25, 1996, we discussed the draft report with officials designated by the land management agencies. The report was released on March 21, 1996. 1996, we discussed the draft report with officials designated by the departments. The officials said they generally agreed with the facts as presented in the draft. Officials from four of the agencies—National Park Service, Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Bureau of Reclamation—said they agreed with draft report. The report was published in 1996 and is available on the National Park Service website and on the Internet at http://www.nps.gov/nps/nr/nr-nr/npr/nr.html. we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees, the agencies included in our review, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. The major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IX. Please contact me on (202) 512-8387 if you have any questions concerning this report. The Department of the Army Corps of Engineers is listed as a major contributor to the report. It is followed by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service and the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board. Twenty-seven of the 75 departments and agencies we surveyed reported that they had concessions operations during fiscal year 1994. The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (continued) operations in 1994? National Aeronautics and Space Administration National Archives and Records Administration National Endowment for the Arts. Thrift Deposit Protection Oversight Board U.S. Trade and Development Agency (continuing) operations during 1994? Department of Health and Human Services Department of Housing and Urban Development Department of Social Services. The Concessions Policy Act of 1965 gives National Park Service concessioners the right to be compensated for improvements they construct on federal lands. The legislation specifies that unless otherwise provided by agreement, the compensation must be based on “sound value,” which is generally defined as reconstruction cost less depreciation, not to exceed fair market value. The National Park Hospitality Association is challenging the new policy in the courts. Officials from the four states and Canada said their regulations do not allow concessioners to acquire possessory interests. The National Park Service said that between 1985 and 1989, 28 of 29 contracts up for renewal were awarded to the incumbent concessioner. The National they said they consider the amount of a concessioner’s investment when deciding the length of the contract. According to the officials, concessioners are given enough time to make a profit and amortize their investments, but the maximum term of contracts is 20 years. New and extended agreements granting possessory interest resulted in a rate of return of 3.8 percent. The preferential right for contract renewal is the right of incumbent concessioners to match or better the best offer received from firms competing for the concessions contract. The existing concessioner must have performed satisfactorily and must have been under the existing contract for 2 years. This preference reduces competition because it may limit the number of prospective concessioners. Businesses are reluctant to expend time and money preparing bids in a process where the award is decided by a panel of three people rather than a public vote. No overall federal concessions policy exists. In exchange for use of federal property, concessioners pay the government a concessions, franchise, permit, or license fee. The primary purpose of the land management agencies’ concessions programs is to provide a service to the public, not to maximize the rate of return. Officials from the Forest Service and the Bureau of Reclamation noted that high investments made by some concessioners also affect the government’s rates of return, which our report recognizes. We revised the questionnaires on the basis of their detailed feedback. land management agencies generally have discretion whether to compete concessions agreements. The Concessions Policy Act of 1965, governing National Park Service concessions, is the only law covering concessions in land management agencies that specifically requires competition. About 70 percent of the 42 agencies or agency components responding to our survey said retaining fees is or would be beneficial to them. An official from one of the agencies that retained fees said that since the fees support agency operations, staff put forth extra effort to obtain a high rate of return on concessions. Concessions services include food service, retail sales, ski resorts, lodging, and marinas. Nonland management agencies such as the General Services Administration and U.S. Postal Service provide concessions services either for all federal employees or their individual employees. The primary purpose of their concessions programs is to provide high-quality merchandise and convenient services at reasonable prices. Since the mid 1970s, we have had a public-private partnership to provide recreation for visitors to national parks, forests, and other public lands and waters. Each year, millions of people use the services made possible through these agreements. A long-term agreement, which generally involves a large financial investment by the concessioner for construction or capital improvements, may last up to 50 years. A short-term permit or license, which usually requires little or no financial investment in facilities by the concessionser, mayLast up to 5 years. Each agency is responsible for the services provided on federal property to the public. The federal government provides many of the services and accommodations provided on its property. Parks and Recreation: Park Service Managers Report Shortfalls in Maintenance Funding (GAO/RCED-88-91BR, Mar. 21, 1988). Maintenance Needs of the National Park Service (GAo/T-RCED -88-27, Mar., 23, 1988) Parks and Recreation. Documenting and Mitigating Threats to the Parks (GAE/RCed-87-36, Feb. 9, 1987). Parks and. Recreation: Recreational Fee Authorizations, Prohibitions, and Limitations (GAA/RCeds-86-149, May 8, 1986). Corps of Engineers and Bureau of Reclamation’s Recreation and Construction Backlogs (GAW/RCEd-84-54, Nov. 25, 1984). The National Park. Service Has Improved Facilities at 12 Park Service Areas (GAB/RED-80-102, July 31, 1980). Concession Operations in the National Parks—Improvements Needed in Administration. Federal Lands: Views on Reform of Recreation Concessioners. Forest Service: Little Assurance That Fair Market Value Fees Are Collected From Ski Areas. National Park Service: Policies and Practices for Determining Concessioner’s Building Use Fees. Federal Lands: Oversight of Long-Term Concessiones. Forest service: Difficult Choices Face the Future of the Recreation Program. Federal lands: Improvements Needed in Managing Concessioning. Federal land: Little Progress Made in Improving Oversight of Concessionering. required by legislation. The National Park Service’s periodic operational reviews of concessioners, which may increase maintenance costs. The legislatively required rate control of concessiones’ prices for goods and services. The expense for financial audits to concessioners grossing over 1 million dollars annually that the Park Service requires. It is likely that all larger concessioners would incur the costs of financial and routine maintenance audits, regardless of the agencies’ requirements, the authors say. The review was not designed to measure what impact, if any, that operational reviews or rate controls have on a concessioners’ profitability. to those of similar services and facilities under similar circumstances. Nothing seems to suggest that National Park Service concessioners have been directed to set prices at rates below those that one would normally expect to find in the surrounding localities. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies of this. report to interested congressional members. The Department of the Army Corps of Engineers said they had no comments on the draft report. dividing gross revenues into the sum of concessions fees and special accounts. To determine how the federal government’s rate of return compared with that of other governments, we also sent a questionnaire to five state governments and Canada. We selected the five states—California, Maryland, Michigan, Missouri, and Tennessee. The information showed that these five states had relatively high rates of return. We also visited two of the states—Maryland and Tennessee—and met with their key concessions managers. vending machines, and coin-operated photocopiers. Since the mid 1970s, we have conducted several reviews of the concessions programs in the land management agencies. (See the list of Related GAO Products on pp. 43 and 44.) The objectives of our review were to determine the extent of concessions operations in the federal government, and the rate of return received by the government from concessions. (4) The extent of agencies’ nonconcessions activities that generated income in the U.S. in U.S. Treasury securities) Harbor maintenance fees; commissions on pay telephone stations; charges for testing, inspecting and grading services; fees and other charges for miscellaneous services and Consolidated Omnibus Budget and Reconciliation Act (COBRA) The objectives of our review were to determine (1) the extent of concessions operations in the federal government, (2) the rate of return the federalGovernment received from concessions, and (3) how the government’s rate ofreturn compared to other governments’ rates of return. of 2 percent to a high rate of 47 percent for the 15 service categories. Food service operations averaged the lowest rate of return (2 percent) and coin-operated copiers in U.S. Postal Service facilities averaged the highest rate (47 percent) Other governments reported receiving higher rates of return from concessions operations than the overall federal rate. Four states and Canada reported on average a 12.7 percent rate ofreturn. The states were California, Maryland, Michigan, and Missouri. The National Parks and Conservation Association noted the states as having high rates ofreturn from concessions. They reported that they had contracting officers to set policies but delegated concessions management to park managers. As shown in appendix VI, concessions agreements entered into on a competitive basis had higher rates of return than those that were not competed. For campground permits where agencies reported both revenue and fee data, agencies reported they competed 82 percent of the permits issued in fiscal year 1994. Campground permits that agencies reported competing averaged a 7.1 percent rate of return compared to a 4.1-percent rate ofreturn for campground permit agencies said they issued noncompetitively. amount of fees generated for the government and bidders’ experience and financial status. According to state officials, agreements exempted from competition included short-term permits expecting to gross a low level of revenue, generally $5,000 or less. Officials for one state said the state would enter into a noncompetitive agreement with a business that initiated a proposal for a concession. If the operation proved lucrative after 1 year, the state said it would renegotiate the concessions agreement through a competitive process. having high rates of return from concessions reported obtaining rates ofreturn ranging from 11 to 17 percent. Canada reported receiving a 9.8 percent rate of return on its concessions operations. Canada and the four states reported that their concessions services included marinas, food service operations, campgrounds, and retail sales. All four states and Canada said they generally compete concessions agreements. They said that key factors for selecting concessioners were the amount of fees generated for the government and bidders’ experience. revenues and fees against our prior reports, and followed up with agency staff in selected cases to clarify their responses. Because agencies did not collect revenue data on all concessions, we could calculate the rate of return only for those agreements where agencies reported both the revenues and fees. On the basis of questionnaire data, we determined that 6 of these types of concessions were among the 50 concessions with the highest reported gross revenues to the concessioners in our survey and were initiated in fiscal year 1994. The reported information showed that the agreements were initiated on a noncompetitive basis. government property for various reasons, including the difficulty of distinguishing between maintenance costs for federal property and concessioners’ property. We calculated the rate of return by dividing gross revenues into the sum of concessions fees and the amount concessioners deposited into special accounts for improvements. Rates of return ranged from a low rate of 2 percent to a high rate of 47 percent. The rate represents the percentage of reported concessioners' gross revenues that the federal government is to receive. We excluded questionnaires that did not contain both gross revenue and concessions fee data. In response to our questionnaires, we received information on 5,000 concessions agreements. Our information about the agreements comes from only the agencies’ questionnaire responses. To check whether the questionnaires were filled out completely and accurately, we (1) checked selected responses against copies of the concessions agreements that agencies sent to us. We (2) checked agency totals for concessions revenues and fees against prior GAO reports; (3) followed up with agency staff in selected cases to clarify their responses; (4) manually reviewed all pages of each form. had specially trained staff convert the data to computer-readable format and verify their entries. (6) manually checked computerized data against the original forms, including all data on concessions revenues and fees. (7) conducted computerized checks for data consistency. We analyzed the information using standard software for tabulating and analyzing data. To calculate the rate of return from concessions, we used questionnaire financial data for concessions agreements either initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994. From this reported information, we calculated the rates of return by dividing gross revenues into the sum of concessions fees. 27 of the 75 federal departments and agencies surveyed reported having concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994. Fifteen of the 27 agencies either initiated or extended at least 1 concession agreement. The Central Intelligence Agency provided an oral briefing on its concessions program and did not provide any details. In response to our questionnaires, we received information on 5,000 concessions. For over 92 percent of the concessions, the Department of the Interior had more than one component managing concessions. include these concessions in its response. To accomplish objectives one, two, and four, we used three questionnaires to request data from 75 federal executive departments and agencies listed in the 1993/94 U.S. Government Manual. The first questionnaire requested summary information on all concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994, such as the total number of agreements, concessioners’ revenues, and concessions fees. The second questionnaire asked for detailed agreement-specific information on each concessions agreements either initiated or extended during fiscal Year 1994. Details included the details of each agreement that was either initiated and extended during the fiscal year. initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994. Details included the amount of revenues and fees, information on whether competition was used to select the concessioner. The third questionnaire asked for information on agencies’ income-generating activities that were not concessions. We pretested the questionnaires at six federal agencies or agency components: the Department of Agriculture’s Forest Service, the Department of the California Department of Agriculture and the State Department. components also estimated that concessioners provided an additional $4.7 million in nonfee compensation by maintaining government property. Table II.1 contains overall information reported by the 27 departments and agencies. Data on all concessioners’ revenues were not available. Central Intelligence Agency did not provide details on its concessions agreements. Agency responded that concessions fees were sometimes waived because of the following reasons: (1) reduced prices on vended items, (2) difficulty in obtaining contractors, (3) a more attractive procurement was needed because of a lack of offerors. The rate of return on agreements where agencies reported that they were authorized to retain over 50 percent of the fees was 3.3 times the rate on agreements with agencies that did not. Most concessions fees are to be deposited into the Department of the Treasury as general miscellaneous receipts. Since agencies that collect concessions fees generally are not able to use them, they have less incentive to maximize fees. Therefore, agenciesauthorized to retain fees reported obtaining more fees in proportion to their concessioners’ gross revenues. Information on 2,234 concessions agreements reporting both revenue and fee data detailed how they were entered into during fiscal year 1994. Nonland management agencies entered into 101 of the agreements and competed 96 percent of them. The land management agencies initiated 2,133 of these concessions agreements and Competition 8.6 percent. Five nonland agencies (with authority to retain fees) reported 5 percent of the total agreements and 3 percent of concessioners’ gross revenues but reported 18 percent of concessions fees. In contrast, the six landmanagement agencies (without authority to retaining their fees), reported 93 percent of total agreements but reported 73 percent of fees. the Interior, had more than 1 component managing concessions agreements. The 42 agencies or agency components reported that they had 11,263 concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994. The agencies reported concessioners’ gross revenues of $2.2 billion in fiscal year1994. The National Park Service and the Forest Service concessions operations accounted for about 90 percent of the six land management agencies’ reported concessioner’s gross revenues. Some agency officials said they had no requirement to track concessioners' revenues when concessioners paid a flat concessions fee. and nonprofit organizations interested in concessions issues; and (3) obtained and reviewed the laws, regulations, and policies for each federal entity’s concessions operations. If concessions services in agencies were provided under agreements with GSA, we requested agencies not to include these operations in their responses. GSA agreed to includeThese concessions in its response. Our information on the concessions agreements comes from only the agency's questionnaire responses for the agreements. However, we checked selected responses against copies of concessions agreements sent to us, checked agency totals for concessions revenues and fees against our prior reports. either returned to the government or put back into the food service operation, (5) concessioners make it possible to market Native Americans arts and crafts. Agency responded that some revenue data were not available mainly because concessioners were not required to report revenues for certain concessions where they generally paid a flat concessions fee. According to the Bureau of Reclamation, the 37 concessioners represent only a portion of the agency’s concessioners. Survey information was not available for the 225 concessions agreements that are managed by state agencies.