H.R. 2642 has provided approximately $2.2 billion for VA construction projects. A large portion of this amount was for construction and building improvements of VA medical facilities. The House Appropriations Committee did not recommended any funding amounts for various construction and projects submitted by Members of Congress or by the Administration. The Senate Appropriations Committee provided funding for specific construction projects requested by the President. However, the committee continued the practice of not earmarking major construction projects that are not requested in the President's budget proposal. At the end of the 109 th Congress, Congress did not pass the MIL-CON-VA-appropriations bill for FY2007. Most government agencies, including the VA, funded most government agencies through a series of Continuing Appropriations Resolutions. On May 24, 2007, the House and Senate approved the U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans' Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act, 2007 ( H.R. 2206 ). The bill was signed into law on May 25 ( P.L. 110-28 ). The Military Construction and Veterans Affairs and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2008 (MILCON-VA Appropriations Act), was included as Division I of P.L. 110-161. The bill was signed into law on December 26. It provided $37.2 billion for VHA for FY2008, which is $2.6 billion above the Administration's request for FY 2008 (see Table 5 ). Of this amount, $2,6 billion (the amount of funding for the Iraq war) was included in the bill. On June 13, 2007, the Senate Appropriations Committee, Subcommittee on Military Construction, Veterans Affairs, and Related Agencies, approved a draft version of the MILCON-VA appropriations bill. The bill was reported to the Senate on June 18. S. 1645 provided a total of $37.2 billion for the VHA. This amount includes $29.0 billion for military construction projects and $1.3 billion for veterans' housing. The measure was passed by the Senate and signed into law by President Bush. provided a total of $85.3 billion in budget authority for all veterans benefits and services for FY2008. Of the amount allocated for FY 2008, the conference agreement provided $43.1 billion for discretionary veterans' programs, which consists mainly of VA medical care. The conference agreement rejected the veterans' health-care enrollment fees and co-payment increases that were proposed by the President's budget request. On May 22, 2007, the House Appropriations Committee approved by voice vote a draft measure recommending funding levels for request, the Administration has put forward several legislative proposals. to $2.0 billion in FY2006. During this same period, first-party collections increased by 26%, from $685 million to $863 million. The Administration requested $32.7 billion for the VHA, an 11.3% increase over the FY2006 enacted amount of $29.3 billion. The FY2007 request included $25.5 billion for medical services, a 12% increaseover the FY 2006 enacted amount; $3.2 billion (see Table 5 and Appendix D ). $3.4 billion for medical administration, $3.6 billion forMedical facilities, and $411 million for medical and prosthetic research (see Table 5 ). As in FY2003, FY2004, FY2005, FY2006, and FY2007, the Administration included several cost-sharing proposals. These legislative proposals are discussed in detail in the " Key Budget Issues " section at the end of this report. The House and Senate adopted the Conference Report ( H.Rept. 110-153 ) to accompany the Concurrent Resolution on the Budget for FY2008. The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have expressed concern that the President's budget has not accurately projected the future cost of health care for veterans from FY2008-FY2012. The House Appropriations Committee expressed doubt in the actuarial model currently used to project health-care demand for Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) and Operation Iraqi freedom (OIF) veterans. The Senate Appropriations Committee has included a general provision in H.R. 2642 directing the CBO to submit a CBO report on the issue. provision in H.R. 2642 directing the CBO to submit a report projecting the annual funding level necessary for the VHA to continue providing health care for veterans from FY2009 through FY2012. Appendix A. Priority Groups and Their Eligibility Criteria Appendix B. Veterans' Payments for Health-Care Services, by Priority Group Appendix C. Financial Income Thresholds for VA Health- Care Benefits Appendix D. VHA Appropriations for FY2005 and FY2006. V HA Appropriations for Fiscal Years 2005 and 2006. The Consolidated Appropriations Act directs the DOD and VA to provide a joint report to the Committees on Appropriations detailing the actions being taken by each Department to achieve an interoperable electronic medical record (EMR) system. Similar language has been included in the Defense Appropriations conference report ( H.Rept. 110-434 ). In its FY2008 budget request, the Administration has put forward several legislative proposals. These proposals include the creation of a national electronic health record system for the military. The report must identify all ongoing and planned projects and programs within both DOD andVA addressing interoperability. The Military Construction and Veterans Affairs appropriations bill for FY2008 was reported out of committee on June 11. The committee did not recommend any fee increases as requested by the Administration's budget proposal for the VHA for FY 2008. On September 6, 2007, the Senate passed H.R. 2642 with an amendment to reflect the Senate Appropriations Committee-approved measure ( S. 1645 , S.Rept. 110-85 ). During Senate floor debate, an amendment offered by Senator Jon Tester was approved to transfer $125 million from the medical administration account to the medical services account. $2.6 billion was designated as contingent emergency funding and was available for obligation only after the President submitted a budget request to Congress. $29.1 billion has been allocated to the medical services account, which is almost $2 billion above the President's FY2008 request. The amount appropriated for medical services includes an additional $125 million to increase the number of veterans receiving medical care. The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who Table 5 ). On May 19, 2006, the House passed its version of the Military Construction, Military Quality of Life, and Veterans Affairs Appropriations bill (MIL-CON-QUAL-appropriations bill) for FY2007. H.R. 5385 provided $32.7 billion for the VHA, a $3.4 billion (11.4%) increase over the FY2006 enacted amount of $29.3 billion and about the same as the President's request. On June 6, the full House Appropriations Committee recommended $37.1 billion for VHA for FY2008, a 9.3% increase. from third-party health plans. This proposal would apply to all veterans who make co-payments. According to VA estimates, this proposal will increase revenue by $44 million in FY2008 and $217 million over five years. The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have not addressed this issue because it is an issue in the purview of the authorizing committees. On February 15, 2007, the Congressional Budget Office testified that [VHA] medical spending would increase from $35 billion in 2007 to $66 billion in 2025. The Senate-passed version of H.R. 5385 provided $28.7 billion for medical services. This amount was a 26.0% increase over the FY2006 enacted amount. The Senate also provided $3.6 billion forMedical facilities. This was the same as the Administration's request and $25.0 million less than the House-passing amount. It provided $412 million for medical and prosthetic research. The House passed this amount and the President's request, but the Senate increased it by $13.0 billion. forces after September 7, 1980, and officers commissioned after October 16, 1981, must have completed two years of active duty or the full period of their initial service obligation to be eligible for VA health-care benefits. Servicemembers discharged at any time because of service-connected disabilities are not held to this requirement. reservists that were called to active duty and who completed the term for which they were called, and who were granted an other than dishonorable discharge, are exempt. active duty for training, or while going directly to or returning directly from such duty. National Guard members are not granted service-connection for any injury, heart attack, or stroke that occurs while performing duty ordered by a governor for state emergencies or activities. The granting of service- connection makes them eligible to receive care from the VA for those conditions. The VA places applicants into one of two categories: active duty, or reserve component service members. For more information, visit the VA's website. All outpatient appointment requests must be acted on as soon as possible, but no later than seven calendar days from the date of the request. The VHA also requires that priority scheduling of any veteran must not affect the medical care of any other previously previously served veteran. Veterans who are service-connected 50% or more need to be scheduled to be seen within 30 days of the desired date for any condition. VHA staff are required to assume, on behalf of the veteran, that the veteran is entitled to priority access. Not every veteran is automatically entitled to medical care from the VA. The Veterans' Health Care Eligibility Reform Act of 1996, P.L. 104-262, established two eligibility categories. The new eligibility standard was created by Congress to "ensure that medical judgment rather than legal criteria will determine when care will be provided" Some veterans are exempt from the enrollment requirement if they meet special eligibility requirements. For most veterans, entry into the veterans' health-care system begins by completing the application for enrollment. relative degrees of preference in accordance with specified priorities. P.L. 104-262 was clear in its intent that the provision of health care to veterans was dependent upon the available resources. The provision of hospital care and medical services would be provided to "the extent and in the amount provided in advance in appropriations Acts for these purposes," according to the report accompanying the bill. Such language is intended to clarify that these services would continue to be provided, the report says. It would vest discretion in the Secretary to determine the manner in which such enrollment system would operate. A veteran may apply for enrollment by completing the Application for Health Benefits (VA Form 10-10EZ) at any time during the year. Once a veteran is enrolled in the VA health-care system, the veteran remains in the system and does not have to reapply for enrollment annually. Eligibility for VA health care is based primarily on "veteran's status" resulting from military service. Veteran's status is established by active-duty status in the military, naval, or air service and an honorable discharge. The VA places applicants into one of two categories. The first group is composed of veterans with service-connected disabilities or with incomes below an established means test. These veterans are regarded by the VA as "high priority" veterans. The VHA is mandated to provide priority care for non-emergency outpatient medical care for any condition of a service- connected veteran rated 50% or more. According to VHA policies, patients with emergency or urgent medical needs must be provided care, or must be scheduled to receive care. they have to pay co-payments for nonservice-connected care. In addition, veterans are asked to provide the VA with information on any health insurance coverage they have, including coverage through employment or through a spouse. The VA may bill these payers for treatment of conditions that are not a result of injuries or illnesses incurred or aggravated during military service. The second group of veterans is composed of those who do not fall into one of the first six priority groups.primarily veterans with nonservices-connected medical conditions. P.L. 104-262 authorized the VA to provide all needed hospital care and medical services to veterans with service-connected disabilities, former prisoners of war, veterans exposed to toxic substances and environmental hazards such as Agent Orange. These veterans are generally known as "higher priority" or "core" veterans (see Appendix A , discussed in more detail below). The other category of veterans are those with no service- connected disabilities and with attributable incomes above an established means test (see appendix C ). disability that was incurred or aggravated in the line of duty; veterans who are former prisoners of war (POWs); veterans awarded the Purple Heart. The VA looks at applicants' income and net worth to determine their specific priority category and whether they have to pay co-payments for nonservice-connected care. In addition, veterans who were exposed to hazardous agents (such as Agent Orange in Vietnam) while on active duty are considered a priority category for the VA's care. $8 for a 30-day supply of medication, including over-the-counter medications. When veterans reach the annual cap, they continue to receive medications. The VA estimates that if the current proposal to raise the co-payment were approved, it would cost $1.2 billion a year in lost revenue. There is no cap for veterans in Priority Groups 7 and 8 (see Appendixes B and C ). The current proposal would cost the federal government $1 billion annually in lost revenues. The President's FY2008 budget request includes three major policy proposals. Assess a tiered annual enrollment fee for all Priority 7 and 8 veterans based on the family income of the veteran. Increase pharmaceutical co-payments from $8 to $15 (for each 30-day prescription) for all enrolled veterans in Priority Groups 7 and8. Bill veterans receiving treatment for nonservice-connected conditions for the entire co-payment amount. The Administration put forward this proposal in its FY2004, FY2005, FY2006, and FY2007 budget requests as well, but did not receive any approval from Congress. The Administration is proposing a tiered annual enrollment fee, which is structured to charge $250 for Priority 7 and 8 veterans with family incomes from $50,000 to $74,999. The VA has estimated that this proposal would contribute more than $138 million to the Treasury annually, beginning in FY2009. According to VA estimates, of the 5.8 million unique patients that it expects to see in 2008, 111,000 may choose not to use the system if an enrollment fee is imposed and the pharmacy copays are increased. expenses for furnishing inpatient and outpatient care and treatment of veterans and certain dependents. In its FY2008 budget request to Congress, the VA requested the transfer of food service operations costs from the medical facilities appropriations to the medical services appropriations. The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have concurred with this request. The medical administration account provides funds for the expenses in the administration of the VA's medical services program. The VA's budget request for FY2008 was released to Congress on July 1. during House floor debate, Representative Shelley Moore Capito offered an amendment to transfer $5 million to the medical services account for the establishment of an Office of Rural Health. The MILCON-VA appropriations bill, as amended, also provided $3.5 billion for the medical administration account, $68.6 million above the FY2008 request. Representative Jerry Moran also offered an Amendment to increase funding for the Veterans Beneficiary Travel Program, as directed by P.L. 109-461. All other amendments were voted down. TBI, therefore, it is a challenge to quantify the number of TBI cases. Presently, both DOD and VA are working with the National Center for Health Statistics to refine current International Classification of Diseases-9 th Revision (ICD—9) codes to better reflect the TBI patient population. Beginning with FY2009, the appropriators are directing the Administration to include TBI as a select program within the medical services account in order to better account for special needs of these patients. The Appropriation Committees expressed concern about insufficient funding levels for mental health and substance abuse services. insufficient funding levels for mental health and substance abuse services in the FY2008 budget request. Administration's budget request had included a reduction in the number of inpatient beds for psychiatric care. The Consolidated Appropriations Act ( H.R. 2764 , P.L. 110-161 ) includes increased funding within the medical services account. The appropriators also directed the VA to reexamine the policy for a Reduction in psychiatric inpatient care. It is hoped that this will ensure that adequate inpatient psychiatric care is maintained. The Appropriation Committees have urged both DOD and VA to seek every opportunity to partner to improve the continuity of care for veterans. Joint clinics; joint Centers of Excellence for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) Joint research and/or treatment; and the development of joint clinical practice guidelines for polytrauma injury, TBI, burns, and amputee care. Currently, there is no medical diagnostic code specific to TBI. It is a challenge to quantify the number of TBI cases. $400 million for medical services. $193 million for treatment of Operation Enduring Freedom/Operation Iraqi Freedom (OEF/OIF) veterans. $25 million for prosthetics. $45.0 million for facility and equipment upgrades at polytrauma centers. $550 million for non-recurring maintenance to address structural deficiencies in VA medical facilities. The total amount requested by the President. The amount appropriated under P.L. 110-5 . This amount included $9.4 million for polyTrauma residential transition rehabilitation. the committee included bill language stipulating $2.9 billion for speciality mental health care, $130 million for the homeless veterans grant and per diem program. The committee recommendation also included $3.6 billion for medical administration, $193 million above the Administration's request. $480 million for medical and prosthetic research, a 17% increase over the President's request of $411 million (see Table 5 ). The committee did not recommend any fee increases as a result of the bill. for medical services includes an additional $125 million to increase the beneficiary travel reimbursement mileage rate to 28.5 cents per mile. The explanatory statement (discussed below) also stipulates that of the total amount appropriated for medical services, not less than $2.9 billion shall be expended for specialty mental health care. P.L. 110-161 has appropriated approximately $1.9 million for homeless grants and per diem program. The bill also includes $12.5 million for expanded outpatient services for the blind. the policy for a reduction in psychiatric inpatient care, taking into account the needs of returning OIF and OEF veterans. The explanatory statement directs the VA not to reduce the number of inpatient psychiatric beds at any facility that currently has a waiting list. Veterans access to VA care in remote rural areas has been a long standing issue. To address this issue the appropriators have directed the VA to provide a report to the committees that includes a description of the unique challenges and costs faced by veterans. in remote rural areas when obtaining medical services from the VA. The report should also identify the need to fund alternative sources of medical services in areas where VA medical facilities are not accessible to veterans without them leaving such areas. It should also contain an assessment of the potential for increasing local access to medical services for veterans in remote rural area through strategic partnerships with other government and local private health care providers. The explanatory statement accompanying the report should include the need for the VA to improve access to locally administered care for veterans. Veterans Equitable Resource Allocation (VERA) system, which generally bases funding on patient workload. In FY2007, the VHA operated 155 medical centers, 135 nursing homes, 717 ambulatory care and community-based outpatient clinics (CBOCs) The VHA also pays for care provided to veterans by private-sector providers on a fee basis under certain circumstances. Inpatient and outpatient care is also provided in the private sector to eligible dependents of veterans under the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Department of Veterans Affairs (CHAMPVA) VA budget authority of approximately $80 billion, with about 90% of this discretionary funding going toward supporting VA health-care programs. The VHA operates the nation's largest integrated direct health- Care delivery system. The VA's health- care system is organized into 21 geographically defined Veterans Integrated Service Networks (VISNs) Although policies and guidelines are developed at VA headquarters, management authority for basic decision making and budgetary responsibilities are delegated to VISNs. Congressionally appropriated medical care funds are allocated to the VISNs based on the Veterans Equitable Resource Allocation (VERA) system. The number of unique veteran patients is estimated to increase by approximately 110,000. The total number of outpatient visits, including visits to Vet Centers, reached 60.2 million during FY2006 and is projected to increase to 64.4 million in FY2008. As shown in Table 3 , there would be a 2.4% increase in the total number. of unique patients (both veterans and non-veterans), from 5.7 million in. FY2007 to 5.8 million inFY2008. Unlike Medicare or Medicaid, VA health care is not an entitlement program. In FY2007, the VHA estimates that it will spend approximately 64.8% of its medical services obligations on outpatient care. To understand some of the issues discussed later in this report, it is important to understand eligibility for VA health Care, the VA's enrollment process, and its enrollment priority groups. The VA estimates that its outpatient care spending will increase to 64.4 million in FY2007 and 67.4million in FY2008. mental health conditions, rehabilitation of veterans with limb loss, traumatic brain injury and spinal cord injury, organ transplantation, and the organization of the health-care delivery system. VA researchers receive funding not only through this account but also from the DOD, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and private sources. As seen in Figure 1 , the total level of funding for VHA increased between FY2006 and FY2008. Most of this increase has been due to the increase in spending on medical services. must not affect the medical care of any other previously scheduled veteran. VHA guidelines state that veterans with service-connected conditions cannot be prioritized over other veterans with more acute health-care needs. The VHA is funded through multiple appropriations accounts that are supplemented by other sources of revenue. In FY2004, "to provide better oversight and [to] receive a more accurate accounting of funds," Congress changed the VHA's appropriations structure. It funded VHA through four accounts: (1) medical services, (2) medical administration, (3) medical facilities, and (4) medical and prosthetic research. provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who meet certain eligibility rules. The VA carries out its programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans appeals (BVA) The Veterans Health Administration is responsible for health-care services and medical research programs. The Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) is responsible, among other things, for providing compensations, pensions, and education assistance. The National Cemetery Administration (NCA) isresponsible for maintaining national cemeteries and burial sites. The VA's budget includes both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts. Mandatory funding supports disability compensation, pension benefits, vocational rehabilitation, and life insurance. Discretionary funding supports a broad array of benefits and services, including medical care. In FY2007, discretionary budget authority accounted for about 48.1% of the total VA budget authority of approximately $80 billion, with about 90% of it going to medical care, among other things. The National Cemetery Administration (NCA) is responsible for maintaining national veterans cemeteries. The VA is authorized to collect from third-party health insurers to offset the cost of medical care furnished to a veteran for the treatment of a nonservice-connected condition. The VA will apply the payment collected from the insurer to satisfy the veteran's co-payment debt related to that treatment. Under the Administration's proposal, veterans receiving medical care services for treatment of non-service-connected disabilities will receive a bill for their entire co- payment. This proposal would apply to all insurance policies. The Committees on Appropriations include medical care cost recovery collections. The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 ( P.L. 105-33 ) gave the VHA the authority to retain these funds in the Medical Care Collections Fund (MCCF) Instead of returning the funds to the Treasury, the VA can use them for medical services for veterans without fiscal year limitations. The VHA can bill some veterans and most health-care insurers for nonservice-connected care provided to veterans enrolled in the VA system. The VA asserts that this proposal would align the VA with the DOD health-care system for military retirees and with the private sector. With the enactment of P.L. 99-272 in 1986, Congress authorized the VA to collect payments from third-party health insurers for the treatment of veterans with nonservice-connected disabilities. The Administration is requesting that Congress amend the VA's statutory authority by eliminating the practice of reducing first-party co-payment debts with third- party health-insurance collections. intended to enhance VA collections to the extent that reasonable charges result in higher payments than reasonable costs. In FY2004, the Administration's budget requested consolidating several medical existing collections accounts into one MCCF. The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2005 provided the VA with permanent authority to deposit funds from these five accounts into the MccF. These collected funds do not have to be spent in any particular fiscal year and are available until expended. The funds would be available for medical services for veterans. required the VA to establish a revenue improvement demonstration project. The purpose of this pilot project is to provide a "comprehensive restructuring of the complete revenue cycle including cash-flow management and accounts receivable" The VHA has established a pilot Consolidated Patient Account Center in VISN 6. As shown in Table 4 , MCCF collections increased by 31%, from $1.5 billion in FY2003 to $2.0 billion inFY2006. During this same period, first-party first-source collections increased from $3.2 billion to $4.1 billion.