next year under a Putin presidency. He projected that Putin would not reverse the course of U.S.-Russian relations, but they might be more "challenging" since Putin has an "instinctive distrust ofU.S. intentions" Challenges to Russia's democratic development have long been of concern to Congress. Among these concerns, many Members have condemned Russia's invasion of Georgia in 2008, the death of lawyer Sergey Magnitskiy after being detained and tortured in a Russian prison in 2009. detained and tortured in a Russian prison in 2009, and the re-sentencing of businessman/oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovskiy in 2010 to several more years in prison. Recent legislation includes the Senate and House versions of the Magnitskiy Rule of Law bills, which would impose a visa ban and an asset freeze on human rights abusers. The National Defense Authorization Act of 2012 ( P.L. 112-81 ), signed into law on December 31, 2011, that calls for a plan to provide defensive weaponry to Georgia. budget for FY2013 submitted to Congress in February 2012 requests $52 million for Russia. Some observers have suggested that since Putin has condemned such aid as interference in Russia's internal affairs, he may tighten restrictions on such aid for non-governmental organizations. Ongoing congressional concerns about democratization, human rights, and trade will continue and may have been heightened by the Russian election outcome. During his trip to Russia, President Obama also met with Russian President Vladimir Putin to discuss the state of the Russian economy. Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus stressed that the growth of U.S. trade and investment would be facilitated by further democratization. Russia's legislature will give approval for the ratification of WTO accession by mid-2012. Congress may consider whether to grant Permanent Normal Trade Relations (PNTR) to Russia and to lift the applicability of the so-called Jackson-Vanik provisions of the Trade Act of 1974 to Russia (concerning emigration) Russia's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) is expected to be approved by the end of 2012. of the Trade Act of 1974 to Russia (concerning emigration from the former Soviet Union) Russia's human rights and democratization record may well be part of the debate. On March 5, 2012, Representative David Dreier, chairman of the House Democracy Partnership, congratulated Putin on his election victory, but objected to Putin's election night victory speech. Dreier stated that the United States was not seeking to dictate to Russia, but suggested that the U.S., "a country that has had a 223-year history of democracy" a good choice as prime minister. He stated that the United States wanted a "strong, vibrant, and growing Russia," and good U.S.-Russia relations. He said that Putin was a good choice because he had a good relationship with the U.N. Security Council. He added that Putin had a great deal of respect for the United Nations and its mission in the Middle East, including the role of the UN Security Council as an arbiter of international law. He also said that he wanted a strong, vibrant Russia. Putin is expected to attend the Group of 8 (G-8) industrialized nations meeting at Camp David, Maryland, on May 19-20, just before a NATO summit meeting. Some observers have warned that if European missile defense issues remain contentious at the time of this NATO Summit, Putin may deliver a harsh anti-U.S. speech. The Administration has suggested that Obama and Putin may hold a summit on the sidelines of the G-8 meeting. The two "agreed that the successful reset in relations should be built upon during the coming years," Obama said. Russian media reported in early March that a lack of progress on missile defense made it unlikely that a NATO-Russia Council meeting would be held in Chicago. A mostly positive assessment of near-term U.S.-Russia relations was given by Director of National Intelligence James Clapper in testimony to Congress in late January. Clapper suggested that there would be "more continuity than change" in Russian domestic and foreign policy over the next year under a Putin presidency. He projected that Putin would not attend the NATO Summit. proposal that also was endorsed by Putin on March 5. It remains to be seen whether the impetus to create and strengthen civil society organizations will be sustained, particularly if a new Putin administration cracks down on such efforts. The U.S. "looks forward to working with the President-elect after ... he is sworn in," the State Department said the day after the election. The statement pointed to the results of the preliminary report of the OSCE in stating that the "election had a clear winner with an absolute majority" an absolute majority," but also urged the Russian government to address shortcomings mentioned in the report. The statement hailed the large number of Russian citizens who turned out to monitor the election, held rallies, and otherwise "express[ed] their views peacefully" On March 9, 2012, President Obama telephoned President-elect Putin to congratulate him on his electoral victory, and stated that he looked forward to meeting him at Camp David, Maryland, in May 2012 (see below). Other Western nations have also praised the intentions of the government to improve the political system. Challenges to Russia's democratic development have long been of concern to Congress. The Obama Administration has been critical of the apparently flawed Russian presidential election. Some in Congress also have criticized the conduct of the election, but have endorsed continued engagement, while others have called for stepping back and reevaluating the Administration's engagement policy. Congress may consider the implications of another Putin presidency, lagging lagging behind the U.S. in some areas of economic growth, such as the energy sector and the economy. The European Union's High Representative Catherine Ashton on March 5 "took note" of Putin's "clear victory" Ashton praised the significant level of civic engagement in the election. She urged Russian authorities to address shortcomings mentioned in the OSCE report. She stated that the "EU looks forward to working with the incoming Russian President" to implement pledges of economic and political reforms. The Administration has pointed to successes of the U.S.-Russia "reset" of relations as including approval by Russia in 2009. occupied areas of Georgia, to which Moscow thus far has failed to respond. In early 2011, Russia abstained on a UNSC resolution calling for a "no-fly zone" to protect civilians in Libya. Almost immediately Russia denounced NATO actions in Libya as aimed at "regime change" Russia has used the same rationale in vetoing UNSC resolutions on Syria. Secretary Clinton termed the February Russian response to the U.S.-Russia reset as "disappointing," but not surprising. UNSC resolutions on Syria. Secretary Clinton termed the February Russian veto "despicable" Russia is a major arms supplier to Syria and has a Mediterranean naval docking facility at Tartus (although it is seldom used). Although the Putin-Medvedev "tandem" defended the veto, it faced Russian domestic as well as international criticism. On February 24, Putin rejected an argument that U.S.-Russia relations were "cooling off," stating that "I don't think we are seeing a cooling.... "reset" of relations as including approval by Russia in 2009 for the land and air transit of military supplies to support U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan. It is possible that the anti-Americanism exhibited by Putin during the campaign could put a strain on future cooperation under the "reset," particularly if the opposition protests continue in Russia. The U.N. Security Council (UNSC) resolution in 2010 tightening sanctions on Iran, as well as the signing of the START Treaty and the work to gain Russia's invitation to join World Trade Organization. stating that "I don't think we are seeing a cooling.... We have a constant dialogue" In an interview with Western media on March 1, Putin praised the U.S.-Russia reset as "useful" Putin also stated that he had warm relations with President Obama, whom he viewed as desiring good U.K.-U.S. relations. During President Obama's March 9, 2012, telephone call with Putin, the two discussed the START Treaty and WTO accession. Commission have continued in recent weeks. Russian officials have stated that cooperation on the transit of supplies to support U.S. and NATO operations in Afghanistan will not be linked to other issues. Russia continues to support this transit because it helps stanch terrorist threats aimed at Russia emanating from Afghanistan. But differences have remained or emerged in recent months. The United States, for example, continues to call for Russia to withdraw its troops from occupied areas of Georgia, to which Moscow thus far has not responded. U.S. Ambassador Michael McFaul was accused on state-owned television of providing orders and money to some opposition politicians. McFaul has reported that he has had fruitful meetings with Russian officials since this criticism. One positive sign is that various meetings of the U.S.-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission have continued in recent weeks, writes CNN's John Defterios. Defterio: If the opposition protests continue in Russia into the summer and are met by a government crackdown and continuing anti-American statements, the situation could get worse. Some observers have speculated that Putin may not follow through on his announced plans to nominate Medvedev as his prime minister. Most observers, however, believe that Medvede will be confirmed as prime minister, at least in the short term. Some observers suggest that a Prime Minister Medvedeva would have substantial authority as a former president, so that the "tandem" would continue to operate. According to this view, Putin would be unlikely to fire Prime MinisterMedvedev. However, prime ministers have been replaced by Putin (and former President Yeltsin) when the economy has been poor. Medvedev announced several democratization initiatives in his state of the federation speech on December 22 that he stated were partly spurred by the protests. One proposal was to restore gubernatorial elections, which Putin had abolished in 2004. Putin voiced qualms about this initiative, requesting that he be asked to withdraw it from the legislature. Putin has stated that Medvedev as prime minister would continue to carry out initiatives he launched as president.by Putin (and former President Yeltsin) when the economy has declined. Former Russian President Vladimir Putin served two elected terms from 2000 to 2008. He was required to step down due to a constitutional limit to two successive terms. He endorsed his then-First Deputy Prime Minister Dmitriy Medvedev as his choice to be the next president. Medvede was elected by a wide margin in March 2008, and upon taking office nominated Putin to be his prime minister. The U.S. Congress may consider the implications of another Putin presidency, lagging democratization, and human rights abuses in Russia. In September 2011, Prime Minister Putin and President Medvedev announced that they would exchange places so that Putin could re-assume the presidency. This announcement created a great deal of resentment among many Russians who felt that a backroom deal had been foisted on them. The resentment was mostly low-key at first, but signs included polls showing growing dissatisfaction with Putin and Medvede. The trigger for wider open discontent was a series of corruption scandals involving Putin's government and the media. Putin voiced qualms about this initiative, requesting that he retain control over who may run in such elections, and the draft bill reportedly contains such a provision. Another vague proposal by Medvedev was to increase the openness of legislative elections, which some observers had hoped would include the restoration of constituency races. The bill submitted to the Duma, however, called for altering electoral procedures so that voters in 225 new districts would select a party list with identifiable local candidates. Golos researchers have termed these two bills what they have termed "two bills" Dreier endorsed an idea that Putin not run again after his third term in office, call a new Duma election, and hold free and fair gubernatorial elections. He also praised Medvedev's request for an examination of the sentence against Khodorkovskiy. He suggested that former Russian Finance Minister Alexey Kudrin might make a good choice as prime minister. He stated that the.that has had a 223-year history of democracy, could provide a little bit of advice to a country that is just now entering its third decade of democracy. Golos researchers have termed these two bills disappointing "propaganda" exercises. Another bill may prove more reformist, however, by greatly reducing the registration requirements for new parties. On March 5, Medvedev directed the prosecutor general to review businessman/oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovskiy's conviction and that of 30 other prisoners. He also ordered the Prosecutor General to examine the mid-2011 denial of party registration to the Party.identifiable local candidates. The bill may permit many currently unrepresented interests to participate in political life. A December 2011 election to Russia's legislature, the Duma, was widely viewed by many Russians as not free and fair. Demonstrations against the election began even before the polls closed. Over the next few weeks, several protests of up to 100,000 or more people were held in Moscow and many other cities. These protesters demanded that a new Duma election be held, but also called for a scheduled March 4, 2012, presidential election to be held. and Medvedev. Putin, Gennadiy Zyuganov, Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, and Sergey Mironov were nominated by parties with seats in the Duma. Four of the five candidates were able to register for the March 4, 2012, presidential election. President Medvedev introduced some legislation that he claimed would enhance democratization in Russia in the future. According to the election rules, other candidates were not allowed to run for office. The election is scheduled for March 4 and is expected to be free and fair. Putin and other observers have pointed to this growing middle class as major participants in the protests that began after the Duma election. A major question is whether a Putin presidency can implement substantial economic and democratic reforms. Some critics have argued that Putin is not attuned to making such reforms, and that he will face rising civil discontent during his third term in office. Most observers discount such a scenario, but argue that Russian political and economic institutions and civil society will face substantial strains to adapt to the long-term demands of a modern global economy. initiatives, according to many observers. Besides these efforts, Putin boosted or promised large increases in military and government pay, pensions, and student stipends. These benefits may have made many voters very receptive to his argument that they should elect him in order to preserve their benefits. A major aspect of the shift in tactics by the Putin campaign involved blaming the United States and the West for the protests. This anti-Americanism aimed to define the election as a patriotic vote for Putin. After Secretary Clinton voiced criticism of the Duma election in early December 2011, Putin accused her of "giving up" Putin declared victory two hours after the polls closed and after about one-third of polling precincts had reported that he had received a sufficient vote for a first-round win. He and Medvedev hosted a large pre-planned outdoor victory rally and concert in Moscow. Putin proclaimed that the voters had rebuffed attempts to "break up the state and usurp power.... We proved that no one can impose on us.... We have won in open and honest battle." Even before the last polling places in Russia had closed, which ostensibly is illegal. We have won in open and honest battle, CEC head Vladimir Churov says. He declares that the election was the most "open, fair, transparent and decent presidential campaign" in the world. Zhirinovskiy and Mironov immediately congratulated Putin for what they termed an honest win. Zyuganov and Prokhorov alleged that electoral irregularities meant that the vote was not free and fair. All but ZyugAnov met with Putin on March 5, where a discussion of each candidate's campaign was held. elections and lost badly. Zyuganov and Zhirinovskiy had run several times. While he was speaker of the Federation Council (the upper legislative chamber), Mironov ran in the 2004 presidential election, where he praised Putin's policies. Prokhorov announced his candidacy just two days after a large opposition demonstration on December 10, 2011, raising speculation that he was urged to run by the government. According to polling, substantial percentages of prospective voters viewed all these candidates in a negative light and would never vote for. Putin won 63.6% of 71.8 million votes cast, somewhat less than the 71.3% he had received in his last presidential election in 2004. Some of Mironov's expected supporters instead may have voted for Prokhorov, reducing his result below that gained by his A Just Russia Party in the Duma election. Moscow was the only major city where Putin failed to get over 50% of the vote, even though there may have been a concerted effort to inflate Putin's result. candidates in a negative light and would never vote for them. These negative views greatly hampered the effectiveness of these candidates' campaign efforts. Many voters may well have voted for Putin as the "lesser evil," according to some observers. Besides permitting protests "for free elections" as well as opposition presidential candidate meetings, the Medvedev-Putin government launched efforts to appeal to wavering if not disgruntled voters. The government also offered opposition figures jobs, including by offering opposition leaders jobs. revitalized opposition political parties. Udaltsov, who represents the "left wing" nationalists among the protesters, has disagreed. Business interests appeared to welcome Prokhorov's third-place showing and his indication that he would continue a role in politics by forming a party. The proposal also was endorsed by Putin on March 5, and has been endorsed by Mironov and other opposition leaders. It would allow A Just Russia Party to join with the Communist Party to form a new social democratic coalition. and many were disqualified on technical grounds by the Central Electoral Commission (CEC), and only three managed to submit signatures. Two out of the three—regional governor Dmitriy Mezentsev and opposition Yabloko Party head Grigoriy Yavlinskiy—were disqualified by the CEC on the grounds that over 5% of their signatures were invalid. The signatures of the third prospective candidate, businessman Mikhail Prokhorov, were deemed valid and he was placed on the ballot. seats in the Duma. According to the election rules, other prospective candidates from minor parties not represented in the. Duma or self-nominated individuals were required to gather 2 million signatures of support. Many analysts have viewed these and many other requirements imposed on prospective minor party and independent candidates as too restrictive and as limiting political participation. Of the 17 individuals who initially announced they would run for the presidency, some dropped out and many were disqualified on technical grounds by the Central Election Commission. not disperse after the time for the rally had elapsed, police forcibly intervened. At a protest rally in St. Petersburg, reportedly 300 people were detained. Small protest rallies reportedly numbering up to several hundred people occurred in several other cities of Russia. A "for free elections" protest rally was held in Moscow on March 10, attended by 10,000-25,000 people. After the rally some protesters attempted a march and were temporarily detained, including Sergey Udaltsov, who represents the "left wing" The initial protests after Putin's election by those who view the electoral process as tainted appeared smaller in size and number than after the Duma election. Authorities approved a protest rally in Pushkin Square in central Moscow on March 5, along with Putin victory rallies elsewhere in the city. Some youth activists involved in the victory rallies reportedly stated that they were ready to fight against "provocations" by the protesters. After some of the protesters allegedly did not disperse after the time for the rally had elapsed, if not disgruntled voters, including by offering opposition figures jobs and by making some changes in government postings. Russia's ambassador to NATO, the nationalist Dmitriy Rogozin, was elevated to deputy prime minister in a seeming effort to attract the nationalist vote. Also, the Putin campaign orchestrated large-scale rallies, the most prominent of which was a pro-Putin demonstration on February 4 in Moscow aimed at rivaling the attendance at a "for free elections" rally, and a campaign rally in the Luzhniki stadium in Moscow. The government claimed that over 130,000 supporters attended the rally, although the stadium's capacity is about 84,000. At this final campaign rally of the Putin campaign, some individuals reportedly had arrived by bus or train after trips lasting more than 24 hours. In addition to these pro-Putin events, a wave of television shows was launched extolling Putin's rule. At the same time, authorities moved to harass and suppress independent vote monitoring groups, the Internet, and certain "old media" election in early December 2011, Putin accused her of "giving orders" for the launch of protests. Rogozin even asserted that Secretary Clinton and former Secretary Madeleine Albright wanted to destroy Russia in order to take over Siberia's mineral resources. At the campaign rally at the Luzhniki stadium on February 23, Putin urged voters "not to look abroad ... and not betray their motherland" This anti-American theme also was prominent in a number of supposedly non-partisan talk shows and "documentaries" The most sensational was an announcement in late February that Ukrainian police had uncovered a plot by Chechen terrorists to assassinate Putin after the election. Other sensational accusations included those by Putin that oppositionist politicians planned to kill one of their own in order to blame the death on him. Another was that oppositionists planned to stuff ballots marked with Putin's name into ballot boxes to declare that the election was illegitimate. The privately owned REN TV showed a program warning that if Putin won the election, the opposition would kill him. owned REN TV showed a program warning that if Putin was not elected, Russia would descend into civil war and destruction within a few months at the hands of the opposition. In an attempt to convince the public that the election would be free and fair, Prime Minister Putin announced in mid-December 2011 that two webcams would be placed in each of about 94,500 polling places. Most of these were installed. Individuals who pre-registered were permitted to view the voting and vote-counting on-line (the latter after a delay until all polls were closed). A number of supposedly non-partisan talk shows and "documentaries" aired on state-owned or controlled television. Several major Russian polling organizations are owned by the government or receive government contracts. Some critics have argued that VTsIOM's polls were an announcement of what results the government planned for on election day. The government pointed to the polls as evidence that the results were valid and not due to ballot-box stuffing, according to the government's own report on the election. In particular, the prominent All-Russian Center for the Study of Public Opinion (known by its Russian acronym, VT'sIOM), is state- owned. were valid and not due to ballot-box stuffing, according to these critics. They point to Putin's award of the Order for Services to the Fatherland to VTsIOM after the 2007-2008 election cycle as evidence of this collusion. On February 27, the last permitted day to release polling results, VT'sIOM estimated that Putin would garner nearly 59% of the vote, so that a second round of voting would not be necessary. During the last few days before the election, the Putin government and campaign made several accusations that opposition politicians and other enemies of Putin were enemies. The independent Golos (Voice) monitoring group reported the heavy use of "carousel voting," in which buses carried groups that voted at several polling places. Golos also reported the use of absentee ballots in government offices, institutions, and businesses that were gathered up and checked by supervisors to make sure that the employees had voted for Putin. The group concluded in its preliminary report on the election that although there appeared to be somewhat fewer irregularities than during the Duma election, the presidential election was not free and fair. Duma election, the presidential election was not free and fair. At a press conference, Golos also stated that its ballot count had given Putin just over 50% of the vote, giving him a win in the first round. Russian physicist Sergey Shpilkin estimated that Putin may actually have received about 58% ofThe official result inflated by ballot box stuffing, by inflating the voter turnout and allocating these votes to Putin, and by other means. In their preliminary report, the 262 monitors led by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) concluded that the election wasn't free or fair. Thousands of irregularities reported by independent Russian activists. Video of individuals allegedly admitting that they had been paid to vote repeatedly. "hundreds" of buses parked in Moscow that allegedly had carried Putin's supporters into the city to inflate the voting results there for Putin. The performance of the webcams was uneven. Many were not focused on the ballot boxes or views were blocked, according to reports. The vote count in Chechnya continued its tradition of reporting a high turnout (99.6%) and vote ( 99.8%) for Vladimir Putin. The OSCE reported that the government did not hinder demonstrators calling for fair elections. The government permitted many monitors at polling places, and installed webcams in most polling places. On election day, the OSCE monitors assessed voting positively overall in the over 1,000 polling places they visited. But witnessed irregularities in vote-counting in nearly one-third of the 98 polling stations visited and in about 15% of 72 higher-level territorial electoral commissions. Putin (and outgoing President Medvedev) face rising dissatisfaction by many Russians with what are viewed as poor election results. OSCE monitors say they did not view the election as free and fair. The report says Prime Minister Putin received an advantage in media coverage. It also raised concerns that precinct polling place chairpersons generally appeared to belong to the ruling United Russia Party or were from the ruling party. The election was held on March 18, 2014. It was the first presidential election in Russia since 1998. The result was a victory for Vladimir Putin, who was re-elected for a second term as prime minister. independent vote monitoring groups, the Internet, and certain "old media" newspapers and broadcasters that the opposition relied on. Putin refused to participate in televised debates with the other candidates, but appeared extensively on television in the guise of carrying out his duties as prime minister. From mid-January through late February, he published seven long articles in major newspapers. These "election manifesto" articles covered such policy issues as ethnicity, the economy, democracy, socioeconomic problems, national security, and foreign policy. In the first overview article, Putin boasted that during his rule, he helped "deliver Russia from the blind alley of civil war" Putin warned against creating a contentious electoral environment of "buffoons" He called for retaining a strong federal government if gubernatorial elections are reinstated. He also called for greater efforts to combat corruption, which he claimed had strengthened when young greedy people had moved into the civil service. In general, the articles appeared to be a reiteration of existing policies and sentiments, rather than a forum for launching new initiatives, according to many observers. Besides these efforts, Putin boosted education, although he admitted that civil society recently had demanded more political participation. he helped "deliver Russia from the blind alley of civil war," he writes. In the democracy article, he argues that there was no democracy in Russia in the 1990s, only "anarchy and oligarchy" He defined this democracy in terms of the rights of Russians to employment, free healthcare, and education, although he admitted that civil society recently had demanded more. He says he helped "break the back of terrorism, restore the country's territorial integrity and constitutional order, and spark economic revival" Russian sociologists say about one-quarter of the population belongs to the middle class. This portion could grow to one-third by the end of the decade, they estimate. These individuals, including many business owners and private-sector employees, want a government that is not corrupt and follows the rule of law, these sociologist report.face rising dissatisfaction by many Russians with what are viewed as tainted elections, corruption, and other political and human rights problems.. Putin and other observers have pointed to this growing middle class as one of the reasons for Russia's economic growth.