The Army and the contractor concluded that using galvanized (zinc coated) steel to produce the cabs may be the only way to meet the 10-year corrosion protection requirement. Because the galvanized cab has the potential to protect against corrosion beyond the contract requirement, the Army agreed to share the cost. The Army is designing a new corrosion test to determine the number of years of protection the new design will provide. The modifications set a ceiling of $7 million on the Army’s share of costs. The first 4,955 trucks produced did not meet the FMTV corrosion protection requirements. Army officials said that since the Army had specified the material to be used in 20 of the areas, it agreed to pay for necessary changes in these areas. The Army was unable to ongoing, high priority, effort and the contractor continues to be required to meet corrosion Protection requirements. Based on theFMTV corrosion problems cited in this report, we agree that improving corrosion protection should be an ongoing high priority effort. FMTV contract was terminated because of production problems and higher funding priorities. DOD also states that improving corrosion protection on tactical vehicles is an ongoing, high priority, effort and the contractor continues to be.strategy. The program’s schedule and production problems weakened its ability to compete with other programs for funds, a DOD official said. The decision was based on funding demands from higher priority programs, the official said, adding that the FMTV program was no longer a priority for the military. the cab agreement, the Army agreed to accept trucks with corrosion repairs of their cargo beds. The Army later tested the corrosion repairs made on two cabs and found the repairs unacceptable. The contractor offered to provide a 10-year corrosion protection warranty on the cabs, cargo beds, frame rails, and crossmembers on all trucks produced through February 28, 1997. Trucks produced after that date would be produced with cabs assembled new procedures. The contract was subsequently modified to require the galvanized steel cabs. terminating the final year, the contract was extended 2 additional years with the original final year’s production quantities spread over the 3-year period. The contract extension added an estimated $85 million to the original contract price. When the Army found that the first 4,955 trucks produced did not meet the corrosion protection requirements, the contractor agreed to repair the corroded trucks, provide a 10-year corrosion warranty on those trucks. The contractor produced 2,491 trucks under these new procedures. The Army’s decision to award a $1.2-billion FMTV contract to a company that was not experienced in truck production. The contractor produced 2,491 trucks after McLaughlin improved its procedures to address corrosion problems found on the first 4,955 trucks. The Army also ran a contract-specified corrosion test on an FMTV cargo truck with a cab produced before McLaughlinimproved its procedures. The truck failed the test. By the end of the test, the truck was corroded in 60 areas. Stewart & Stevenson found that the main causes of the corrosion were inadequate cleaning and painting procedures by the cab subcontractor, McLaughlin Body Company. McLaughlin subsequently improved its procedures at no cost to the Army. These improvements would be reflected in trucks produced after February 28, 1997. On November 13, 1996, the Army agreed to the warranty and again began accepting trucks with corrosion repairs. The warranty limited the contractor’s liability for these repairs to $10 million. The Army withheld $1,000 or $2,000 per truck, depending on type. House Committees on Government Reform, Armed Services, and Appropriations; the Secretaries of Defense and the Army; and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix II. Please contact me on (202) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, orders should be mailed to: Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. $2 each. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Texas; Tactical Vehicle Systems, Stewart & Stevenson Services, Inc., Sealy, Texas; and Defense Finance and Accounting Service, Columbus, Ohio. We conducted our review between July 1997 and November 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier. At that time, we will send copies of the report to the Chairmen and Ranking Minority Members of the Senate Committees on Governmental Affairs, Armed Services, and Appropriations. The Army estimated that it would cost $18.5 million to replace all of the cabs on trucks covered by the warranty. It bases its estimate on 2,864 trucks that it thought would be covered, not 4,955 trucks that actually are covered. We were not able to determine the number of air drop and standard trucks in the 2,091 trucks not included in the Army’s estimate. To produce a conservative estimate of the potential total cost, we multiplied the standard cab cost of $6,000 per truck by 2,91 trucks. We identified the number of 2.5- and 5-ton FMTV trucks accepted by the government on a monthly basis. We compared the original FMTV delivery schedules to actual delivery dates. We did not independently verify the accuracy of material receiving and shipping report data obtained from the Defense Finance and Accounting Service. The Army might have incurred additional costs as of December 31, 1997, because of delayed FMTV truck deliveries, we estimated. We then multiplied that product by the monthly additional operating and support costs for the older trucks. We estimate that as of December 31, 1997, the Army may have incurred an additional $22 million to operate the older trucks that the FMTV trucks were to replace. We determined an average operating tempo for each truck using the operating tempo reported by the same three Army major commands. We based our estimate of the potential cost of replacing all of the cabs on trucks covered by the corrosion warranty on an Army estimate. The Army estimated that it would cost $18.5 million to replace the trucks. At a projected cost of $15.7 billion, the FMTV program is one of the Army’s largest acquisition programs. The Army plans to purchase 85,488 FMTV trucks to replace its aging medium truck fleet. Under the program, the Army will purchase a family of 2.5- and 5-ton trucks based on a common truck cab and chassis. The trucks will consist of cargo, long wheel base cargo, dump, fuel tanker, and trailer variants, among others. trucks. Stewart & Stevenson completed production under the contract in November 1998. The initial production contract does not include the 5-ton fuel tanker, 5- ton van, and both trailers. These vehicles will be included in future production contracts. The contract contained options for additional trucks. The fifth year of the contract was subsequently restructured and the Contract was extended 2 years. In our November 1998 report, we found that the Army had not (1) instituted safeguards to ensure that existing production problems did not occur in follow-on production contracts and (2) performed a cost and benefit analysis. contract, it established a source selection board, which evaluated the proposals of the three competing contractors. The Army gave highest consideration to the technical and cost factors of the proposals. Stewart & Stevenson was selected because its proposal offered the best value for meeting the Army’s overall requirements and receives the highest score for the technical factor and was the lowest cost. The board considered the government's previous experience with the prototype contractors as part of the Army's overall production readiness evaluation. This evaluation noted that Stewart and Stevenson had no prior experience in high volume production of combat. had no prior experience in high volume production of combat or tactical vehicles, (2) needed to convert European engineering drawings to U.S. specifications and standards, and (3) had unsatisfactory delivery performance on past low dollar purchase orders. To acquire FMTV truck production capability, Stewart & Stevenson purchased a plant from an oil-drilling equipment manufacturer, configured the plant for truck production, and established a tactical truck division. The contract required the contractor to deliver a minimum of 85 trucks by October 1992. production process beyond the current capability of truck manufacturers, (2) FMTV truck configurations would be established and subjected to prototype testing prior to the production contract award, and (3) contractors participating in the prototype competition either had produced military trucks in the past or were affiliated with an experienced military truck producer. Stewart & Stevenson was a distribution and service company trucks. The Army planned to have enough trucks to fully equip its first unit with FMTV trucks by October 1993—about 24 months after contract award. of seven variants—cargo, long wheel base cargo, dump, fuel tanker, tractor, van, and wrecker—and a 5-ton trailer. In the prototype phase, three companies were awarded contracts to develop and produce prototype trucks for evaluation and testing. On October 11, 1991, the Army awarded the winning contractor, Stewart & Stevenson Services, Inc., Houston, Texas, a $1.2 billion, 5-year fixed-price production contract for the first 10,843 FMTV trucks. Stewart & Stevenson subcontracted with Steyr to design and develop FMTV prototypes based on the design of a truck Steyr produced for the Austrian army. Steyr completed its subcontract work before Stewart & Stevenson submitted its production proposal and was not included in the production phase of the program. When the Army issued the solicitation for the production contract, it established a source selection board, which evaluated the source selection work. The contract was not awarded until after the board's evaluation of Steyr's work. contractor had to stop new production for 5 months and produced only 175 new trucks during the other 4 months. The contract required the contractor to pay for the modifications needed to make the trucks meet FMTV requirements. The Army changed its plans to terminate the final year of the 5-year FMTV production contract when the Congress provided additional funding to continue the program. The agreement increased the price of the FMTV trucks. The project office has not determined the exact cost of the contract extension but has an estimate that it will add $85 million to the Army's contract cost. Initial operational testing was originally scheduled to be completed in June 1993. Because of production problems, the Army did not begin operational testing until October 1993. The trucks failed the test because they did not meet reliability and some performance requirements. The Army identified over 90 problems that the contractor was required to correct. Operational testing of the new trucks began in April 1995. The first unit was not equipped with FMTV trucks until January 1996, 2 years and 3 months after the initial testing began. The tests were assessed as having met the FMTV requirements in both tests. to deliver a minimum of 85 trucks by October 1992 for production qualification testing, initial operational testing, and technical manual verification. The contractor delivered its first truck in March 1993 and did not deliver 85 trucks until March 1994. As a result, the start of the production qualification and operational testing was delayed. Production qualification testing was originally scheduled to be completed in August 1993; the test was not completed until December 1994. The test was designed to determine whether the FMTV FMTV trucks until January 1996, 2 years and 3 months later than planned. The Army did not execute a low-risk acquisition strategy. Rather than a lengthy development phase, the Army decided to conduct a prototype competition and use even though the trucks were not meeting test requirements. We recommended that the Army include safeguards in follow-on production contracts so that it does not repeat errors. The Army used a streamlined acquisition strategy to reduce the time required to develop and field FMTV trucks. The reduction in time was to be achieved by combining the demonstration and validation phase and the engineering and manufacturing development phase. officials and reviewed various FMTV program documents. For early historical data, we had to rely mainly on oral testimony because many documents dealing with the early program were unavailable. To determine the impact of delays in delivering FMTV trucks, we calculated additional operating and support costs the Army might have incurred. We were able to obtain some of the earlier documents, mostly those dealing with FMTV truck testing, by reviewing our workpapers from previous reviews of the program. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. the Army decided to conduct a prototype competition and use the results as part of the evaluation of proposals for a production contract. The Army believed this strategy would be low-risk partly because the contractors participating in the prototype competition were experienced in producing military trucks. However, the Army did not include experience or affiliation with an experienced truck producer as a requirement in the production contract solicitation and subsequently awarded the FMTV multiyear production contract to a contractor that was neither experienced in truck production nor affiliated with a truck producer. enclosure providing additional contextual information for some of the issues in the report. In the enclosure, DOD stated that it believed the acquisition strategy for the FMTV program has been appropriate. According to DOD, the competitive source selection took into account a balance of factors, including the contractor’s assessed production capabilities. We did not find the combination of awarding a contract. with an aggressive production schedule to an inexperienced truck producer, who had no affiliation with an experienced truck producer. consistent with a low-risk acquisition strategy. in truck production nor affiliated with an experienced truck producer. Contract contained an aggressive production schedule that did not take into account the contractor’s inexperience. The inexperienced contractor had problems establishing a production line and producing trucks that met testing requirements. These problems resulted in substantial delays in delivering the trucks. In response to the schedule delays, the Army and contractor agreed to accelerate truck production during testing even though the trucks were not meeting test requirements. The trucks were later delivered on time and on schedule.