The Guam Integrated Military Development Plan considered both existing and former DOD land areas for potential use to accommodate realignment actions. DOD owned about 40,000 acres of land in Guam at the time of this review—approximately 29 percent of the island. Funding uncertainties, operational challenges, and community impacts may not only affect the development of the Guam master plan but also increase costs for the U.S. government. DOD’s has begun efforts to create a successful partnership and coordinate with other federal departments and agencies, the Government of Guam says. legislature had approved $228 million for planning and initial construction funds for force posture realignments, including efforts for project planning in Guam. DOD officials also expressed concern regarding the department’s ability to obtain a continuous flow of funds adequate to pay its share of the current $13 billion cost estimate for military buildup on Guam. Future DOD operations may be constrained on Guam if improvements are not made to Guam's infrastructure. Government of Japan has agreed to provide $700 million for utilities infrastructure on DOD bases in Guam, but this funding is neither intended nor is it sufficient. and officials—was initiated on March 7, 2007. According to DOD officials, the results of this environmental impact statement will influence many of the key decisions on the exact location, size, and makeup of the military infrastructure development on Guam. DOD has not established a comprehensive and routine process to keep Congress informed on its progress dealing with these issues and the overall status of implementing the military buildup on Guam, the letter says. In the absence of this information on how challenges will be addressed in the future, Congress is not in a position to help ensure the best application of limited federal funds. Base in Guam to see the installations and future military construction sites firsthand. We also reviewed DOD’s military construction budgets for fiscal years 2007 and 2008 and planned for future years to identify U.S. funding levels and sources planned for the military buildup in Guam. To identify challenges associated with the buildup in this planning effort, we met with the Governor, legislative leaders, the Chamber of Commerce, the Civil Military Task Force, the Guam Women’S Group, and the Office of the Delegate from Guam to the House of Representatives.  Guam provides strategic flexibility, freedom of action, and prompt global action for the Global War on Terrorism, peace and wartime engagement, and crisis response. About 29 percent of the land is controlled by DOD (see fig. 2), 52 percent is privately owned, and 19 percent is under the supervision of the Government of Guam. In 2003, the Senate Appropriations Committee expressed concern that the overseas basing structure had not been properly funded. The U.S. military says Guam is an integral part of DOD’s logistical support system. 14,195 in Guam, and it is expected to increase to 39,130—an increase of 176 percent (see table 1). The population could also swell further because DOD’s estimates do not include DOD civilians, contractors, or Navy transient personnel from an aircraft carrier. The extent to which the Guam local community and foreign workers can meet this increase has yet to be determined. As a result of Guam realignment. actions, the construction demands for infrastructure will exceed the realignment actions. The current population of Guam is estimated to be 171,000, and the projected future military population could increase it by more than 15 percent. The effects of the increase in military forces, in terms of population and military infrastructure, on Guam’s unique economic and infrastructure requirements have not been fully addressed.optimistic that the study, which will include environmental limitations, facility requirements, real estate requirements, and estimated costs, will result in the identification and development of new training areas. The active duty military personnel and dependent population is estimated at 14,195 in Guam. required to support the development on Guam. The increased demand for workers may require workforce training for the local population. Foreign workers would have to temporarily enter the United States on temporary nonagricultural workers visas, capped at 66,000 per year. DOD officials have already indicated that visa waivers might be needed in order to mitigate limitations on the number of visas allowed into the U.S. each year. Other challenges associated with an increase of foreign workers in Guam include providing support facilities and services, such as housing and medical care. support facilities and services, such as housing and medical care for these workers, as well as possible social tensions between the local population and foreign workers because of job competition. Public infrastructure. The effects of the increased demand on Guam’s roads, port capabilities, and utility services have not been fully addressed. DOD officials and the Guam Integrated Military Development Plan identified several infrastructure areas that are in need of improvements. The Government of Guam has estimated that it will cost about $2.6 billion to improve the local infrastructure to accommodate forecasted military and civilian growth on the island. transported on one of these major roads that runs through highly populated areas. The Government of Guam plans a number of projects to upgrade the capability and efficiency of Guam’s port facilities that total about $155 million with only $56 million funded at the time of our review. The utilities transmission lines are antiquated and the system is not reliable, and voltage and frequency fluctuations are common. The wastewater treatment facilities have a long history of failing and are near capacity. The solid waste landfills have a series of unresolved issues related to discharge of waste.  Guam is located in an area of the Pacific commonly referred to as Typhoon Alley, where on average 31 tropical storms develop annually. Also, earthquake risk in Guam is caused by the island’s proximity to the Mariana Trench, which leads to earthquakes throughout the region. Estimated costs to build infrastructure in Guam are based on damage from typhoons and seismic shocks, according to the Marine Corps. The U.S. Marine Corps estimates that additional costs will occur when constructing to Guam's typhoon and seismic standards. Guam is one of the more expensive locations for military construction in comparison with other locations in the United States and its territories. The construction costs for Guam are 2.64 times more expensive than the baseline average presented in the DOD Facilities Pricing Guide. The area cost factor is used by planners to adjust average historical facility costs to a specific project location. It takes into consideration the costs of construction material, labor, and equipment, along with factors such as the location of the facility and its location in the U.S. The environmental impact statement will examine potential effects from activities associated with Marine Corps units’ relocation. Examine the Navy’s plan to enhance the infrastructure, logistic capabilities, and pier/waterfront facilities to support transient nuclear aircraft carrier berthing at Naval Base Guam. The statement will also examine the potential effects of the waterfront improvements associated with the proposed changes to the Navy's base on the island of Guam. It is expected that the statement will be completed by the end of the year. potential effects of the waterfront improvements associated with the proposed transient berthing. Evaluate placing a ballistic missile defense task force (approximately 630 servicemembers and 950 family members) in Guam. DOD officials recognize that the results of this environmental assessment process may affect the development and timing of DOD’s plan for Guam. Under NEPA and the regulations for implementing NEPA established by the Council on Environmental Quality, an environmental impact statement must include a purpose and need statement, a need statement. A new carrier pier with additional capabilities will need to be constructed in order to accommodate this plan. Most of the aircraft from the aircraft carrier will also require temporary beddown at Andersen Air Force Base. The Army is also planning on basing a ballistic missile defense task force in Guam, though the size and mix of this task force as well as the infrastructure requirements are still being determined. Funding requirements for the military buildup on Guam are yet not fully identified and may be difficult to meet given other priorities and existing funding constraints. The Navy is planning on periodically berthing an aircraft carrier in Guam. The support facilities needed for this ship are still being determined. According to Navy officials, a new carrier pier with a heliport will be built on the island. The exact size and mix of the Army missile defense task force as well as the infrastructure requirements are still to be determined.to Guam. However, in the absence of information, it will be difficult to provide an accurate assessment of specific facility requirements to support the Guam realignment actions.  Guam is strategically located in the Pacific Ocean approximately 3,810 miles southwest of Honolulu, Hawaii. It is 1,600 miles east of Manila, the Philippines; and 1,560 miles southeast of Tokyo, Japan. Given its strategic location, Guam is an integral part of DOD’s military operations in the Asia-Pacific region. The U.S. has deployed a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier at Yokosuka Naval Base, Japan; deployment of a transportable ballistic missile defense radar system; and relocation of training activities. The failure or delay of one plan outlined in the Defense Policy Review Initiative may affect another. DOD officials expect that if the Futenma replacement facility in Okinawa is not built, the Marine Corps relocation to Guam may be delayed. The Government of Japan may encounter challenges in funding its share of the Marine corps move considering Japan’s other national priorities and its commitments associated with funding several other major realignments of U.S. forces in Japan. At the time of our review, the Japanese legislature had approved $228 million for planning and initial construction. $13 billion cost estimate includes costs to move Marine Corps forces from Okinawa to Guam. Government of Japan has agreed to contribute about $6.1 billion to develop facilities and infrastructure on Guam. Nearly half of Japan’s contribution, or $2.8 billion, is expected on Guam at current estimated levels. DOD agencies, such as the Defense Logistics Agency and Defense Education Activity, that will help support the services’ influx of personnel, missions, and equipment to Guam will likely incur additional costs. The Marine Corps is still determining the specific mix of units and capabilities needed to meet mission requirements on both Guam and Okinawa. Approximately 10,000 marines plus their dependents are expected to remain on the island of Okinawa following the realignment of forces to Guam. The Marine Corps forces remaining on Okinawa will consist of Marine Air-Ground Task Force elements, such as command, ground, aviation, and combat service support, as well as a base support capability.expected to be identified and assessed during the parallel environmental analysis and the individual service and joint planning processes. for U.S. forces by relocating units to other areas, including Guam. This initiative also includes a significant reduction and reorganization of the Marine Corps posture on Okinawa, Japan. More than 10,000 marines and their dependents will remain stationed in Okinawa after this relocation. The initiatives also include the relocation of Carrier Air Wing Five from Atsugi Naval Air Facility to Iwakuni Marine Corps Air Station, Japan, and the replacement of the U.s. Marine Corps Futenma Air Station. of construction material, labor, and equipment, along with factors such as weather, climate, seismic conditions, mobilization, overhead and profit, labor availability, and labor productivity for each area. Marine Corps officials expect there will be additional facility repair costs periodically as a result of damage from typhoons and seismic shocks. Several operational challenges, such as providing appropriate mobility support and training capabilities, have not been fully addressed. For example, according to Marine Corps Forces, Pacific, officials, the Marine Corps in Guam will depend on strategic military sealift and airlift to reach destinations in Asia. The Marine Corps depends on strategic lift for its operational and training- related movement needs, including transportation of forces and equipment. For example, in a contingency operation that requires sealift, the ships may have to deploy from Sasebo, Japan, or another location to transport soldiers and equipment in Guam and then return to the area of responsibility where the contingency is taking place. According to Marine Corps officials, amphibious shipping capability and airlift capacity are key to the Corps' ability to move forces.  amphibious shipping capability and airlift capacity are needed in Guam. Existing training facilities and ranges on Guam are not sufficient to meet the training requirements of the projected Marine Corps force. The Marine Corps estimated additional costs for strategic lift operating from Guam to be nearly $88 million annually. A DOD analysis of training opportunities in Guam concluded that no ranges are suitable for the needs of the projecting Marine Corps. force because of inadequacy in size or lack of lack of training facilities on the island. It may include expanding staging facilities and systems support for both sealift and air Lift. Within DOD, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics was tasked to prepare the detailed, comprehensive master plans. PACOM coordinates East Asia and South Asia; EUCOM coordinates much of sub- Saharan Africa and Europe, as well as the Indian Ocean islands off the coast of southeast Africa. CENTCOM coordinates efforts in the Middle East, the Horn of Africa, and Central Asia. Not shown are Northern Command, not shown are Southern Command, and not shown is Northern Command. U.S. Africa Command eventually will encompass the entire continent of Africa except for Egypt, which will continue to fall. There are 13 cooperative security locations throughout Africa that historically have been identified in the EUCOM master plan. The new U.S.-led Africa Command will be based in Washington, D.C., and will be headquartered in Africa Command's new headquarters in Africa City, Nairobi. The command is expected to be operational by the end of the first quarter of 2015. Not shown are Northern Command, which coordinates activities in North America, and Southern Command. Northern and Southern Commands have significantly fewer facilities outside of the United States than the other regional commands in the Pacific, Europe, and Central Asia. There are also four functional unified combatant commands that are assigned worldwide functional responsibilities not bounded by geography. Special Operations Command, Strategic Command, Joint Forces Command, and Transportation Command are included in this list. The U.S. Central Command is based in Washington, D.C. In addition, we did not include Southern and Northern Commands in our analysis because these commands have significantly fewer facilities overseas than the other regional commands. We conducted our review from September 2006 through July 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. In addition to the contact named above, Nelsie Alcoser, Kate Lenane, Erika Prochaska, Roger Tomlinson; and Cheryl Weissman made major contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Last year, EUCOM’s master plan did not explain the potential effect of implementing base realignment and closure recommendations on the movement of troops from Germany to bases in the U.S. This year, PACOM discussed this topic as well as the progress of bilateral negotiations with Japan and challenges associated with this realignment. EUCOM and Army officials told us that any delay in the implementation of baserealignment andclosure recommendations would cause them to delay movement of Army servicemembers and their families. CENTCOM recognized that current U.S. basing may not adequately support either strategic changes in an expanding North Atlantic Treaty Organization Alliance or the requirements of a rapidly changing area of responsibility. EUCOM also explained that its transformation execution depends on host nation negotiations, political-military considerations, base realignment and closure, and fiscal limitations. CENTCOM’s master plan discussed efforts to solicit host nation contributions and the amount of coordination and support that is needed from DOD, the State Department, and Congress. paid by the Japanese government. EUCOM provided information on North Atlantic Treaty Organization contributions and discussed a burden-sharing arrangement with the Government of Norway. CENTCOM also provided host nation estimates and explained that its efforts to attain host nation funding were ongoing. This year, all of the commands described the effects of other defense activities on implementation of their master plans. Last year, only PACOM’s plan gave some indication of how its implementation could be affected by another activity—the potential decrease in traditional Japanese construction funding that would help Japan offset its Defense Policy Review. master plan stated that the United States signed individual agreements with the governments of Romania and of Bulgaria in 2005 and 2006. EUCOM also provided additional details, such as the mission, planned capabilities, equipment and aircraft, and population. Furthermore, EUCOM provided a status of ongoing transformation realignments in its area of responsibility, including listing the return of facilities to host nations and changes to its basing categories. The master plans also described recent efforts to proceed with formal negotiations with the Governments of Poland. government has received approximately $592 million since 1989 in residual value and payment-in-kind compensation from property returns in EUCOM’s area of responsibility. EUCOM continues to aggressively seek compensation for U.S. capital improvements at installations returned to host nations. As EUCOM continue to return facilities in Germany, Italy, and Iceland, this figure may increase. Accordingly, we continue to believe that residual value should be addressed in the master plans. The master plan did not describe the challenges the command faces in addressing training limitations for the Seventh Air Force in South. The plan discussed the challenge of ongoing operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. CENTCOM’s plan identified how future basing and infrastructure will be defined by ongoing contingencies and global defense posture. The plan also reflected land return actions in Kuwait and Uzbekistan and changes to base category designations, such as consolidation of a cooperative security location into a forward operating site, both of which support surge capability for ground force support. All of the commands addressed the extent of their environmental challenges in this year's overseas master plans. of Africa except for Egypt, which will continue to fall under CENTCOM’s area of responsibility. Discussions are ongoing on the possible headquarters location and what kinds of military forces would be assigned to the command. This year, the changes identified in the plans provided useful information on evolving costs and facility requirements in overseas basing. In addition, the commands continue to focus first on the mission and then on the infrastructure requirements needed to support the mission. For example, in CENTCOM's master plan, the descriptions of each forward operating site focus on mission, then on requirements. forces from Seoul and other locations. Last year, CENTCOM did not report any environmental issues. This year, EUCOM identified areas for cleanup, groundwater investigation, and monitoring. CENTCOM’s master plan identified funding requirements for a wastewater treatment plant and a water treatment and distribution system at Bagram Airfield, Afghanistan, in hopes of avoiding potential environmental problems. The extent to which there were no environmental issues last year in the command's area of responsibility has not been determined. The amount of contamination at one site did not present an unacceptable risk to human health or the mission. such as precise facility requirements and costs, time frames for an end state, base categories, host nation funding levels, and effects of other defense activities. For example, CENTCOM provided information on supplemental appropriations for facilities and projects at Bagram Airfield, Afghanistan. This year, all of the commands categorized their installations into applicable base categories of main operating categories. All of the regional commands identified their precise facility requirement and costs for fiscal year 2008 and for fiscal years 2009 through 2013, and reported estimated facility sustainment costs. focus first on the mission and then on requirements by providing the type of mission the site has, the unit that it could host, and its role in the region. All of the commands provide similar information for their main operating bases, forward operating sites, and cooperative security locations. Even with the department’s effort to update the plans, there are still some areas that need to be addressed, such as the need to strengthen capabilities for rapid and flexible response in the central Asian states, the report says. categorized their installations into applicable base categories of main operating base, forward operating site, and cooperative security location. The commands also supplemented the information on base categories with detailed data on the installations’ capabilities, overall mission, population, and types of equipment and facilities located at each site. For example, CENTCOM and EUCOM also identified adjustments to the base categories, such as redesignating a main operating Base as a forward operating Site or consolidating two cooperative security locations into one.EUCOM also provided specific details on the capabilities of each base. security locations into one. EUCOM also provided specific details on sites no longer considered cooperative security locations in Bulgaria, Romania, and Poland. Sites with no operational importance and a commercial facility readily available for military use that did not require U.S. investment or presence. End state date. This year, all of the commands identified a common strategic end state date of 2013, which identifies the last fiscal year of the construction time frame. It provides users a more complete and clearer basis for tracking progress in meeting the command infrastructure objectives. The PACOM master plan did not point out that the Seventh Air Force in South Korea may be unable to maintain combat capability in the long term. For decades, the Government of South Korea has attempted to relocate Force’s air-to-surface training requirements. As a result, the Air Force has been using ranges in Japan and Alaska to meet its training requirements, which results in additional transportation costs to the U.S. government. In May 2007, officials said that some progress had been made in addressing Air Force”s training challenges. The Koon-Ni range had served as the primary air-to-ground range for the Seventh Air Force. The Government of South Korea closed the range in August 2005. There is an agreement with the Government ofSouth Korea to train at other ranges, according to senior Air Force and USFK officials. But the other ranges do not provide electronic scoring capabilities necessary to meet the Air Force’s training requirements, officials say. The U.S. Air Force says there is difficultly in scheduling. Department agrees validated training requirements that are affected by force posture transformation plans should be addressed in overseas master plans. Nonprogrammed and nonvalidated training limitations experienced by service components were not appropriate for inclusion in the overseas commands’ risk assessment. U.S. Forces Japan provided information on training limitations in its area of responsibility, while the Pentagon did not respond to a request for comment on the issue. The Pentagon said it is not aware of any nonprogrammed or non validate training limitations. and the effects of airspace access restrictions in Japan on C-130 training. In addition, noise and land use sensitivities and maneuver area limitations in Okinawa require U.S. forces to deploy to other Pacific Rim locations to supplement their training, which results in additional transportation requirements and costs. The plan also discussed efforts by U.s. Forces Japan and the Government of Japan to engage in bilateral discussions to address training shortfalls and explore solutions. We have previously recommended that overseas regional commands address residual value issues and that PACOM explain how it plans to address existing training. Corps force, because of inadequacy in size or lack of availability. The services are in the process of conducting a training study that includes Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific, officials stated that live fire artillery training, amphibious landings, and tracked vehicle operations will be challenging. Still, they are optimistic that the study, which will include environmental limitations, facility, facility and other factors, will be successful. The study is expected to be completed by the end of the year. Japan anticipates the Government of Japan will continue to decrease these funds on the basis that in addition to this program and other forms of host nation support (i.e., utilities and Japanese labor force) Potential Government of Japanese financial constraints may result in U.S. facilities in Japan requiring more financial support. In addition, USFK provided details on current realignment efforts, including the Government. of South Korea’s approval of the Land Partnership Plan and Yongsan Relocation. Plan.  PACOM did not identify specific host nation funding from the Defense Policy Review Initiative. The Government of Japan has not made an official, public estimate of the costs for several major realignments within Japan. EUCOM provided information on North Korea, including the Land Partnership Plan and the Yongsan Relocation Plan. The command did identify the need for U.S. military construction funds to support realignment costs not paid by the Japanese government. It did not provide specific funding for the Guam relocation.  PACOM’s master plan updated information on the results of the Defense Policy Review Initiative. U.S. Forces Japan anticipates the Government of Japan will continue to decrease funds for the Japanese facilities improvement program. The replacement of the Marine Corps Air Station Futenma in hopes that it will lessen the effect of military aviation operations on the local citizens of Japan. For example, this year: PACOM.may increase or decrease U.s.-funded costs for future infrastructure changes. In addition, PACOM identified decreasing funds for. the Japanese Facilities improvement program, historically the source of major construction on U.N. bases in Japan. Nearly half of Japan’s contribution, or $2.8 billion, is expected to be direct contributions. The remaining $3.3 billion will consist of investment incentives for family housing and on-base infrastructure, such as utilities, which over time could be recouped by Japan in the form of rent or service charges. For example, the Government of Japan will finance construction of family housing units in Guam, but these construction costs will be reimbursed by payments from the servicemembers’ housing allowance. In September 2001, DOD issued its Quadrennial Defense Review Report, which addressed, among other issues, reorienting the U.S. military global posture. The report called for developing a permanent basing system that provides greater flexibility for U.s. forces in critical areas of the world. It also called for providing temporary access to facilities in foreign countries that enable U.N. forces to train and operate in the absence of a permanent base. The Pentagon has been reexamining overseas basing requirements to allow for greater military flexibility. enable U.S. forces to train and operate in the absence of permanent ranges and bases. The integrated global presence and basing strategy is the culmination of various DOD studies, including the overseas basing and requirements study. The initiative is intended to close bases no longer needed to meet Cold War threats, as well as bring home many U.s. forces while stationing more flexible, deployable capabilities in strategic locations around the world. In August 2004, President Bush announced what has been described as the most comprehensive restructuring of military forces overseas since the end of the Korean War. studies, including the overseas basing and requirements study, the overseas presence study, and the U.S. global posture study. In 2004 the United States and Japan began a series of sustained security consultations aimed at strengthening the U-S.-Japan security alliance. DOD’s Defense Policy Review Initiative established a framework for the future of U.s. force structure in Japan designed to create the conditions to reduce the burden on local Japanese communities and create a continuing presence for U.N. forces. PACOM’s plan did not address training limitations in South Korea and Japan. OSD recognized that further changes will result as it continues to implement the global defense plans. This year”s master plans incorporated key changes associated with the continuing evolution of U.S. overseas basing strategies and requirements. There is not a requirement for them to do so. However without such explanations and linkage, it was difficult to determine the extent to which the master plans were coordinated and synchronized with other defense plans and activities. will result as it continues to implement the global defense posture decisions. PACOM’s master plan discussed the progress of dynamic realignment initiatives, which will relocate military personnel and facilities in South Korea and Japan. For example, DOD’S efforts to establish missile defense in Eastern Europe, and the creation of U.S. Africa Command were discussed. The department reported that as the overseas political and military environment and strategic landscape further evolve,global defense posture plans will continue to mature to address new priorities. DOD forecasted changes for next year’s master plans involving the development of a new command responsible for Africa. PACOM is expected to be established by September 30, 2008. U.S. involvement in Africa is shared among three combatant commands. The President announced in February 2007 that the U.s. military will establish a new, separate Africa Command to enhance security cooperation, extend humanitarian assistance, and build partnership capacity on the African continent. At the time of our review, U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon was still chairman of PACOM. approval of the Land Partnership Plan and Yongsan Relocation Plan and efforts to coordinate the transfer of U.S.-vacated bases. The plans also discussed USFK’s efforts to work with South Korea to complete the transition of wartime operational control from the United States to South Korea in the future. EUCOM's master plan identified specific information on efforts to close or return installations, such as Naval Air Station Keflavik, Iceland; Naval Support Activity La Maddalena, Italy; selected sites in Germany, Belgium, and Turkey. In 2005, none of the commands identified environmental remediation and restoration issues. This year, PACOM provided information on remediation actions taken by USFK before returning installations to South Korea. Last year, USFK also discussed its efforts to coordinate with the Government of South Korea on remediated U.S. bases. Officials expect these efforts will accelerate the return of vacated facilities and areas and the relocation of U.s. forces from Seoul and other locations. In 2005, no issues were identified; this year, EUCOM identified issues. personnel and facilities in South Korea and Japan. In addition, PACOM described the importance of relocating 8,000 marines and their dependents from Okinawa to Guam. The U.S. and Japanese governments had established an interim agreement in October 2005 involving the realignment of U.s. forces in Japan. This year PACOM updated this information by indicating that final implementation documents were approved in May 2006. It is important to retain a forward Marine Corps command and control capability to ensure a balanced, flexible contingency response capacity within the Asia-Pacific region. contingency response capacity within the Asia-Pacific region. With respect to South Korea, PACOM provided information updating the status of the Land Partnership Plan and the Yongsan Relocation Plan. As a part of DOD’s efforts to establish a U.S. presence in Eastern Europe through a network of forward operating sites and cooperative security locations, EUCOM’S master plan stated that the United States signed individual agreements with the European Union in 2006. The United States also signed individual agreement with the Czech Republic in 2007. We met with officials from OSD and each of the following commands and agencies: U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM), U. s. Army Pacific, U.s. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific. We also met with the commander of Naval Forces Korea and the head of Naval Facilities Engineering Command-Pacific, Japan. We were also briefed on the status of Forces Korea, the Status of Forces Agreement Office, and other issues affecting the military in the region. For more information on OSD, go to: www.osd.org. that PACOM explain how it plans to address existing training limitations in our prior reports. We believe that identifying these issues would make Congress aware of potential challenges to obtaining residual value and to training U.S. forces in South Korea. Even though our prior recommendations have not been fully addressed, we continue to believe that they have merit and that Congress would benefit from disclosure of this information. In July 2006, the Senate report accompanying the fiscal year 2007 military construction appropriation bill directed DOD to provide a master plan on the military buildup in Guam. U.S. Forces Japan provided information on training limitations, while USFK omitted this information from the overseas master plan. This inconsistency led to our recommendation that Congress require such reporting, and we continue to believe that this information is necessary to provide a complete picture of the potential effects on infrastructure and funding requirements in South Korea. In commenting on our matter for congressional consideration that the Secretary of Defense report periodically to all the defense committees on the status of DOD’s planning efforts for Guam, the Deputy under secretary of Defense responded that the Guam master plan is scheduled. the status of DOD’s planning efforts for Guam. identify the exact size and makeup of the forces to be moved to Guam and the associated infrastructure required. address the various challenges associated with the military buildup. In comments on a draft of this report, the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Installations and Environment responded that congressional action is not necessary. We are sending copies to the Secretaries of Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force; the Commandant of the Marine Corps; and the Director, Office of Management and Budget. Copies will be made available to others upon request. GAO is not recommending executive action. Congress should consider requiring the Secretary of Defense to ensure that future overseas master plans address the extent to which the regional commands are seeking residual value compensation for U.S. capital improvements at installations returned to host nations. Future PACOM plans should address existing training limitations in its area of responsibility and the potential effects of those limitations on infrastructure and funding requirements, GAO says. To help ensure the best application of limited federal funds and the leveraging of all available options for supporting the military buildup on Guam until DOD prepares a master plan, Congress should require DOD to report periodically to all the defense committees. Guam Integrated Military Development Plan provides information on projected military population, units, and infrastructure that may be needed for the Guam realignments. Additional time is needed for DOD to address several challenges before JGPO can develop a Guam master plan. The exact size and makeup of the forces to move to Guam and the housing, operational, quality of life, and services support infrastructure required are not yet fully known and are expected to be identified and assessed during the parallel environmental a master plan on the military buildup in Guam. Senate report directed DOD to submit Guam master plan by December 2006. Master plan cannot be completed until environmental impact statement is completed. Congress may not see the master plan for another 2 years. GAO will review DOD’s master planning effort for Guam as part of its annual review of DOD”s overseas master plans. The Guam masterPlan is scheduled to be completed in 2008, at which time a copy will be provided to congressional defense committees. It should be noted that DOD did not submit the plan for several reasons that we discuss in this report. may not see the master plan for another 2 years at least. DOD faces a variety of funding challenges, operational challenges, and community impacts that may both affect the development and timing of the Guam master plan and increase costs for the U.S. government. Congress could be enhanced by periodically receiving an update on the planning efforts in Guam, the authors say. The authors did not evaluate concerns raised by the officials, but they reviewed relevant federal laws and discussed them with DOD officials. They also analyzed available reports, documents, international agreements, and media articles to keep abreast of ongoing activities in Guam. The Senate Appropriations Committee noted the ambitiousness of the military construction program and the need for a well-developed master plan. In July 2006, the committee recommended deferral of two military construction projects at Andersen Air Force Base that were included in the President’s budget request until such time as they can be incorporated into a master plan for Guam. The committee also asked the military to provide the congressional defense committees with a report each year giving an assessment of the plans for the U.S. military presence on Guam. issues; population levels; and facility requirements and funding levels for Hawaii, Guam, U.S. territories, and other insular areas in the Pacific. Congress and other users did not have the best data available to facilitate their annual review and oversight. In 2004, before DOD issued its initial overseas master plans, Congress had no detailed information on individual construction projects and the anticipated strategic end state of the command’s overseas basing infrastructure. Congress also had no consistent data on which to track progress and changes from year to year and between commands. In August 2006, OSD directed the Navy to establish JGPO to facilitate, manage, and execute requirements associated with the rebasing of Marine Corps assets from Okinawa to Guam. Initial implementation details for the movement of U.S. Marines to Guam and associated military construction projects took place under the leadership of PACOM.and Transportation Command. The office’s responsibilities include integration of operational support requirements, development, program, and budget synchronization; oversight of the construction; and coordination of government and business activities. coordinated planning efforts among the DOD components and other stakeholders to consolidate, optimize, and integrate the existing DOD infrastructure capabilities on Guam. The office is expected to work closely with the Government of Japan and the local Guam government, other federal agencies, and Congress in order to manage this comprehensive effort and to develop a master plan. JGPO falls under the direct oversight of the Department of the Interior, which had formed a federal interagency task force to address issues relating to commerce, transportation, environment, and other areas. and other areas. In 2006, we reported that the master plans did not always explain how their implementation could be affected by other relevant and related defense plans and activities. In our prior work, we found that while DOD’s master plans generally exceeded the reporting requirements established by Congress, opportunities existed for the plans to provide more complete, clear, and consistent information and to present a more definitive picture of future requirements. JGPO falls under the direct oversight of the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Installations and Environment. basing strategies and requirements. To see firsthand the condition of facilities and status of selected construction projects, we visited and toured facilities at Camp Schwab, Camp Kinser, Camp Foster, Torii Station, Camp Zama, Yokosuka Naval Base, and Yokota Air Base, Japan. We visited Naval Base Guam and Andersen Air Force Base in Guam to see the installations and future military installations. We also met with officials from U.S. Pacific Fleet; U.s. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific; and Pacific Air Forces. established a comprehensive and routine process to keep Congress informed on its progress in dealing with these issues. In July 2006, PACOM issued its Guam development plan—a notional document describing the future development of the military services. While the Guam Integrated Military Development Plan provides the best available information on the projected military population, units, and infrastructure that may be needed for future Guam realignments, DOD officials told us that their planning effort was still in its initial phases with many key decisions and challenges yet to be addressed. notional document describing the future development of the military services on Guam over the next decade and beyond. The plan is based upon a notional force structure that was used to generate land and facility requirements for basing, operations, logistics, training, and quality of life involving the Marine Corps, Army, Air Force, Navy, and Special Operations Forces. DOD officials told us that the plan was not a master plan because it did not include specific information on facility requirements, associated costs, and a timeline for specific actions. Marine Corps officials are assessing the type, size, and number of units that will relocate to Guam. This determination will define the training and facility requirements, such as barracks, family housing, schools, and other infrastructure. A JGPO official said that the office was initiating a master plan that will reflect the building of flexible infrastructure that could accommodate any type of military units that may relocate. However, in the absence of information on the type of units, the master plan is not complete. impact statement. The results of the environmental statement could take up 3 years to complete. The Navy issued a public notice of intent to prepare an environmental impact statement on March 7, 2007. Examine the potential location, size, and makeup of the military infrastructure development. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. impact statement must include a purpose and need statement, a description of all reasonable project alternatives and their associated environmental impacts. Further, accurate scientific analysis, expert agency comments, and public scrutiny are essential to implementing NEPA. For example, federal agencies such as DOD are required to ensure the professional integrity, including scientific integrity, of the discussions and analyses in the environmental impact statement. It is also essential to ensure that the environmental impacts of the proposed action and each alternative are accurate and balanced. It also is essential to protect the environment of the area to be affected. Federal agencies such as DOD are required to obtain the comments of any federal agency that has jurisdiction by law or certain special expertise. Until an agency issues a final environmental impact statement and record of decision, it generally may not take any action concerning the proposal that would either have an adverse environmental impact or limit the project's ability to do its job. The agency is also required to seek comments from appropriate state and local agencies, Native American tribes, and any agency that requested that it receive such statements. In 2005, we reported that without more complete, clear, and consistent reporting, Congress lacked the complete picture it needed to evaluate the annual military construction funding request. This year, the plans provided a much more comprehensive description of challenges and the potential effects on implementation. All of the regional commands describe to varying degrees the status of recent negotiations and agreements with host nations in their fiscal year 2008 master plans. In our review, we explained how these challenges could have an effect on infrastructure and funding requirements. In 2005, we found that none of the commands fully explained the status of or challenges to finalizing host nation agreements. These agreements depend largely on the political environment and economic conditions in host nations. They can affect the extent of host nation support—access to facilities or funding—to U.S. forces. The resulting agreements may increase or decrease U.s.-funded costs for future infrastructure changes. In their fiscal year 2008 master plans, the commands briefly explain the status. of negotiations with host nations to provide more complete and clearer plans.  PACOM identified host nation funding for its bilateral agreements in South Korea. Host nation funding levels were reported at the project level and aggregate level for fiscal years 2009 through 2013. This provided users a better basis to determine the extent to which U.S. funding is needed for facility requirements. For more information on PACOM, visit: www.pcmom.org/pacom- infrastructure-improvement-report. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Master plans do not address the issue of residual value. U.S. government has received approximately $592 million since 1989 in residual. DOD officials believe that residual value cannot be readily predicted and therefore should not be assumed in the master plans. However, since these issues vary by host nation and may not be clear to all users of the plans, we continue to believe that OSD should require commands, at a minimum, to explain the issues with obtaining residual value in each host nation.. which commands are seeking residual value compensation. DOD already provides status reports on its residual value negotiations to the Committees on Appropriations and Armed Services, the report says. "These reports do not provide users of the master plans the kind of information needed to address their concerns about the status of residualvalue negotiations," the report adds. "Our recommendation is to require DOD to provide more information to the master plan users about the implications for U.S. funding," it adds. The report also recommends that DOD provide more details about the negotiations with foreign military installations. value negotiations or the implications for U.S. funding. We continue to believe that the Secretary of Defense should require commands to explain the issues with obtaining residual value from each host nation. In commenting on our matter for congressional consideration that future PACOM plans address training limitations in its area of responsibility, the Deputy Chief of Staff of the Defense Staff said, "We believe that this is the right thing to do" He added, "Our recommendation to Congress is grounded in the fact that residual value issues vary by host nation and the implications of U.N. funding also vary accordingly" Committee expressed concern that the overseas basing structure had not been updated to reflect the new realities of the post-Cold War world. Committee has also expressed concern about the use of military construction budget authority for projects at bases that may soon be obsolete because of changes being considered in overseas presence and basing. In Senate Report 108-82, the Senate Appropriations Committee directed DOD to prepare detailed, comprehensive master plans for the changing infrastructure requirements for U.S. military facilities in each of its overseas regional commands. military construction appropriation bill also directed the department to prepare comprehensive master plans with yearly updates through fiscal year 2009. The first report was due with the fiscal year 2005 military construction budget submission and is to be updated each succeeding year to reflect changes to the plans. The Senate report also directed GAO to monitor the comprehensive master plan being developed and implemented for the overseas regional commands and to provide the congressional defense committees with the results of such monitoring. The bill was passed by the Senate on a vote of 50-0. The military construction appropriation request for fiscal year 2008 included approximately $21.3 billion for military construction and family housing. As of fiscal year 2006, DOD had 3,731 installations, with 766 installations located overseas. In recent years, DOD has been undergoing a transformation to develop a defense strategy and force structure capable of meeting changing global threats. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. hopes of avoiding potential environmental problems. The extent to which the commands provide information involving environmental activities provides the users of the plans with the ability to compare and comprehend how costs have varied and how these costs may affect planned U.S. funding levels. The fiscal year 2008 overseas master plans have been updated to reflect our prior recommendations for improving the plans, though they do not address the issue of residual value as we recommended in 2004. To improve the overseasMaster plans and address our recommendations from last year, OSD provided additional guidance on October 12, 2006. year, OSD provided additional guidance on October 12, 2006, to the regional commands in preparing this year’s plans. As a result, the fiscal year 2008 master plans identify how implementation of the plans could be affected by other relevant and related defense plans and activities. For example, PACOM’S force structure plans are linked to the military buildup on Guam. CENTCOM's increased troop strength and facilities in Iraq and Afghanistan is linked to ongoing operations. In addition, the commands generally provided more detailed information on a variety of key areas, such as precise facility requirements and costs. The evolution of U.S. overseas defense basing strategies and requirements continues. The changes occurring after this year’s plans were submitted to Congress will have to be reflected in next year's plans. In order to identify improvements to the overseas master plan, we compared and contrasted the fiscal year 2007 and 2008 plans. We assessed the quantity and quality of one plan's responses for each of the data elements, including details on base categories, host nation funding levels, facility requirements and costs. regional commands’ area of responsibility, reflect changes. The plans generally incorporate key changes associated with the continuing evolution of U.S. overseas basing strategies. This year’s plans provide information to respond to most of our prior recommendations. But they do not address residual value—that is, the value that the plans still hold for the U.N. military and the world at large. The U.K. and Australia are among the countries that have adopted the plans. In 2004, before DOD issued its initial overseas master plans, we reported that various factors, such as residual property value, environmental remediation, could affect the funding of U.S. infrastructure overseas. At that time, we recommended that the overseas regional commands address these and other factors in the development of their plans. The fiscal year 2008 master plans provide infrastructure requirements at military facilities in each of the Overseas Regional Commands’ area of responsibility. They reflect changes—to include recent decisions. European Command, U.S. Army Europe, and Special Operations Command. In general, we discussed the reporting requirements contained in OSD’s guidance, host nation agreements and funding levels. We also analyzed available reports, documents, policies, directives, international agreements, guidance, and media articles to keep abreast of ongoing changes in overseas defense basing strategies and requirements. To see firsthand the condition of the bases, go to www.cnn.com/cnndefense. facility requirements and costs, environmental remediation issues, and other issues affecting the implementation of the plans. We compared them to equivalent responses in other plans; formed conclusions as to the completeness, clarity, and consistency of the latest plan’s responses. We also discussed with DOD officials our observations and recommendations, specific reporting requirements, and whether improvements in the guidance and reporting were needed. We interviewed cognizant officials from DOD about the various changes and challenges that were identified within the Plans. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-4523. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. The GAO staff members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. to determine the extent to which the fiscal year 2008 overseas master plans have changed since last year.