The TAG program established by the FDIC expired on December 31, 2010. It was replaced by the TAG program as established by Section 343 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The "TAG program" refers to two similar but distinct programs. Though both TAG programs provided unlimited deposit insurance to NIBTAs, they also differ in several ways.. The TAG program created by theFDIC was a voluntary program in which eligible financial institutions were automatically registered to participate unless they opted out. The Dodd- Frank Act, however, made all FDIC-insured banks part of TAG.  FDIC established TAG in 2008. Changes to FDIC's authority made by Dodd-Frank Act may prevent the FDIC from having the option of extending TAG. An extension of TAG, therefore, may require congressional action. On November 26, 2012, Senator Harry Reid introduced S. 3637 , a bill to temporarily extend the TAG program for two years. NIBTAs constitute one of several cash management tools used by businesses, non-profits, governments, and other entities. They provide depositors with easy access to their money.  section 1105 of Dodd-Frank provides the FDIC with authority to institute a widely available program of emergency assistance. The authority appears to be limited to guaranteeing debt obligations rather than expanding deposit insurance coverage. Though the authority is limited to situations involving a liquidity crisis, it could be used in the event of a major financial crisis in the U.S. It requires a detailed determination by the FD IC and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed Board) that a liquidity event exists and that failure to take action would have serious adverse effects. program developed in response to the financial crisis. Some deposits may migrate to the largest institutions due to a perception of their implicit guarantee. Dodd-Frank Act created a special resolution regime administered by the FDIC for failing firms that pose a threat to financial stability. Some market participants may have changed their views on the value of the program since the end of 2010, according to the report. The report was based on interviews with more than 1,000 people in the U.S. and around the world. In September 2008, ongoing financial turmoil escalated into a financial panic. Large financial institutions, such as Lehman Brothers and AIG, were failing. The federal government responded with a series of lending and guarantee programs to mitigate the economic damage. Among the many policy responses, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) established the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program (TLGP) on October 14, 2008, to strengthen confidence and to encourage liquidity in the banking system. The TLGP had two parts: a debt guarantee program and a lending program. Since the financial crisis peaked in 2008, non-financial businesses have increased their holdings of checkable deposits and decreased their holding of money market funds. If one of the reasons that money flowed to deposits was the presence of TAG, it is possible that the expiration of TAG could lead to a partial reversal. Money market funds are currently earning historically low returns, lowering the opportunity to invest in them. However, one of their often cited benefits is that they have traditionally earned a higher yield than bank deposits. Funds are currently earning historically low returns, lowering the opportunity cost of holding noninterest-bearing deposits. There is also uncertainty surrounding the future regulation of money market funds. It is unclear if the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) will impose additional regulation. Although deposits could flow to money market Funds if TAG expires, it is unclear whether the SEC will impose new regulations on the funds. The Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), a council of financial regulators that is charged with monitoring systemic risk in the financial system, has identified structural vulnerabilities in funds. Money market funds are mutual funds that invest in money market securities. Money market securities are short-term financial instruments with relatively high liquidities and short maturities of between several days and about a year. Examples of money market Securities include negotiable certificates of deposit (CDs), bankers' acceptances, U.S. Treasury bills, commercial paper, debt issued by municipalities, and repurchase agreements (repos) Money market funds, therefore, act as intermediaries between shareholders who demand liquid investments and borrowers who desire short- term funding. Moneymarket funds attempt to keep a stable net asset value (NAV) on their shares. A stable NAV gives shareholders the impression of a high degree of safety similar to deposits but offering a higher return. If a money market fund falls below a $1.00 NAV, then the fund is said to "break the buck," and part of the fund's shareholders' invested principal is in jeopardy. Breaking the buck is a rare occurrence, though it happened in September 2008. In response, many withdrew their money from money market funds and deposited it in banks, as seen in Figure 5. table 1 shows statistics on TAG accounts by bank size. The largest banks have more accounts per institution and higher average account balances than smaller banks. Approximately 75% of TAG funds are in the 19 banks with more than $100 billion in assets. Those 19 banks account for 61% of total assets in the insured banking system. The expiration of TAG may increase the number of banks that would be allowed to fail if it were to be removed from the system. But even with TAG in place, the largest banks hold a disproportionately large share of TAG accounts. of TAG accounts. The expiration of TAG may increase the concentration of deposits in the largest banks. A potential indicator of the different views of large and small banks about the usefulness of TAG is the percentage of each group that opted out of the FDIC's TAG program when given the option. When the FD IC version of TAG expired on December 31, 2010, 31% of banks with assets over $10 billion were still participating in TAG, according to a study by the American Bankers Association. with assets over $10 billion were still participating in TAG. 75% of banks with less than $10billion in assets were in the program. The higher participation rate by smaller banks may signal that they believed they needed the program to attract funds, whereas the larger banks were less likely to view it as necessary. Others may argue that decisions to participate in TAG may not have been driven by the actual usefulness of the program as much as by a possible stigma associated with participating in a program developed in response to the financial crisis. The FDIC estimates that, for the 108 banks that failed in 2011 and the first quarter of 2012, TAG deposits amounted to 3 percent of deposits on average. Allocating DIF losses between these deposits and other deposits would result in an estimated TAG cost over these five quarters of about $270 million. The DIF may have to borrow from the Treasury to protect depositors, putting taxpayers at risk, according to the report. The number of bank failures has fallen from its peak in 2008, the report says. The number of bank failures has fallen from its peak in 2010. The number of institutions on the FDIC's "problem list," which is one potential indicator of the number of banks that are at risk of failing in the future, is still elevated. Most of the bank failures since January 2011 have been smaller banks which, as mentioned previously, had relatively few TAG deposits. If either of the two factors is different, then estimates of future losses based on the past losses of TAG to the banks could be different. Some have raised concerns about what effect an extension of TAG would have on the FDIC's Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF) For a risk-based insurance system to function effectively, the entity setting the insurance premium must accurately forecast future risk or be able to recoup losses ex post. If a member institution fails, the proceeds in the DIF are used to prevent insured depositors from losing any of their insured deposits. The uncertainty about future regulation and the low yields makes it unclear how much would leave TAG accounts. losses based on the past losses of TAG to the DIF would be inaccurate. An additional potential cost of extending TAG would be the moral hazard associated with deposit insurance. In the context of deposit insurance, moral hazard can be dangerous. The counterfactual cannot be known with certainty, making it difficult to estimate the costs and benefits of extend TAG. It may be that extending TAG maintains confidence in the banking system and prevents future bank failures that would have required drawing on the D IF. It is possible that TAG could be extended beyond the current deadline. If TAG expires, depositors may choose to leave their deposits as uninsured deposits at their existing banks. NIBTAs have grown by approximately $1 trillion from $1.3 trillion in the third quarter of 2008. Changes in economic and financial conditions since TAG was introduced may make NIBtAs an appealing choice. The expiration of unlimited insurance may increase the risk of NibTAs. But even without TAG, the high degree of liquidity offered by NIB tas may incentivize some borrowers to keep their money as uninsured.  TLGP had two parts: a Debt Guarantee Program (DGP) and a Transaction Account Guarantee (TAG) program. TAG program currently provides unlimited deposit insurance for $1.4 trillion in noninterest-bearing transaction accounts. NIBTAs are accounts that do not pay interest and allow the depositor to make withdrawals without giving advanced notice to the bank. The DGP is no longer guaranteeing new debt, but TAG continues to apply to new deposit balances. The TAG program is available to any depositor whose account meets the eligibility criteria.  Deposit insurance can potentially create moral hazard by neutralizing market mechanisms that penalize the banking system for taking on additional risk. The reduced market discipline caused by deposit insurance could incentivize banks to issue loans that do not accurately price the underlying risk. moral hazard could impair the quality of credit intermediation decisions in the economy. Regulators are supposed to prevent banks from acting in a way that could put insured deposits at risk.. Extending deposit insurance is a good way to reduce moral hazard in the banking industry. The St. Louis Federal Reserve Financial Stress Index provides one measure of financial stress. According to this index, financial stress in 2012 is elevated compared with the lows of 2006 and 2007. Extending deposit insurance to some uninsured accounts through TAG may have strengthened the banking system by discouraging some borrowers from withdrawing their deposits during the height of the financial stress, according to the study. The study also looked at the moral hazard created by deposit insurance and the role of the FDIC in protecting depositors from losses. transactions, but any depositor whose account meets the eligibility criteria receives unlimited deposit insurance coverage. In spite of a loss of confidence in other parts of the financial system, the insured banking sector saw few bank runs during the financial panic. The establishment of TAG, in addition to the existing deposit insurance and other measures taken by regulators, may have bolstered depositors' confidence in banks as reliable counterparties. Deposit insurance brings stability to the banking sector by giving depositors confidence that if their bank fails, they will not lose their insured accounts. track of and possibly more types of fees to be aware of at different banks. Some depositors may attempt to recapture the safety they would lose if TAG expires by shifting their deposits to safer banks. Safer banks, such as those with higher capital levels or with less concentration in a risky asset class, may be perceived as less likely to fail. Depositors may move their accounts to one of the largest or most interconnected banks. For some, this may mean to a bank with uninsured deposits.  Depositors may move their accounts to one of the largest or most interconnected banks if they believe those banks are in practice "too big to fail" (TBTF) A bank is said to be TBTF if policymakers are likely to judge that its failure would cause unacceptable disruptions to the overall financial system and would act to prevent failure. If a depositor thinks policymakers would not allow a particular bank to fail, then the depositor may view their uninsured deposits as safer than if the deposits were in a bank that would be allowed to fail. Some market participants may view the steps taken by the Dodd-Frank Act to remove TBTF status as credible. In that case, uninsured depositors may move their deposits away from large institutions and use smaller banks. The traditional banking sector is not the only place depositors can deposit their money. Depositors can effectively "deposit" their money in other nonbank options by buying shares of nonbank companies.that pose a threat to financial stability. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. If TAG expires, depositors may change their perception of the safety of NIBTAs. Changes in the financial and regulatory environment since 2008 could also result in a different allocation than the pre-TAG levels. Three factors are typically important to depositors when determining where to allocate their money. The use of NibTAs could return to pre- TAG levels if TAG expires. If TAG expires then depositors will have to reevaluate how they allocate money across the various options in theFinancial system. can be converted into cash). Certificates of deposit, for example, may pay a higher interest rate than a typical savings account, but there are restrictions on when the money can be withdrawn. Depositors' preferences for safety, liquidity, and yield will determine how they allocate their money across the various options they face. If TAG expires, the options available to depositors can be simplified to two general choices: (1) depositors could leave some or all of their money in the traditional, insured banking sector or (2) they could move some orall their money out of the traditional banking sector. factors are typically important to depositors when determining where to place their money: safety, liquidity, and yield. Depositors would prefer to have more of all three, but face trade-offs. For example, generally speaking, there is a trade-off between safety and yield on an investment. To have a higher return, an investor may have to sacrifice liquidity (the ease with which an asset can be converted into cash). Certificates of deposit, for example, are a good place to start.