Each is planned to be within an area 3,500 nautical miles from the United States and from the war zones. This distance is based on the maximum efficient range of the C-17 cargo aircraft without refueling. Operation of the ERS airfields is shared between the host nation, which owns the airfield, and a number of DOD organizations. Host nation responsibilities vary and are documented in the Status of Forces Agreement for each country. U.S. organizations with responsibility for the airfields include the Air Force, who provides day-to-day operations. The U.S. Transportation, Air Mobility, European, Central, and Pacific Commands have various functional or geographical responsibilities. The airfields are normally staffed for the peacetime flow of aircraft. Additional personnel and equipment would be brought in to handle the increased flow of Aircraft in the event of contingency operations. Many air fields are primarily for U.N. cargo and refueling operations. U.K. fighter aircraft are generally located at separate bases because of the specialized equipment needed to fly them. The Air Force operates 11 ERS airfields; the Navy operates the airfield in Rota, Spain; and the Marines operate the air field in Iwakuni, Japan. The airfields are located on bases owned by the host country, under agreements for support negotiated by the State Department. Each military service must operate theAirfield in accordance with its primary service mission. However, each service must also manage the Airfield in according with the policies set forth by the geographical command. These commands are responsible for supporting and achieving U.S. interests in their particular ERS-related areas. The Air Force operates 11 ERS airfields; the Navy operates for ERS needs. The ERS purpose is to act as a conduit for aircraft headed to war zones in the Middle East. While the unified commands have some management responsibilities for the airfields, they have no funding programs for base operations and construction. The military services and the Defense Logistics Agency generally provide U.S. funding for these purposes. In Europe, both the European and Central commands may act as advocates for the E RS airfields. The ability to fight and win two nearly simultaneous major theater wars is the cornerstone of U.S. defense strategy. For planning purposes, the military assumes that the two most likely places where these wars would take place are Korea and Southwest Asia. Mobilization of U.,S. forces for such conflicts requires a global system of integrated land, sea, and air resources, and supplies already stored overseas. The fleet of civilian and military passenger and cargo aircraft and the En Route System (ERS) airfields provide the critical air component. The ERS provides the primary “throughput” services for aircraft as they move from U.S. bases through ERS airfields and on to their eventual destinations. The ERS also provides the capabilities needed to handle ongoing peacetime operations and requirements associated with smaller-scale contingency operations. For example, the base must have the ramp space to park the aircraft and perform required maintenance, the equipment to load and unload cargo if needed, and the equipment needed to quickly refuel the aircraft. operations and requirements associated with smaller-scale contingency operations. ERS bases were used extensively during recent operations in Kosovo. As shown in figure 1, the 13 ERS airfields are located mostly in Europe and throughout the Pacific. Each is planned to be within an area of 3,500 square miles, with a total of 13 bases in the U.S., Europe, and the Asia-Pacific region. The bases are selected according to their proximity to the anticipated war zones, the host nation's willingness to allow the use of its bases, and other factors such as climate. The growth in importance of the En Route System has not been matched by a commensurate improvement in its information and management structures. Establishing the European and Pacific steering committees was an important first step in organizing regional operations, but does not go far enough. While these committees perform an important function, officials said that no organization is responsible for formally coordinating and overseeing overall ERS operations. Without such structure, one overarching organization with responsibility for strategic operations and coordination of overall E RS operations during peacetime is needed. The ERS is fragmented among at least four unified commands and six subcommands, three services, host nations, and other organizations. No single organization has overall responsibility for the ERS. Because of the absence of centralized responsibility, the European and Pacific Commands established separate steering committees (see app. I for more details on the various responsibilities of these organizations) The U.S. Central Command is responsible for the U.K.’s military operations in Europe and the Middle East. has functional responsibility for managing the entire Defense Transportation System. It is not in charge of the ERS airfields and can provide only limited funding for repair and improvement projects. The needs of the geographical commands (such as the European, Central, and Pacific commands) take precedence over those of the functional commands. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization may also use the bases to assist in carrying out its strategic operations. Conflicts can and do occur. For example, in the late 1980s, the European Command had planned to return. responsible for supporting and achieving U.S. interests in their particular region. They include component commands drawn from each of the military services to manage the support associated with each. These commands may act as an advocate for ERS needs consistent with their contribution to the commands’ For example, US Navy Europe and US Air Forces Europe provide support for their naval and air bases in the region. The US Navy’s Pacific Fleet, Marine Forces Pacific, and Pacific Air Forces provide similar support in the Pacific. Logistics Agency generally provide U.S. funding for these purposes. For example, the Air Force provides funds for the operation of its ERS airfield in Fairford, England. If the base command needs funds for a construction project, it requests them from its parent command in the region. The Defense Logistics Agency has responsibility for funding fuels projects across all services. In deciding whether to include a project in funding requests, the services and the Defense Logistic Agency assign their own priorities to the project. are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the Honorable Donald H. Rumsfeld, Secretary of Defense. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. Please contact me at (757) 552-8100 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report. The major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV. According to Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials, all of the organizations with responsibility for the En Route System play some combination of three basic roles: owner/manager, funder, and/or advocate. The Transportation Command plans and coordinates movements through the overall transportation system. The Air Mobility Command uses the ERS airfields to help provide aerial refueling and airlift through its fleet of air tankers and cargo airplanes. Both commands may act as advocates for the resource needs of the E RS. The Transportation Command has functional responsibility for managing the entire Defense Transportation System, with the airlift portion handled by its air component, the Air Force Air mobility Command. The ERS is a joint operation of the Air force and the U.S. Air Force. funding. Only recently has the ERS begun to receive high priority for funding. In 1997 the Air Mobility Command proclaimed 1997 the “Year of the En Route System” and funding began to increase. However, the Air Transportation Command still struggles to fund the system. The ERS was established in the early 1950s to provide air transport for the U.S. military. It has since been expanded to include a number of other air transport systems, including the Air National Guard and the Army Corps of Engineers. whether all the construction projects will be completed as planned. U.S.-funded ERS projects in Europe must compete for funding against Pacific projects and others within DOD. DOD infrastructure is grossly under funded, with facilities currently funded for replacement every 250 years. (See p. 18 for a discussion of DOD problems in infrastructure management.) For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, contact the Samaritans on 08457 909090. The proposed projects are intended largely to replace capability lost due to deterioration or base closures, not to increase overall capacity. Only 25 of the 516 projects provide additional capacity. The remaining projects either upgrade existing capacity to current environmental, safety, or operational standards or replace/repair equipment due to obsolescence or failure. DOD plans call for about 55 percent of the $2 billion in ERS construction funding to come from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ($132.6 million) and host nations such as Canada. is voluntary, and there are no written agreements associated with the ERS projects. The remaining 45 percent ($878 million) is expected to come from a variety of U.S. programs. The largest contributors are the Defense Logistics Agency and the Air Force Operation and Maintenance and Military Construction programs. It is unclear whether all the construction projects will be completed as planned. The level of funding has been declining somewhat since the early 1990s, and is constrained by prohibitions such as using the funds for projects viewed by the government of Japan as increasing war-fighting capacity. Most of the costs (86 percent) are associated with projects that had not yet started construction as of October 2000. Host nations and U.S. allies are expected to fund about 55 percent of the total. It is unclear whether all the projects will be completed as planned, as the projects must compete with each other and with other DOD projects for funding and face other uncertainties. Since the end of the Cold War, many U.N. military locations overseas have been closed. The United States is expected to funding the rest. of a 2- to 3-year delay in host government approval of funding requirements. According to officials, the host government was concerned about sovereignty issues involved in its membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Formal approval has now been received for these projects, and funding has been shifted by about 1 year. Most of the projects have not yet started construction. As of October 2000, about 4 percent ($75.0 million) of total funding had been spent on completed projects with another 10 percent ($194.6 million) spent on projects in progress. The remaining 86 percent ($1.7 billion) of funding was associated with projects in various stages of planning, programming of funds, and engineering design. Funding for such projects is subject to future budgetary constraints and uncertainties. Projects funded by U.S. programs have progressed somewhat faster than those funded by host nations and allies. According to Transportation Command officials only recently has the project been funded by the United States. The funding for the project is expected to run out in 2006, Transportation Command says. North Atlantic Treaty Organization ($132.6 million) and host nations such as Germany ($430.8 million) Japan ($523.9 million) According to officials from the U.S. Transportation, European, and Pacific Commands, funding commitments from the NATO and Germany are contained in formal agreements. Japanese funding is provided under the Japanese Facilities Improvement Program. Japan has provided some $21 billion for projects under this program, which started in 1979 to ease the financial burden of stationing U.N. forces in Japan. A formal, written strategic plan that lays out missions and goals, guiding principles and priorities, performance measures, and monitoring mechanisms is also needed. Without such structure ERS operations are prone to a higher risk of inefficiency in the form of confusing and overlapping lines of authority and accountability for key decisions. Without the vision and order provided by a formal strategic plan, decisionmakers do not have the information they need to ensure that ERS resources and operations are focused on the right goals and outcomes. Without a system for ongoing monitoring of key aspects of E RS operations, decisionmaker do not. have the real time, readily available information needed to quickly identify and correct problems. performance, and assigned responsibilities is crucial to achieving program success. According to officials from the Office of the Secretary of Defense, some strategic guidance for the ERS is expressed through the DOD budget process. DOD indicated in its written comments that it generally even several areas does not constitute a coherent and coordinated overall management structure. Our recommendation is intended to assign responsibility for overarching issues to one organization to help provide a clear, coordinated, and comprehensive management structure for all ERS operations. It should be noted that during our review this recommendation received strong support from officials at organizations currently involved in E RS operations. We agree that some elements of ERS operations are individually managed by various organizations and processes. Some elements, such as base level operations, fuels projects and readiness reporting, may be managed quite intensively. However, “robust” management in one or even several areas does not constitute a coherent and coordinated ERS. We remain convinced that the ERS needs a better management structure. But we agreed to consider whether one organization should be designated as responsible for some matters. We in fact describe examples of many of these Organizations and processes and their responsibilities for parts of E RS operations in our report. The Congress may wish to consider directing the Secretary of Defense to implement the recommendations. DOD generally disagreed with our conclusions and recommendations. We believe that the lack of a strategy or system for monitoring progress and overall costs is symptomatic of the weaknesses in DOD’s management of the ERS. DOD stated that our report asserted that the approach it used is “flawed” and overestimates the shortfalls. DOD further stated that any modeling provides only an approximation of real-world systems and that no analysis can provide solutions. its proposed projects represent the best solutions. Despite concerns about aging and deteriorating facilities and equipment, the ERS has no centralized oversight system to provide data on deterioration and failure rates. It has no formal strategic plan to identify long-term plans and strategies, guiding policies, and operating priorities. No single organization is responsible for managing and funding the E RS. These weaknesses raise questions about system plans and operations, and unnecessarily increase the risk of operational problems and inefficiencies. DOD does not include information on ERS shortfalls in its reports on the performance of the overall ERS. growth in costs of eliminating the shortfall in system capacity, or our description of the modeling approach used to analyze ERS capacity. DOD believes that the existing organization, in particular its ERS steering committees, readiness reporting processes, planning and budgeting system, and reviews of strategic mobility already provide a “robust” management structure for the ERS. DOD partially agreed with our recommendation to make one organization responsible for overarching strategic issues. It believes that base-level management of ERS airfields is best performed by the responsible services. justified in the military construction budgeting process. Transportation Command officials also told us that they could not provide data on deterioration and failure rates. The ERS has no centralized oversight system to provide readily available, up-to-date data on the condition and readiness of the airfields. Sound strategic planning that clearly lays out missions and goals, needed resources, priorities, strategies, measures of performance, and assigned responsibilities is crucial to achieving program success, the report says. The report says the ERS could not identify any worthwhile measures that it could accurately produce without an extended research effort. to correct them, we reviewed the processes DOD used to identify deficiencies and corrective actions. We obtained lists of construction projects at each ERS airfield and analyzed them from a number of different perspectives. The total costs by base, by region, and systemwide; the cost of each project; and the total cost of the entire ERS system. We reviewed deficiencies, corrective actions identified in DOD Joint Monthly Readiness Review Reports, Air Mobility Command reports, and other documents produced by the European and Pacific Steering committees and the Inspector General. strategic plan and monitoring system. It stated that the recent Mobility Requirements Study 2005 already includes a strategic plan for the ERS. DOD said it would nevertheless try to improve the integration, presentation, and documentation of the plan to help outside organizations understand its provisions. We disagree. The document cited by DOD in the January 2001 Mobility Requirements. Study 2005 is identified as the E RS “Infrastructure Analysis,” not as a. strategic plan. It is simply an analysis of current shortfalls in capacity and. whether planned construction projects will remedy those shortfalls by 2005. DOD reports annually on its performance in managing strategic mobility capabilities. It does not include data on ERS shortfalls in the report, despite the major effect such shortfalls have on airlift capacity. We concluded that reducing unneeded infrastructure could free up the funding needed to ensure that critical assets such as the ERS airfields are adequately funded. The ERS is an integral aspect of strategic mobility. Omitting ERS information from the key annual report would be a mistake, we say. review of ERS construction plans and projects in light of the ongoing review of the National Military Strategy. DOD needs to ensure that ERS problems and issues receive a visibility consistent with their critical strategic importance. Omitting data on ERS limitations from DOD’s plan and reports on strategic mobility presents an incomplete picture of DOD capability. Efforts to reduce shortages of DOD cargo aircraft will have limited impact if those aircraft do not have adequate airfields to land on. to improve the visibility of the ERS. often results only in inferences as to why decisions were made. DOD’s annual requests for funds contain no evidence that projects are prioritized by importance or that progress toward an established goal, such as modernizing the ERS, is being made in an efficient and timely fashion. DOD disagreed with our recommendation to include information on ERS limitations in its annual performance plan and report along with the other elements of strategic mobility: airlift, sealift, and airlift/sealift. on schedule. The analysis does not include many of the elements needed for sound strategic plans, which need to lay out missions and goals, necessary resources, assigned responsibilities for accomplishing goals, priorities and strategies to be followed, and performance measures for gauging progress toward identified goals. In addition, the analysisdoes not identify the expected cost to remedy the capacity shortfalls, or the organizational or procedural responsibilities for achieving ERS goals. Similarly, it does not identify priorities between regions, bases, or projects to help identify strategies in case of funding or other problems. in case of funding or other problems. The analysis also does not identify any system of performance measures and monitoring mechanisms to help decisionmakers gauge progress and problems. For example, it simply assumes that projects will be completed on schedule without any measures of actual progress. In fact, during our review Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials could not tell us how many projects were behind their original schedule because there is no centralized monitoring system. The Department also disagreed with our recommendation for an overall cost-benefit study to document the rationales for plans. DOD needs to develop an overall cost-benefit study of its construction plans for the ERS. DOD believes the guidance it provides through the planning and budgeting process is sufficient to optimize the list of construction projects to be funded. We disagree. We understand that developing a formal cost- benefit analysis of the overall ERS infrastructure is difficult. But relying exclusively on the budget process to document funding rationales often results only in inferences as to why decisions were made.not be delayed. This study would also serve as a useful review of ERS construction plans and projects. the En Route System” and funding began to increase. Officials told us that it still takes many years to move projects through the budget process, obtain funding, and begin construction. Despite the strategic importance of the ERS, critical information on ERS plans and operations is not available, and the system is not managed as a coherent whole. Despite increased cost estimates and other uncertainties surrounding ERS construction projects, DOD has not developed overall cost-benefit studies or other prudent assurances to demonstrate either the rationale for its decisions or the planned $2 billion in projects. to difficulties in assessing performance in a variety of areas. As a result, we have classified DOD strategic planning as a major management challenge. DOD has reduced force structure since the end of the Cold War, but it has not achieved similar reductions in infrastructure costs. We concluded that reducing unneeded infrastructure could free up money for other priorities. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. It is published by arrangement with the Institute for Defense Studies and the RAND Corporation. conducted our review from July 2000 through April 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. In addition to those named above, Katherine Chenault, Lawrence E. Dixon, Richard G. Payne, Stefano Petrucci, and Gregory J. Symons, made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The model DOD uses to simulate ERS operations could overestimate the size of the shortfall. Air Mobility Command officials acknowledge that the Airlift Flow Model does not necessarily identify the best or optimal solution to mobilization requirements. The model repeatedly simulates cargo movements until it reaches a solution to the identified mission, but the solution may or may not be the optimal one. There are other types of models, called optimization models, that officials part, Air mobility Command officials say. The net effect on estimates of ERS capacity in 2005 is unclear. ERS in the Mobility Requirements Study 2005. Air Mobility Command officials responsible for operating the Airlift say models are inflexible and slow. Officials further state that loading data into optimization models can be very labor intensive, making the models relatively inflexable and slow, and that it is difficult to introduce variables into analyses because optimization models attempt to analyze all possible permutations. They believe that models can come to unrealistic conclusions because they cannot simulate random events and may use information that may not be available to commanders early in the mobilization. Airlift Flow Model would schedule an aircraft to pick up the 10-ton cargo immediately since it is focused on current conditions. An optimization model would likely wait a few hours until an aircraft was loaded with all 50 tons before sending it off. In 1997 DOD sponsored an ERS capacity analysis that compared the results of an optimization model with those of the Airlift Flow model. The optimization analysis agreed with the basic AirliftFlow Model conclusion that there would be a capacity shortfall. However, the analysis also concluded that a better distribution of ERS resources could significantly increase the flow of cargo.  optimization models are designed to seek the best or optimal solutions to mission requirements. For example, in analyzing the movement of cargo aircraft through the ERS the Airlift Flow Model would only be aware of what cargo is available for pickup at the moment. An optimization model would be aware. of all cargo available forpick throughout the mission being modeled. As a result, in a situation where 10 tons of cargo are being transported, an optimization model can identify the best allocation of cargo to aircraft, aircraft to routes, and ground resources to airfields. The $2 billion will fund repairs and improvements to fuel systems, runways, ramp space, and other base elements. Transportation Command officials told us that most ERS airfields were built during or immediately after World War II. According to Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials, the standard fuel systems at current ERS bases were built in the 1940s and 1950s. The largest construction cost category is associated with fuel system repair and improvement. The cost of the project is estimated to be between $1 billion and $3 billion. An overall cost-benefit analysis was not done, officials said. Officials stated that they attempted to make cost-effective decisions. Because of the age of the facilities, many of the planned projects had already been identified and justified in the military construction budgeting process, they said. The ERS evolved over many years in response to changing military and political conditions and to hundreds of mobility and engineering analyses of capacity trade-offs under different combinations of bases, they added. The U.S. military says it is trying to minimize costs where possible. by an estimated 12 to 13 percent. A second DOD- sponsored study used an optimization model to analyze the impact of proposed construction projects designed to increase the fuel handling capacity at ERS bases. The study concluded that the increase in throughput capacity provided by the projects would be small and that using existing resources more effectively may be the best way to increase fuel deliveries. Although DOD officials believe that optimization models have promise, they also believe that they have drawbacks and did not use them to analyzed the ERS in the Mobility Requirements Study 2005. The standard fuel systems at current ERS bases were designed and built during the early 1950s and had an estimated life span of 30 to 40 years. At some bases refueling must be carried out by trucks, rather than by more modern pipeline and hydrant systems. At other bases, hydrants are antiquated or have deteriorating lines that slow and sometimes interrupt fueling operations altogether. Bases in the Pacific are the worst off. As shown in figure 6, repairs and improvements at bases in thePacific region total about $1.14 billion. in deployment operations. Omitting ERS information from the key annual performance report gives an incomplete and misleading view of strategic mobility capabilities. DOD also disagreed with our description of the growth in estimated costs for improving the ERS. DOD stated that the different cost estimates we were provided are not directly comparable because they were produced several years apart and were premised on different sets of bases and analytical methodologies. Our report clearly lays out these differences. DOD further claimed that we were using the comparison to point to “unexplained” cost growth. “unexplained” cost growth. Whether DOD was aware of the reasons behind the increased estimate was not the primary point we were trying to make. Our primary point is that DOD did not know how much it would cost to bring ERS capacity up to requirements because it does not monitor overall costs. Air Mobility Command officials had to make a special query to all the commands to find out what the current costs were and whether they had changed over previous estimates. Similarly, when we requested an updated estimate late in our review, officials responded that obtaining such an update was not possible. in 2005 is unclear. Most (58 percent) of the costs are associated with bases in the Pacific region. Host nations told us that the cost to eliminate the shortfall in ERS capacity was about $1.2 billion for fiscal years 1997 through 2006. However, shortly after that the estimate was changed to $2.0 billion. According to Transportation Command officials, no one is responsible for monitoring the overall cost of eliminating the shortfall. The U.S. overseas presence has shrunk since the end of the Cold War. covered what at the time were about 35 ERS bases, with sometimes only half a day spent at each base. Air Mobility Command agreed to query all of the various commands involved in the ERS to determine the current cost to eliminate the shortfall. The estimated cost had grown to about $2 billion. According to officials, the increase reflects changes in the bases making up the E RS since the mid-1990s, increases in the costs of repairing/improving system components due to aging, and a more in-depth and accurate analysis. Cold War, many U.S. military locations overseas have been closed and their personnel relocated to bases in the continental United States. Transportation Command officials state that with this drawdown in the 1990s, the ERS lost many of its facilities and much of its flexibility. Today, ERS has access to only 13 locations, compared with 45 in the early 1990s. As a result, the remaining bases have become much more important as the only airfield options available for en- route mobilization support. systems and that no analysis can provide solutions that are 100-percent accurate. DOD believes that it has applied the best tools available and that it will continue to refine its capabilities, as new modeling tools become available. Our report does not attempt to measure the precise effect of these factors on DOD’s estimate. We state that the assumptions and modeling approaches DOD used could underestimate or overestimate the size of the shortfall, but that we could not measure the exact effect on DOD's estimate. these factors on DOD’s estimate. Our report does not attempt to endorse one modeling approach over the other. It is important to fully consider all options in such analyses to ensure that, should an optimal solution be available, it is identified. DOD also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional members for their consideration. The report is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/science/science-and-defense/features/features-features-solar-panoramic-panorama. In the event of overlapping major theater wars in Korea and Southwest Asia, the 13 ERS airfields would not currently have enough capacity to move the required amounts of personnel and equipment to the war zones. DOD expects the shortfall to be largely eliminated by 2005. But the assumptions and modeling approach DOD uses in its calculations raise some uncertainty about the precise size of the shortfall. The study concluded that current capacity is significantly short of requirements but that improvements to the ERS would largely eliminate the shortfall by 2005, DOD says. Some assumptions tend to underestimate the size of the shortfall. DOD assumes that ERS airfields would operate without breaking down. Because the construction projects are expected to run through 2006, the capacity of several airfields will still be short of requirements at the end of 2005. The study at least partially offsets these assumptions. It says that the U.S. needs to increase the number of ERS bases to meet demand in the event of a conflict in Iraq or Afghanistan. It also says that this needs to be done at a faster rate than previously thought. The capacity requirements of the ERS are defined in the recent Mobility Requirements Study 2005. Some study assumptions tend to underestimate the shortfall, while the modeling approach used could overestimate it. Capacity requirements could be raised even higher if other ongoing missions (such as peacekeeping) were added, further increasing the shortfall. The net effect of these factors on estimates of ERS capacity in 2005 is unclear. The study at least partially offsets these assumptions by calculating the capacity of E RS bases in Europe on the assumption that DOD would lose access to one of six bases during mobilization.  requirements could raise airlift capacity requirements by about 7 percent. The ability of the ERS to handle this extra requirement is unclear, the study says. Officials were unsure when this issue would be tackled, the authors say. The authors did not independently verify DOD’s estimate of system capacity. They reviewed the processes DOD used to determine whether extra capacity was available. They say the assumptions tend to underestimate the officials at the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the RAND Corporation and others.