GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full-text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. The list, known as “Today's Reports,” is posted on the Web site daily. as “Today’s Reports,” on its Web site daily. The list contains links to the full-text document files. To have GAO E-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to our home page and complete the easy-to-use electronic order form found under “To Order GAO Products” Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/f fraudnet.htm, E-mails: fraudnet@gao,gov, or 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system). General Accounting Office exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. The agency's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. The fastest and easiest way to get your hands on a GAO report is to go to the agency's website. Have a question about the report? Send it to iReport. Price per print for an 8- by 10-inch print ranges from $4.50 for one to nine prints to $1.75 for each print in quantities of over 50. The specified charge for clerical search and processing is $13.25 per hour with a minimum charge of $8.30. Existing fees vary significantly among the archives. For example, the charges for a paper copy made by archive staff ranged from no charge by the Air Force Historical Research Agency, to no charge. might be significantly understated. For example, the Institute’s early proposal, based on total direct and indirect costs, shows a total fee of $10.50 for mailing a requester 10 paper copies of an item. The total fee under Appendix 2 for the same order would be $3.90, itemized as follows. In this case, the fee under appendix 2 appears to be about one-third of the Institute's proposal. Comptroller officials noted that Appendix 2 provided for a minimum clerical search and processing charge of $8.30. All of the four primary archives charge fees for providing historical information to requesters. None of the fees were in accordance with the mandated DOD user fee schedule. These arrangements, by reducing budgetary pressures, have lessened the benefits that an archive could achieve from implementing Section 1085. Such arrangements, the costs of reproducing photographs and responding to requester would come from the archive’s budget, and the fees collected from the customer would be deposited in Treasury's Miscellaneous Receipts and would not be available to offset the costs. $3.50 minimum specified in the DOD’s User Charge fee schedule. The Marine Corps fees, which are based on FOIA, resulted in any requester receiving up to 2 hours of search time and 100 pages without a charge. With the exception of the Marine Corps, the archives did not have a clearly identified basis for their fee schedules. The archives also appear to have different practices regarding which requesters are charged and under what circumstances fees will be waived. Archives officials said that fees are often waived for military personnel, veterans, government employees, and others. Military archive officials reported collecting about $81,000 during fiscal year 2000. The Air Force reported the most collections (about $46,000) and the Marine Corps reporting the least ( about $2,000). However, these amounts are probably much less than amounts that should be collected if updated fee schedules are established and effectively implemented because of the need for cost containment. The collections reported by the four primary military archives are not indicative of potential future collections under updated fee schedule. The fee schedule was last issued in 1998, but is the same as the schedule first issued in 1986. The Army Military History Institute arranged for a contract, through a nonappropriated fund account, to reproduce requested photographs with fees collected for the photographs reimbursing the fund. The Naval Historical Center refers those requesting its photographs to the Naval Historical Foundation, a nonprofit foundation, which reproduces the photographs and charges the customer. DOD Comptroller officials had no information as to the amount of funds collected throughout DOD using the fee structure mandated in the DOD FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 4, Appendix 2. no charge by the Air Force Historical Research Agency, to no charge by. the Marine Corps Historical Center for the first 100 pages and a charge of. $0.15 for each page thereafter. In general, the archives do not impose a minimum charge for providing information. This could result in requesters receiving copies of documents free or for less than a dollar as opposed to the $3.50 minimum specified in the DOD’s User Charge fee schedule. The Army Military History Institute charges $0,25 per page, the Naval Historical Center charges $ 0.30 per page. minimum clerical charge in the above comparison would result in a higher fee under Appendix 2 than under the Army Military History Institute’s proposal. However, the officials had no information as to whether the minimum clerical charges had been or would be included in a fee involving a request for paper copies of an item. Further, if a search charge is appropriate, the Institute's proposal includes a $25 hourly research charge as opposed to the $13.25 hourly charge for clerical search and processing. In the mid-1990s, the Army Military History Institute began developing proposed legislation for charging and retaining fees to defray costs of providing historical information to the public. The Institute, whose mission is to preserve the Army’s history, was experiencing a significant increase in requests from the public while resources available to respond were decreasing. For example, the annual number of requests increased from about 13,000 in 1987 to 20,600 in 1995 and to 35,800 in 2000. During the same period, the number of staff members decreased from over 40 to over 30. period, the number of staff members decreased from over 40 to 33. As a result, backlogs and waiting times increased. Congress enacted Section 1085 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2001. The Act authorizes the charging and retaining of fees by one designated primary archive in each of the four military departments. The four designated archives are the Air Force Historical Research Agency at Maxwell AFB, Alabama; Army Military History Institute at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania; Marine Corps Historical Center at Washington. at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania; Marine Corps Historical Center at Washington Navy Yard, D.C.; and Naval Historical Center. Section 1085 does not specify a fee structure or the fees that are to be charged, but states that fees are not to exceed the costs of providing the information. The Section also states that fee is not to be charges for information that is requested (1) to carry out a duty as a member of the armed forces or employee of the United States or (2) under FOIA. Section 1085 does not apply to the DOD offices, organizations, museums, and archives other than the four designated archives. The User Charge Statute and FOIA will continue to be the basic authority for these activities to charge fees for providing information. If a request is not identified as a FOIA request, the fees should be determined under the User charge Statute as specified in FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 4. Fees collected under both the User Charge and FOIA for general information must be deposited in the Treasury as Miscellaneous Receipts. Research Agency had tasked key stakeholders with determining a fee structure. However, they have not established a target date for implementing the Section. Section 1085 permits each of the four archives to develop its own fee schedule provided that the fees charged do not exceed the costs of providing the information. Officials at the Naval Historical Center and the Marine Corps Historical Center have not decided whether to implement a fee system. They have taken no specific actions toward implementation and have received no implementation guidance from their headquarters. One of the factors affecting Section. five copies of an 8- x 10-inch photograph shows a total fee of $105 (pull fee per item of $5 and $20 for each copy) The total fee under Appendix 2 would be $22.50 ($4.50 per copy) or less than one-fourth of the Institute’s proposal. DOD reported that about $670,000 was recovered through assessed fees in fiscal year 2000, less than 2 percent of the reported $36.5 million in costs associated with providing information under FOIA. Fees for search, review, and duplication of documents are to be based on direct costs. Fees will be waived or reduced when the information is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of DOD, and fees shall be automatically waived when assessable fees total $15 or less. Under the User Charge regulation, only members of the U.S. Armed Forces, in their capacity as Service members, are exempt from charges. Archive officials also said that fee waivers were used extensively for FOIA requests. use of outdated fees schedules, the archives and other providers of public information throughout DOD have not collected a million dollars or more annually in user fees and have treated public requesters inconsistently. DOD has not revised its fee schedules under the User Charge Statute and FOIA since 1986. To provide consistency throughout DOD, an archive implementing Section 1085 could use DOD’s user fee schedule in lieu of establishing a new fee schedule unless specific justification exists for the new schedule. Such implementation is necessary for the fair and equitable treatment of the public. requested to include user fee schedule compliance as a part of their standard reviews, where applicable. Because archive officials were unaware of the FMR fee schedule, we continue to believe that the more substantive actions that we recommended are warranted. We are sending copies of this report to the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller); the Director, Freedom of Information and Security Review; and interested congressional committees. Copies of thisReport will also be made available to others upon request. Please contact me at (202) 512-9505 if you have any questions. documents shall be provided without charge or at reduced charge when a DOD component determines that a waiver or reduction of fees is in the public interest and likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of DOD. DOD last revised its User Charge Statute fee schedule for copying, certifying, and searching records in March 1986. At that time, DOD revised its user fees instruction and added a schedule of fees and rates for services related to copying, certification, and search records. The instruction stated that this schedule was to be used for such services throughout DOD. used for such services throughout DOD. The same fees were included in the DOD FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 4, Appendix 2, issued in March 1997. Although the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 and OMB Circular A-25 require a biennial review of charges for services, DOD Comptroller officials were not aware of any reviews having been done. Fees being developed by the Army Military History Institute indicate that the fees mandated in Appendix 2 might be significantly understated. For example, the Institute’s early proposal, DOD policy is that when a service is provided that conveys special benefits to recipients, above and beyond those accruing to the public at large, a reasonable charge shall be made to each identifiable recipient. The policy provides that a charge will be imposed to recover the full cost to the federal government of rendering a service or the fair market value of such service, whichever is higher. Appendix 1 of Chapter 4 lists benefits for which no charge has been imposed so far. The cost of this article has been updated to reflect the new policy.