may have a significant effect on the long-termdirection of investment. Allocating allowances according to output and not differentiatingaccording to the carbon intensity of the project would provide an incentive to developlow carbon alternatives. New entrant reserves should be basedon output or capacity, and avoid differentiating according to the CO 2 -intensity of thenew investment. In particular, giving more to coal than gas plants rewardsinvestment in new coal facilities, which would conflict with objectives. It would be a mistake to allocate more allowances to coal plants than to gas plants. rewardsinvestment in new coal facilities, which would conflict with objectives to tackleclimate change. The damaging effects would be amplified ifcarbon-intensive new entrants not only receive free allowances for the period2008-2012 but also receive promises for subsequent periods. The proposed treatment of coal-fired powerplants by the German Government shows how difficult it will be to direct future investment toward low-carbon projects. However, it could be argued that the long-term success of the ETS and theEU's commitment to Kyoto rests on such agreements. regulatory,climatic, and economic events over the first trading period. Climaticevents influencing prices include cold weather, which increased energy usage, anddry conditions, which decreased the availability of hydroelectric power. The primary economic influence on the ETS revolved around fuel prices. Point Carbon analysis indicates 79% of the variance (R 2 ) inallowance. (22) Figure 2. CO2 Market: Large Price Changes in Very Short Amount of Time Source: Margus Kaasik, Eesti Energia, Carbon Market: EUETS (May 9, 2006),p 14. analysis indicates 79% of the variance (R 2 ) inallowance prices was explained by changes in fuel prices (particularly for electricpower) Kaasik argues that the evidence from the past year indicates that fuelprices influence carbon prices, but not the reverse. He seesallowance Prices as a derivative of natural gas and coal pricing, at least in theshort-term. Assuming natural gas-fired and coal-fired generation are the main sources of power, this is not surprising, as the power sector significantly influencedprice development in 2005. in theshort-term. Assuming natural gas-fired and coal-fired generation are the marginalcost suppliers of power, allowance prices will respond positively to increasingnatural gas prices or decreasing coal prices. Likewise, allowance Prices willrespond negatively to decreasing natural gas Prices or increasing coal Prices. Thiscreates a correlation over time between allowance prices and electricity price byinfluencing the marginal price of electricity. How this has evolved during the firsttrading period is illustrated by Figure 3 . Figure 3. There is a Very Long-Term Correlation Between CO2 and Electricity Price: Link Via Marginal Producer. The EU-ETS traded 362million metric tons of CO 2 in 2005, valued at 7.218 billion euro. Brokers wereresponsible for 57% of the volume, exchange markets did 15%, and bilateraltransactions accounted for 28%. Of the exchange market volume, the EuropeanClimate Exchange (ECX) had the largest share at 63%. The average price for an allowance traded in 2005 was 19.9 euro, withbrokered and exchanged allowances averaging 20.6 euro and bilateral transactionsaveraging 18.2 euro. The EU-ETS is a maturing but still narrow carbon market. However, allowance prices have been quite volatile sincetrading begin in 2005, as indicated in Figure 1 below. Inparticular, allowance Prices dropped from almost 30 euro to about 9-11 euro inApril and May, sparked by a series of reported over-allocation of allowances inseveral Member States. By July 2006,. allowance prices had recovered to about 17euro in July. Figure 1. CO2 Market: Even If No "Big" News Highly Volatile. The EU-ETS is a maturing but still narrow market. Monthly volumes areincreasing, but have never exceeded a 1.6% share of phase 1 allocations. Even after several years of operation, SO 2 allowances prices can changeunpredictably and inexplicably. Some reasons for ETS allowance price derivatives are explicable. The ETS market responded to a variety of regulatory,climatic, and economic events over the first trading period. The market is maturing, but it is still a very small market. the emissions market and creating uncertainty for companies. The EU is not attempting to meet the Kyoto Protocolbut to get experience with emissions trading with some modest emissions targets. For the first trading period, the 21 countries have allocated an annual average of 1.8295 billion allowances and set aside 73.4million allowances for allocation. The 44.2 million allowances allocated in excess of actual 2005 emissions have been characterized as an "over-allocation" of allowances. The 2005 emissions totalreflects emissions from 8,980 sources representing more than 99% of the allowances allocated. 21 countries had not surrendered sufficient allowances. Noncomplying sources are subject to a 40-euro penalty for each tonof emissions in excess of surrendered allowances under the ETS. The EC will determine whether the insufficiency is the result of technical difficulties in national registries,tardiness, or noncompliance. No data are available for those Member States without an active registry. a. The figures in this column indicate the number of installations with active registry accounts on 30 April 2006. They differ from figurescommunicated in earlier reports. Figures are updated for installations that opted-out for the first trading period, opted-in, andinstallations without open accounts. The figures in this column are allowances allocated to existing installations at the start of the scheme. Due to technical problems in the national registries of the Czech Republic, France, the Slovak Republic, and Ireland, the figures for Denmark, Hungary, Ireland, and Lithuania are not included in the figures in the first section of the second section of this article. Norway's "Quota Commission" (created in 1998) stressed that the 2008 program be ascomprehensive as possible. The system could include close to 90% of the country's greenhouse gas emissions. To achieve this coverage, the Commissionenvisioned a hybrid system of quotas, depending on cost-effectiveness andpracticality considerations. The Commission argued in favor of regulating CO 2 emissions at theproducer (upstream) level from mobile sources and some stationary sources. For these emissions, regulation at the producer level will not create weaker incentives for reducing emissions thanregulation at the consumer level. emissions thanregulation at the consumer level, because the volume of emissions from a particularcommodity is not dependent on technology. For process emissions stemming from a series of small sources, e.g. N 2 O from commercial fertilizers, regulation by quotas should beimposed on retailers, or importers in order to avoid unacceptably high systemcosts. (51) The Commission's recommendation that "regulation by quotas be imposed inpart on the producer, in part on the consumer" familiarity in operating such a system. The EC alsowanted the most comprehensive program possible. The wider the scope of the system, the greater will bethe variation in the costs of compliance of individual companies. This argues in favour of a comprehensive trading scheme across differentMember States covering all 6 greenhouse gases and sinks, and encompassing all emissionssources. (7) Economic analysis conducted by the European Commission confirms the potentialcost-saving available from a comprehensive Trading Scheme. As shown in Table 1 , a comprehensivetrading program is estimated by in Table 1 , a comprehensivetrading program is estimated by the EC to reduce Kyoto compliance costs to EU countries by 3billion euro. For a variety of reasons, the EC chose a trading system with limited coverage rather than acomprehensive trading system. Table 1: Cost of Reaching Kyoto Target to EU Member Statesin 2010 (in billions of 1999 euro) Source: EC Green Paper (Mar. 8, 2000), p. 27. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. the EC in explaining its decision to create a less comprehensive trading scheme at this time. There areconsiderable uncertainties surrounding the emissions of the fluorinated gases [HFC, PFC, SF 6 ] and the absorption of carbon dioxide by sinks. Allocating allowances, monitoring emissions and enforcing compliance of small mobile emitters, such as private cars, raise complex technical andadministrative issues. For determining the size of the trading program, the EC looked at five criteria: (1)environmental effectiveness, (2) chose a trading system with limited coverage rather than acomprehensive system covering all sources and gases. Some European analysts have noted that EUpolitics played an important role in preventing serious consideration of a comprehensive program. A significantly wider coverage could have beenprovided only by an upstream system, which had been excluded by the [European] Commission at the beginning of the process. The reason was again political: an upstream scheme would have toomuch looked like a tax. Not surprisingly, this reason was not employed by the EC in explaining its decision to create a less comprehensive system. The 1997 Kyoto Protocol now in force. Countries that ratified the protocol are developing appropriate implementation strategies to begin reducing theiremissions of greenhouse gases. The European Union (EU) has decided to use anemissions trading scheme (called a "cap-and-trade" program) to help it achieve compliance at least cost. The decision to use emissiontrading to implement the Kyoto Protocol is at least partly based on the successful emissions tradingprogram used by the U.S. The EU has also used other market-orientedmechanisms permitted under the Protocol. nordeveloping the trading market. In addition, this "over-allocation" does not includethe 73.4 million metric tons of allowances held in reserve by the various countries. The Kyoto targets requireambitious caps with absolute reductions for the phase 2008-2012. (16) In general, the EC has seen the over-allocated issue as part of the"learning-by-doing" process. The Climate Action Network (CAN), a network of 365non-governmental organizations, stated the following: Emissions limits set by MemberStates were a major disappointment. With the over-allocation issue in the first trading period, it is likely that theEC will take a harder stance in reviewing NAPs for the second trading period. As indicated, EU-15 states, on average, have toreduce their emissions caps 6.8% (119 million metric tons) from their current level to meet requirements under the Kyoto Protocol. In contrast, as a group, the newer countries and the EU as a whole are in substantiallybetter shape. (28) EC has seen the over-allocation issue as part of the"learning-by-doing" process that should help the EU in implementing the secondtrading period beginning in 2008. The new 2005 emissions data givesindependently assessed installation-level figures for the first time and so providesMember States with an excellent factual basis for deciding upon the caps in theirforthcoming national allocations plans for the second trading period. The plans are subject to approval by theCommission, which will also be making extensive use of the 2005 emissionsdata. the national registries of the Czech Republic, France, the Slovak Republic, and Spain, the CITL did not receivewholly reliable information on the installation level surrenders from these Member States. Some commentators have suggested that annual average 2005-2007 allocations that are actually 44.1 million metric tons higher than the reported 2005emissions are neither putting the EU on the path to the Kyoto requirements nordeveloping the trading market. In addition, this "over-allocation" does not. Figures do not account for changes to the number of installations. The deficit between the second trading period for the original 15 MemberStates can be covered by trading with the newer Member States that anticipate asurplus. The EU would have little difficulty meeting its Kyoto Protocol requirements during the second Trading Period. The Kyoto Protocol is a treaty that aims to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from cars and other vehicles. It is intended to reduce the emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases (C02) from vehicles and vehicles. likely to be included before the third trading period. Transport controls are based on voluntaryagreements with automobile manufacturers to improve fuel economy, fuel-economylabelling of cars, and promoting fuel efficiency by fiscal measures. Thecornerstone is the agreements with automobile Manufacturers to achieve improvenew car fleet average CO 2 emissions rates. The objective of the EU Council of Environmental Ministers and European Parliament was to achieve a new car fleetAverage CO2 emissions rate of 120 grams per kilometer (g CO 2 /km) by 2005 or by 2010 at the latest. at the latest. This objective was not met in 2005 and is unlikely to be met by 2010. Voluntary commitments by the European, Japanese, and Korean AutomobileManufacturers Associations in 1998 and subsequently endorsed by the EC set targetsof 140 g CO 2 /km by 2008/2009. At the end of 2005, the average new car emissionsrate is about 160 g CO2 /km. The rate of reduction in CO 2/km for new cars wouldhave to double for the automobile manufacturers to achieve their commitments,which appears unlikely. program, the EC looked at five criteria: (1)environmental effectiveness, (2) economic efficiency, (3) the potential effects on competition, (4)feasibility, and (5) existence of alternative policies and measures. It felt that starting with a relativelysmall number of economic sectors and sources that contribute significantly to total emissions would "substantially" satisfy these criteria. The six sectors chosen emit about 45% of the EU15's CO 2 emissions. The coverage for individual countries varies widely; only 20% ofFrance's greenhouse gas emissions are covered. The EU's Emissions Trading System (ETS) is a cornerstone of the EU's efforts to meet itsobligation under the Kyoto Protocol. It covers more than 11,500 energy intensive facilities acrossthe 25 EU Member countries, including oil refineries, powerplants over 20 megawatts (MW) incapacity, coke ovens, and iron and steel plants, along with cement, glass, lime, brick, ceramics, andpulp and paper installations. Covered entities emit about 45% of the European Union's emissions. called a "bubble" By 2001,collective greenhouse gas emissions in the EU were 2.3% below 1990 levels. Several countries, including Ireland, Spain, and Portugal, experiencedemissions growth of over 30% during this period. In light of the Kyoto Protocol targets, the EU adopted a directiveestablishing the EU-ETS that entered into force October 13, 2003. The importance of emissionstrading was elevated by the accession of 10 additional central and eastern Europe countries to EU membership in May 2004. The trading program does not cover emissions of non-CO 2 greenhouse gases. Covered entities emit about 45% of the EU's carbon dioxide emissions. The first trading period began January 1,2005. A second trading period is scheduled to begin in 2008, covering the period of the Kyoto Protocol, with a third one planned for 2013. By 2001,collective greenhouse gas emissions in the EU had fallen by 8% from 1990 levels under a collective arrangement called a "bubble" (4) economic terms, but are notinterchangeable. "Certified Emissions Reductions" (CERs) under the CDM mustbe issued by the Clean Development Mechanism Executive Board. Emissions Reduction Units (ERUs) under JI are transferred from one country toanother -- an exchange that cannot begin until the second trading period. Neither CERs nor ERUs are converted into EU-ETS allowances; rather, they are entered directly into the surrendered allowance table. Several EU countries have established carbon funds topursue JI and CDM opportunities. are in the range of 8-12 euro. In contrast, for CERsalready issued, or where the sellers take the risk, prices are in therange of 13-15euro. The real impact of CDM and JI on theEU-ETS system will not be fully known until the second trading period. The EC has surveyed stakeholders' views on ETS implementation and long-term issues. Thereport surveys the viewpoints of participating companies, governments, industryassociations, market intermediaries, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) a longer time frame for implementation, it is unclear when the ETSwill become as comprehensive as the European Commission would like. The anticipateddeficit between the second trading period for the original 15 Member States can becovered by trading with the newer Member States that anticipate a surplus. Inaddition, potential CERs and ERUs from the CDM and JI respectively may helpmaintain limits on allowance costs. Table 6 provides one series of estimates ofavailable allowances for the Kyoto Protocol's that anticipate asurplus. Countries with potentialsurpluses may want to retain at least some of that surplus to help fuel their countries' economic growth. Second, the extent to which surplus credits would be created via JI, the EC linking directive, requires that such credits (including from CDM) be "supplemental" to acountry's domestic efforts. A third consideration is the overall commitment of the Kyoto Protocol. Asnoted earlier, the ETS only covers Overview," p. 20. The EU-ETS has provisions for linking its trading scheme to the JointImplementation (JI) and Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) components of the Kyoto Protocol. TheEC's linking directive allows operators to fulfil their allowance obligations using credits derived from JI and CDM projects. Their credits areequivalent to allowances in environmental and economic terms, but are notinterchangeable. "Certified Emissions Reductions" (CERs) under "Carbon Market" (May 9, 2006) commitment to Kyoto and any subsequent agreements rests on such aredirection with respect to new entrants and long-term investment. Concernsrevolve around ambiguity in the current definition of a combustion installation and the number of small installations covered under the ETS. The ETS applies to energyactivities for all sectors with combustion installations above 20 MW of thermal rated input, oil refineries, coke ovens, and, subject to size criteria, iron and steel, cement,lime, glass, ceramics, and pulp and paper facilities. glass, ceramics, and pulp and paper facilities. Finland and Swedenopted to include small district heating installations with a rated thermal input below20 MW. Germany is attempting to have some planned coal-fired powerplants, which will be large producers of CO 2 , able to opt-out of the ETS for 14 years. In addition to the consistency issue, small installations (between 20MW and50MW) account for 30% (about 3,000) of the total facilities covered under ETS. of the Kyoto Protocol. The ETS only covers a percentage of the overall greenhouse gasemissions in the various Member States of the EU. The analysis provided in Table3 assumes that the ETS will have to provide a proportional amount of that reductionbased on 2003 emissions. However, some sectors not covered by the Ets may growfaster than sectors covered byThe ETS, creating difficulties for compliance. Inparticular, the transportation area has become a major source of concern. The transportation sector is not a part of the E TS and is not likely to be included beforethe third trading period. gasemissions in the various Member States of the EU. It is too early to tell whether the ETS market signal and individualcountries' NAPs will move investment in the appropriate direction. The early signsare not particularly encouraging, with the 2005-2008 Naps producing anover-allocation of allowances. One major major concern is the transportation area is already a major source ofconcern. A final consideration for the Ets is its suitability for directing long-terminvestment toward a low-carbon future -- the ultimate goal of any climate changeprogram. control greenhouse gas emissions in other sectors, suchas transportation. The EC may encounter in not choosing acomprehensive approach to begin with. The future direction of the ETS in terms of increasingcoverage is toward incrementally adding more economic sectors, rather than addressing the more complex issue of a comprehensive system. Based on the survey,the focus is currently on the chemical, aviation, and aluminum industries. Given that the number-one recommendation for future implementation is to provideparticipants with a longer time frame for implementation, it is unclear when it will be implemented. companies, governments, industryassociations, market intermediaries, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) asked which of 12 topics they felt were most important to them. Table 3 indicates thetop five topics according to governments surveyed, along with their correspondingranking by other stakeholders. The five issues are discussed below. Source: European Commission, Review of EU Emissions Trading Scheme (November 2005), p. p. 1. The European Commission's review of the ETS was published in November 2005. evident than indiscussions of new entrants. Germany is proposing to permitnew coal-fired powerplants built between 2008-2012 to opt-out of the ETS for thefirst 14 years of operation. In its survey of ETSstakeholders, the EC found that 85% of all respondents favor a harmonized approach to new entrants and closures. Nearly 75% believed that those allowances should beprovided free (40) Likewise, an EU questionnaire conducted by theEuropean Environmental Agency's Topic Centre on Air and Climate Change indicated that most Member States would welcome harmonization of the treatment of new arrivals and closures across the EU. have to be covered by the non-ETS sectors --commercial, residential, and transportation. An assessment done for GreenpeaceInternational states that the German NAP II places "a disproportionate burden foremissions reductions on the non theETS sectors" in terms of meeting its commitmentsunder the EU Burden Sharing agreement. Policies to fill in the gap reportedly include oneplan to reduce emissions by 3 million tons by training German drivers to drive moreeconomically. The EU-ETS system involves an interplay between definitions and proceduresthat are EU-wide. system involves an interplay between definitions and proceduresthat are EU-wide and those that are nationwide. The groundwork for the system is theKyoto Protocol, which (1) defines the pollutants and sets the countries' emissionstargets. Within this framework, the EU defines the elementsthat make the EU-ETS work, including industry participants, the unit of trade, trading periods, settling and national inventory and compliance requirements. The EU also defines the scope of participation: Annex 1 countries may implementemissions trading programs and non-Annex 1 countries can participate through theCDM. improvements in emissions rates,CO 2 emissions in the EU continue to rise because of increased miles driven,increased size and weight of cars, and falling car occupancy rates. Attempts to balance the burden between ETS and non-ETS sectors have already created tension in Germany with respect to the second trading period. Germany is proposing to permitevery new power station built between 2008 and 2012 to opt out from CO 2 caps andthe ETS for 14 years. These emissions increases will have to be covered by the non-ATS sectors --commercial, residential, and business. the 2005-2008 NAPs producing anover-allocation of allowances, and one major Member State, Germany, attempting to direct its second NAP toward carbon-intensive, coal-fired electric generating facilities. Reluctance by countries to redirecttheir NAP's and an inconsistent price from the ETS make the long-term effect of theETS uncertain. Norway, a non-EU country, also has an emissions trading system that beganoperating on January 1, 2005. Norway's system covers 51 facilities in the energy andprocess sectors such as oil refining and iron and steel processing, and has severalfeatures in common with the EU ETS. The carbon tax is levied on about 64% of the country's CO 2 emissions. Other parts of Norway's industry, particularly its offshore oiland gas sector, are covered by the carbon tax of almost 40 euro per metrictonne of CO 2. The firstphase of the trading program covers the period 2005-2007, with a second, expandedphase to begin in 2008. Developing its initial trading scheme independently of the EU, Norway's"Quota Quota" scheme is expected to be completed by the end of 2009. by the EC to determinecompliance with 11 criteria (12 for the second period) For the first period, the EC approved most of the necessary NAPs by the end of 2004. Thelast NAP was approved June 20, 2006 (from Greece). 2004. Excessive allocation problems resulted from statesthat left a gap in how they would achieve their target, to be filled with measures to be defined later. Ex-post adjustments by states are not allowed; such adjustments are seen by the EC as potentially disruptive to the emissions market. only 20% ofFrance's greenhouse gas emissions are covered, compared with 69% of Estonia's emissions. National Allocation Plans (NAPs) are central to the EU's effort to achieve its Kyotoobligations. Each Member of the EU must submit a NAP that lays out its allocation scheme under the ETS. These NAPs are assessed by the EC to determinecompliance with 11 criteria (12 for the EU) for the first trading period, and for the second period. The EC harmonizes the NAPswith respect to penalties, allocation method (e.g., grandfathering), monitoring, andregistries with the goal of achieving the Kyoto targets. It allows Members flexibilitywith respect to allocations to individual participants, the extent to which banking ispermitted, and whether to permit the auctioning of up to 10% of allowances in thesecond trading period. As a result of this framework, there are significant differencesbetween Members with respect to participant definitions, industry level emissionscaps and allocations. with respect to participant definitions, industry level emissionscaps and allocations, and enforcement. To increase the economic and administrative efficiency of the ETS, somestakeholders are interested in improved harmonization of NAPs by the EC. Table 5 illustrates the scope of potentialharmonization issues facing the EU-ETS. The issue of new entrants and definition of affected units specifically identified by theEC survey, harmonization issues include allocation methods and the use of auctions. The degree to which JI and CDM credits may be used for compliance, and monitoring,verification, and reporting rules. The EC does not have the authority to scrutinizeallocations at the facility level. Any allocation harmonization would be on avoluntary basis ("soft harmonization") Also, allocation schemes, such asbenchmarking, may not be suitable for some industries. The EC'ssurvey of ETS stakeholders revealed that more than two-thirds of stakeholders support soft harmonization. More than two thirds of stakeholders also support the use of benchmarking standards in setting allocations. The EU ETS Implementation: Room forHarmonisation (The Royal Institute of International Affairs, 2005) EC'ssurvey of ETS stakeholders revealed that more than two-thirds of therespondents from the cement, aluminum, and chemical industries thoughtbenchmarking was an "interesting alternative" Less than a third of the respondentsfrom the pulp and paper industry and refineries thought so. In many ways, diversity between Member countries with respect to the ETSis inevitable. The final way in which the EU ETSdiffers from many other trading systems is in the devolution of allocation responsibilities, in this case to its 25 Member States. States. This was an essential part of thedeal that enabled the adoption of the Directive. Member States would have neverceded to the European Commission the power to distribute valuable assets to theirindustries. Nor is the EU ETS unique in devolving powers of allocation: it is typicalin a number of US systems. Moreover, there are different degrees of harmonization,applicable to different aspects of theEU ETS. The economic value of allowances is nowhere more evident than indiscussions of new entrants. of the treatmentof new entrants and closures across the EU. Analogous to the U.S. acid rain program, EU states have set up reserves toprovide allowances to new entrants. In general, these allowances are provided free,as that is widely seen as helping boost new investment. Most states have yet to dip intotheir reserves for new entrants; however, the importance of the reserve will increase as the ETS enters its second, and eventually third, trading period. The manner inwhich new entrants receive allowances may have a significant effect on the long-termdirection of investment.