The focus of NIH research, and to some extent its organizational structure, have been criticized by some in the academic literature. U.S. health care spending is more than 2.5 times the OECD average. Yet, the health of the U.s. populace, as measured by life expectancy, is ranked 24 th of the 30 countries. "An agency devoted to current health would do well to focus on tobacco control, exercise, nutrition, sanitation, and more cost-effective delivery of health care" The Senate bill would amend Section 402 of the PHS Act by adding a new subsection (m), which describes a strategic plan for NIH. Within two years of enactment, and once every six years thereafter, the NIH Director would develop a six-year NIH Strategic Plan. The NIH Strategic Strategic Plan would be coordination of research among the ICs, priorities for funding research through the Common Fund, training the biomedical workforce, and collaboration with other agencies and departments. The individual IC strategic plans would be required to be prepared regularly and informed by the NIH Strategic plan. The NIH Strategic Plan would provide direction to the biomedical research investments made by NIH. The research strategy would address the disease burden in the United States, including rare diseases. Rare and pediatric diseases would remain a priority. Mission Priority Focus Areas would be identified that best serve the goals of preventing or eliminating the burden of a disease and scientifically merit focused research over the next five years. The initial strategic plan would be completed not later than 270 days after enactment. The NIH Director would be required to ensure that maintaining the biomedical workforce, including the participation of scientists from traditionally underrepresented groups. Precision medicine is a relatively new term for what has traditionally been called personalized medicine. This approach relies on companion diagnostics to target drugs and biological products to specific subsets of patients. Rare diseases often have genetic origins, and advances in medicine have resulted in the development of new an assessment of the program within 48 months of enactment, and to seek public input. It also would allow the Secretary to expand the limited population use pathway if deemed beneficial by the assessment above. It would aim to improve health outcomes and improve patient outcomes. The Federal Demonstration Partnership (FDP) is a cooperative initiative among 10 federal agencies and 119 institutional recipients of federal funds. In 2005 and 2012, FDP conducted surveys of principal investigators of federally funded projects to determine the impact of federal regulations and requirements on the research process. In both surveys, researchers reported spending 57% of their time engaged in research and 43% in completing pre- and post-award tasks. The FDP is sponsored by the National Academies, with a purpose of reducing the administrative burdens associated with federal research grants and contracts. The Reagan-Udall Foundation for the Food and Drug Administration "to advance the mission" of FDA. Its duties cover activities such as identifying and then prioritizing unmet needs. It is led by a Board of Directors, four of whom are ex officio members, nine from candidates provided by the National Academy of Sciences. The foundation is funded by donations from individuals, foundations, corporations, and governments. It was created by a law passed by the U.S. Congress in 1987. The FY2017 President's budget requests a total of $309 million for the PMI: $4 million to FDA, $5 million to ONC, and the remaining $300 million to NIH. Precision medicine research efforts rely on the collection of large amounts of health data. Access to this data may be a concern in the context of this type of research. The sharing of genetic and genomic data among private individuals, researchers and the federal government has, at least in the past, been controversial.  NIH has established a comprehensive policy for the sharing of genomic data. This policy requires investigators to outline their data-sharing plans as part of their funding applications. If investigators fail to submit the required data, NIH may withhold funding. The policy applies to all NIH-funded research that generates large-scale human or non-human genomic data as well as the use of these data for subsequent research. In contrast to compelled disclosure of research data by FOIA request, sharing of genome data generated by NIH- funded research is a priority of NIH. The Advancing Precision Medicine Act of 2016 would codify the President's Precision Medicine Initiative. It would also protect identifiable, sensitive information from release under FOIA. The act would also require the sharing of NIH-supported research data in certain circumstances. The bill would also support high-risk, high-reward research in the U.S. and around the world. It was introduced in the Senate on September 14, 2015. It has been referred to as the Advancing precision medicine act of 2016. H.R. 6 addresses precision medicine but is not comparable to S. 2713 in its approach. Add a new PHSA Section 402(m) to allow the NIH Director to approve requests by institute and center directors to engage in transactions other than a contract, grant, or agreement with respect to projects for high-impact, cutting-edge research. This provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress evaluating the activities under this new subsection by September 30, 2020 (§6) The White House hosted a Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI) Summit to mark the one year anniversary of the initiative's launch. The mission of the PMI is "(t)o enable a new era of medicine through research, technology, and policies that empower patients, researchers, and providers to work together toward development of individualized care" The PMI's three key agencies—National Institutes of Health (NIH), Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the FDA, are working to improve health outcomes and save costs. The NIH Common Fund, within the Office of the NIH Director, supports the High-Risk, High-Reward Research Program. These awards are intended "to encourage creative, outside-the-box thinkers to pursue exciting and innovative ideas about biomedical research" The program has "four unique funding opportunities for exceptionally creative scientists who propose highly innovative approaches to major challenges in biomedical research," according to the program's website.to submit the required data, NIH may withhold funding. The program is intended to provide funding for research that is highly innovative, risky, and potentially high-reward. future biomedical research workforce. Recent concerns have focused on ways to reduce the time between when young investigators complete their training and when they receive their first independent NIH research grant. The NIH has created a number of initiatives that strive to shorten this time, in part to attempt to better retain young investigators in biomedical research. The Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2016 ( P.L. 114-113 , Division H), instructed the NIH Director to enter into a contract with the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) to Other transaction (OT) authority is a special vehicle used by certain federal agencies for obtaining or advancing research and development (R&D) An OT is not a contract, grant, or cooperative agreement, and there is no statutory or regulatory definition of "other transaction" Only those agencies that have been provided OT authority may engage in other transactions. Generally, OT authority is created because the government needs to obtain leading-edge R&D from commercial sources. Some companies (and other entities) are unwilling or unable to comply with the government's procurement regulations. H.R. 6 would require the NIH Director to submit to Congress a report on NIH efforts "to attract, retain and develop emerging scientists" Section 1041 would authorize a new extramural NIH loan repayment program that would provide not more than $50,000 of loan repayment benefits annually. Section 402(b)(5) of the PHSA specifies that the NIH director "shall ensure that scientifically based strategic planning is implemented in support of research priorities" The bill would increase the amounts that could be repaid under existing loan repayment programs from $35,000 to $ 50,000.  NIH funds seven loan repayment programs for researchers. Three of these are intramural programs that provide educational loan repayment benefits to researchers in exchange for undertaking research while employed by NIH. NIH also funds four programs to assist in the repayment of extramural researchers' educational loans. NIH has a contract with the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) to conduct a comprehensive study of the policies affecting the next generation of researchers in the United States. The study is expected to be completed by the end of the year. programs to assist in the repayment of extramural researchers' educational loans. These funds are awarded competitively to researchers who are employed by a qualifying educational institution. Specific programs are available to researchers investigating health disparities, undertaking contraception and infertility research, engaging in clinical research, and examining pediatric-related topics. Researchers may receive up to $35,000 per year in loan repayment benefits under each of these programs. The regulations that govern the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment program regarding participant eligibility, application procedures, selection criteria, loan repayment contract terms, tax liability for payments received, service obligation, and penalties for breach The NIH Director would be authorized to amend the categories eligible for intramural loan repayment as scientific and workforce priorities change. The provision would prohibit the NIH Director from entering into a loan repayment contract with individuals unless they have substantial amounts of educational loans relative to income. It would also allow amounts appropriated for new loan repayment contracts to remain available until the end of the second fiscal year after they are appropriated. And it would increase loan repayment amounts to a maximum of $50,000 per year. The proposal would also retain authorization for current topics eligible for extramural loans. S. 2014 includes two provisions that would create programs to develop and retain the biomedical workforce funded or employed by the NIH. Section 2 of S. 2014 would amend Part A of Title IV of the PHSA by adding a new Section 404M to consolidate existing NIH intramural and extramural loan repayment programs. Section 3 would increase annual loan repayment amounts from $35,000 to a maximum of $50,000 and provide loan repayment benefits for individuals who conduct research in areas of emerging scientific or workforce needs. 4 would amend Section 492B of the PHSA, adding that the IC Directors must consult at least once annually with the Director of the National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities. The IC strategic plans would have to include details of such objectives. The NIH Director would be required to consider whether applicable grant award recipients have complied with the reporting requirements of ClinicalTrials.gov when awarding any future grants to such an entity. Section 5 would amend Part A of Title IV, adding a new Section 404M, "Research Related to Sexual and Gender Minority Populations" would require the NIH Director to encourage efforts to improve research related to the health of sexual and gender minority populations through the increased participation of such groups in clinical research. Section 6 would amend Section 464z-3 of the PHSA, measures. Section 7 would require the Secretary, acting through the Director of NIH, to convene a working group to make recommendations for a formal policy to enhance the rigor and reproducibility of scientific research funded by the NIH. It would also require the director of NIH to consult with outside groups and conduct outreach in developing (and updating) the policies. or respond to medical products, based on, for example, genetic differences. This could make a treatment less effective or perhaps more toxic for individuals with specific genotypes. Therefore, it is important to study in clinical trials the safety and effectiveness of medical products in a broadly representative sample of people who will likely use the products following FDA approval. Section 492B of the PHSA requires the Director of NIH to include women and minorities in NIH-funded clinical research and to conduct or support outreach to recruit minorities and women into clinical research. Section 1029 of H.R. 6 is broadly comparable to Sections 3 through 6 of S. 2745. The House provision would express the sense of Congress that the NIH National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities "should include within its strategic plan ways to increase representation of underrepresented communities in clinical trials" S.2742 contains several provisions similar to those in the House provision, such as the requirement to improve adherence to the requirements of Section 492B of the PHSA. of S. 2742 would amend Section 405 of the PHSA. It would require that Directors of ICs be appointed by the NIH Director, with the exception of the Director of the National Cancer Institute. The term of office for the director of an IC would be five years and would permit the director to be reappointed at the end of a five-year term. There would be no limit to the number of terms served by a director of the IC. The proposal would also require that, if the office of a director was created, it would be named by the President. It would require that, if the office of a director of an IC becomes vacant before the end of a five-year term, the director appointed to fill the vacancy begin a new five- year term. The compensation limitations in Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993, would be removed. Each current IC Director would be deemed to be appointed for a five year term as of the date of enactment, and the NIH Director could terminate the appointment prior to end of the term. would require the working group to consider various specified factors, including, for example, preclinical and clinical experiment design. It also would require the Director of NIH, not later than 18 months after enactment, to consider the recommendations and develop or update policies as appropriate. Finally, the section would require a report to be issued to the Secretary and Congress two years after enactment. The bill was signed into law by President Barack Obama on July 25. It is expected to become law by the end of the year. than 90 days after enactment, to establish a Task Force on Research Specific to Pregnant and Lactating Women. The task force would be terminated two years after its establishment, with an option for a two-year extension. Section 9 would require the Director of NIH, within two years of enactment and taking into consideration the findings of the task force, to update regulations and guidance, as appropriate, regarding the inclusion of pregnant women and lactating women in research. The section would also require the Secretary, not later than two years afterwards, to updated regulations. Section 3 of S. 2742 includes a series of requirements that would address the administrative burden on researchers funded by NIH and other federal agencies. The bill would direct the Secretary, within two years of enactment, to lead a review by research funding agencies of all financial conflict-of-interest regulations and policies. The Reducing Administrative Burdens of Researchers provision in H.R. 6 Section 1023 is comparable to Section 3 of s 2742 . The House provision would remove compensation limitations for consultants and individual scientists (not just NIH IC Directors) burdens experienced by primary NIH grant awardees related to monitoring grant sub-recipients. Third, the Secretary, in consultation with the NIH Director, would be required to evaluate financial expenditure reporting procedures and requirements for NIH funding recipients. Fourth, within two years of enactment, the. Secretary would have to complete a review of regulations and policies for the care and use of laboratory animals and. make appropriate revisions to reduce administrative burden on. laboratory animals, the bill says. The bill is expected to be signed into law within the next few months. The Director of the National Cancer Institute is appointed by the President. Each NIH Institute Director reports directly to the NIH Director. Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993 ( P.L. 102-394 ), states that the payment of compensation to consultants or individual scientists appointed for limited periods of time is "not to exceed the per diem rate equivalent to the maximum rate payable for senior-level positions," which is not less than 120% of the minimum rate of basic pay. establishing the Initiative, the NIH Director would have to take into consideration recommendations made by NAS in its study on the next generation of researchers. S. 2742 contains several provisions aimed at streamlining and improving administrative matters at NIH. Section 3 of S. 2014 would amend PHSA Section 487A to consolidate existing NIH intramural and of underrepresented communities in clinical trials. Section 403(a) of the PHSA requires the NIH director to submit to Congress biennially a report on NIH activities. the PHSA by adding a new Section 404M to establish within the office of the NIH Director the Next Generation of Researchers Initiative (the Initiative) Through the Initiative, the NIH director would be required to coordinate all NIH policies and programs focused on promoting and providing opportunities for new researchers. Among other things, the director would have to coordinate with relevant agencies, professional associations, and academic institutions to improve and update information on the biomedical workforce in order to inform training, recruitment, and retention programs of biomedical researchers. less than 120% of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS–15 of the General Schedule; and ... not greater than the rate of Basic Pay for level III of the Executive Schedule. Section 2 of S. 2742 would amend Section 403(a) of the PHSA to replace the biennial reporting requirement of the NIH Director with a triennial requirement. The section would add new, and clarify existing, reporting requirements, including a description of intra-NIH activities and funding made available. evaluation of board activities regarding its purpose and responsibilities and submit a report to Congress. Section 5 would modify or eliminate a number of different NIH reporting requirements. Within two years of enactment, it would require the heads of each IC to submit to the NIH Director a report on the amount of funding made available for conducting or supporting research that involves collaboration between a given IC and at least one other IC. This information would be included in the triennial report required by Section 403(a), as amended by Section 2 of S. 2742. FDASIA ( P.L. 112-144 ) added a new FFDCA Section 529, creating the pediatric priority review voucher program. This voucher program, funded by user fees, provides a transferable voucher, under specified conditions, to a sponsor of an approved new drug or biological product for a rare pediatric disease. The purpose of the priority review drug voucher programs is to incentivize development of new treatment for diseases that may otherwise not attract development interest from companies due to cost or lack of market opportunities. The 21 st Century Cures Act contains no comparable provisions to S. 2055 as reported. Under the Prescription Drug User Fee Act of 1992 (PDUFA), FDA agreed to specific goals for improving the drug review time and created a two-tiered system of review times. Compared with the amount of time standard review generally takes (approximately 10 months), a Priority Review designation means FDA's goal is to take action on an application within 6 months. Currently, FDA has two authorized priority review voucher programs (the rare pediatric disease priority review program, than one priority review voucher issued under S. 1878 for the same product application. H.R. 6 contains a comparable provision (Section 2152, Reauthorization of Rare Pediatric Disease Priority Review Voucher Incentive Program), which would extend the authority to award rare disease vouchers. Unlike the Senate bill, the House provision would add to the list of characteristics of a pediatric rare disease product application that the product not have received a tropical disease priority review vouchers. Like S.1878, the provision also would require that GAO study the voucher program. The bill would extend eligibility for a rare pediatric disease priority review voucher. It would also extend the authority to award such priority review vouchers until September 30, 2022. A new drug application or a biologics license application submitted to FDA after the enactment of H.R. 6 and before December 31, 2018, would remain eligible to receive apriority review voucher even if approval comes after December 30, 2018. The bill also would amend the definition of "rare pediatric disease" by adding the following words: "The disease is a serious or life-threatening disease" The term "rare pediatric disease" refers to a disease that affects fewer than 200,000 persons in the United States. FDASIA terminated the authority to award such vouchers one year after the Secretary awards the third-priority voucher. S. 1878 would amend the definition by adding the following words in italics: "The disease is a serious or life-threatening disease in which the serious or. life- threatening disease is for which there is no reasonable expectation that the cost of developing and making the drug available in the U.S. will be recovered" S. 1878 would amend FFDCA Section 529(b)(4) by adding the requirement that the sponsor of a rare pediatric disease product application that intends to request a voucher for a rare Pediatrics product notify the Secretary of Health and Human Services. The bill also would amend the definition of a "rare Pediatrics product application" to mean a human drug application approved after the enactment of S.1878. It also would add the phrase "a serious or life-threatening disease in which the serious orLife-threatening manifestations primarily affect individuals aged from birth to 18 years" to the definition. scientific rationale for the determination. At any time following the Secretary's determination of the product's primary mode of action, the sponsor would be permitted to submit a proposed combination product review plan. The Secretary would be required to provide a written response to the sponsor indicating whether the plan was accepted, accepted in part, or denied. For premarket review of a combination product that includes an approved constituent component, the secretary would be allowed to require that a sponsor submit only a drug or device. The bill would allow the sponsor, if, to remain in effect except with written agreement of the Secretary. would be allowed to require that a sponsor submit only that information that is necessary to determine the safety of the combination product. For premarket review of a combination product that contains an approved drug constituent, the applicant would be permitted to rely upon investigational studies not conducted by the applicant and for which the applicant has not obtained a right of reference. In relying upon these studies, the applicants would be required to certify any patents that claim that claim the product is safe and effective. The applicant would also be required to certify any patents that claim the product is safe and effective. OCP is required to determine the primary mode of action of a combination product and regulate it based on that determination. OCP treats a drug-device combination product as a drug unless the manufacturer can prove that it satisfies the device exclusionary clause. A manufacturer whose product is assigned to CDER will have a higher standard of evidence, a potentially higher requirement for supporting the product's claims. The product does not rely on chemical action to achieve its primary intended purpose, OCP says. It is not dependent upon being metabolized for the achievement of its primary wanted purposes. as the single mode of action expected to make the greatest contribution to the overall intended therapeutic effects of the product. If the sponsor of a combination product disagreed with the Secretary's determination and requested an explanation, the Secretary would be required to provide a substantive scientific rationale for the determination. The Secretary would not be permitted to determine that the primary mode ofaction is that of a drug or biologic solely because the combination product has any chemical action within or on the body. In addition, the sponsor would have to provide an explanation. applicant would be required to certify any patents that claim the approved drug or claim use of the approved drugs. An application for a combination product that contains an approved drug constituent would be considered a 505(b)(2) application. The application would also have to give notice to the holder of a patent that the patent is invalid or will not be infringed upon. The approval of an application containing such certification would be. required to be made effective as specified in FFDCA Section 503(c)(3), among other requirements. approved drug constituent would be considered a 505(b)(2) application. Bill would not prohibit a sponsor from submitting separate applications for the constituent parts of a combination product. The bill would further require OCP to help coordinate timely review of combination products across relevant agency centers. It would also specify additional duties for OCP related to communication, facilitating meetings between the agency and the sponsors, and dispute resolution. It was introduced in the House of Representatives on Wednesday. It has been referred to the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions. product that contains an approved drug constituent, unless the applicant provides a patent certification and notifies the holder of the approved application and patent owner that the patent is invalid or will not be infringed upon. The bill would also require the Secretary to identify, not later than 18 months after enactment, types of combination products that the Secretary proposes may adopt different good manufacturing practices. This list would be required to be published in the Federal Register and updated as needed. Section 2181 of H.R. 6 addresses the issue of combination product, but would take a different approach than the previous section. In 2002, Congress directed FDA to establish an Office of Combination Products. The bill would require the Secretary, not later than four years after enactment, to issue final guidance on the combination product review process. It would add reporting requirements to the annual report to Congress on the activities of OCP as specified, and would amend FFDCA Section 520(h)(4) to prohibit the use of information contained in an application for premarket approval of a class III device from being used in a combination product application. higher standard of evidence, a potentially higher requirement for supporting data, a higher user fee, and probably a longer premarket review time period. S. 1767 would amend Section 503(g) of the FFDCA to require the Secretary to assign a primary center for the regulation of combination products. The bill would require the secretary to determine the primary mode of action for a combination product—defined as the single mode ofaction expected to make the product more competitive with other drugs and devices. the Secretary, are simple laboratory examinations and procedures that have an insignificant risk of an erroneous result. Demonstrating the latter includes showing that a test's accuracy is comparable to a method whose accuracy has already been established and documented. S. 1622 Section 3 would require the Secretary, not later than one year after enactment, to publish draft guidance that revises Section V of the current guidance, including providing draft guidance on how to prove accuracy in a test. It would also require the secretary to provide draft guidance to Congress. or an IDE must also include a brief statement on how the least burdensome requirements were considered and applied. H.R. 6 (Title II, Subtitle M, Section 2223) is comparable to S. 1622. Under the House provision, the Secretary would be required to issue draft guidance, no later than 12 months after enactment, that would update the October 4, 2002, final guidance on the least-burdensome provisions. In developing the guidance, the secretary would berequired to hold a meeting of stakeholders "to ensure a full record" effectiveness shall be specified as a result of a determination by the Secretary that such data are necessary to establish device effectiveness. The Secretary shall consider, in consultation with the applicant, the least burdensome appropriate means of evaluating device effectiveness that would have a reasonable likelihood of resulting in approval. Section 513(i)(1)(D) Whenever the Secretary requests information to demonstrate that devices with differing technological characteristics are substantially equivalent, the Secretary shall only request information that is necessary to making substantial equivalence determinations. for interactive communication with the device sponsor during the review process," and expedite "the Secretary's review of manufacturing and quality systems compliance" The Secretary would be required to "disclose to the sponsor, not less than 5 business days in advance, the topics of any consultation concerning the sponsor's device" The secretary would be allowed to, as appropriate, "coordinate" with the sponsor regarding early agreement on a data development plan. The Secretary also would be able to " coordinate" with a sponsor regarding "early agreement" on a "data development plan" part, or denied. The bill would allow the sponsor, if the plan were to be denied, to request a meeting with the Secretary to discuss the information and requirements necessary to make the plan acceptable. A denied plan would be allowed to be resubmitted. With respect to an accepted plan, in whole or part, the Secretary would be required to accept the plan if the Secretary determines the data to be collected are appropriate for premarket approval. A plan that has been accepted would be needed to remain in effect except with written consent. devices (unless exempt) must have an investigational device exemption (IDE) before the clinical study is initiated. An HDE application is similar to a PMA, but it is exempt from the effectiveness requirements. Such devices may be used in a facility only after a local IRB has approved their use in that facility, except in certain emergency situations. The provision would amend Section 520(g) of the FFDCA, regarding IDEs, by removing the word "local" in all references to local IRBs. in all references to local IRBs, including in the stipulation that an approved humanitarian use device may be used in a facility only after a local IRB has approved such use, except in certain emergency situations. The use of non-local IRBs for review of IDEs and HDEs provision in H.R. 6 is comparable to S. 1622. The House provision would also require the Secretary, within 12 months of enactment, to revise or issue regulations or guidance, as necessary, to carry out these amendments. agencies, which apply the regulations to the research they fund. Under the Common Rule, research protocols must be approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) to ensure that the rights and welfare of research subjects are protected. FDA has issued its own set of Human Subject Regulations, which are similar, but not identical, to the Common rule. FDA applies these regulations to all the research it regulates, including clinical trials of new drugs and medical devices. All clinical evaluations of investigational devices (unless exempt) must have an investigational device exemption (IDE) The Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) of 1988 provide the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) with authority to regulate clinical laboratories. CLIA requires laboratories to receive certification before they are allowed to carry out clinical laboratory testing on a human sample. certification is based on the level of complexity of testing that a laboratory is performing, graded as low, moderate, or high. FDA is responsible for categorizing clinical laboratory tests according to theirlevel of complexity. Laboratories that perform only low-complexity tests are not required to receive CLIA certification.  Laboratories that perform only low-complexity tests (called waived tests ) receive a certificate of waiver (COW) from CMS. Conversely, only laboratories certified to do so may perform moderate- and high- complexity tests. Under current law, waived tests are those "that have been approved by FDA for home use or that, as determined by the Secretary, are simple laboratory examinations and procedures that have their level of complexity determined by FDA" FDA determines whether a test is waived (i.e., low- Complexity) or not based on information submitted about the test by the manufacturer. On April 23, 2014, FDA issued the following draft guidance: Expedited Access for Premarket Approval Medical Devices Intended for Unmet Medical Need for Life Threatening or Irreversibly Debilitating Diseases or Conditions. FDA issued final guidance on April 13, 2015. The guidance focuses on balancing risks versus benefits for patients, drafting a Data Development Plan by the medical device sponsor, and collecting postmarket data on a medical device that has received a priority review designation. As indicated in the title, the FDA draft guidance covered only premarket approval (PMA) medical devices. application, relies on the use of surrogate endpoints and the collection of postmarket data. FDA intends to withdraw approval for a device if the sponsor fails to adhere to the postmarket requirements, such as data collection. Comments on the April 2014 FDA draft guidance questioned FDA's ability to enforce postmarket study requirements. Comments urged the agency and Congress "to evaluate whether FDA has sufficient authorities to promptly withdraw product approval if the necessary data are not promptly collected or suggest that the product benefits do not outweigh risks" in a widespread recall, and the hazards posed by particles shed from [DePuy] metal-on-metal hip replacements were not predictable based on engineering insights or in vitro studies. The 2002 FDA guidance states, "[r]eliance on postmarket controls ... should be considered as a mechanism to reduce the premarket burden for 510(k)s and PMAs" However, the FDA's authority to require postmarket studies of medical devices is limited. A September 2015 GAO study found that of the 392 postmarket surveillance studies ordered by FDA, only 38 were ordered by the FDA. One media source stated that, regarding the EAP program, FDA "estimates that, at least in the early stages, on average, about six devices a year may qualify for the program" The estimated six devices would represent about 15% of FDA's total PMA applications in one year. S. 1077 would add a new Section 515B, "Priority Review for Breakthrough Devices," to Chapter V of the FFDCA. The new section would be part of the FDA's PMA review process. S. 2503 would require FDA to issue final guidance on 510(k) device modification. Industry had voiced concerns that the 2011 guidance would slow the device regulatory process. H.R. 6 would provide review priority for life-threatening or irreversibly debilitating human diseases or conditions. There are no comparable provisions in H.r. 6 under FFDCA Section 515(d)(5), in order to provide for more effective treatment or diagnosis, the Secretary shall provide reviewpriority. determination by the Secretary that an application provides a reasonable assurance of the safety and effectiveness of the device" The provision would amend FFDCA Section 517A(a), adding that each substantive summary of the scientific and regulatory rationale for any decision made by FDA's Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) regarding the submission or review of a PMA, a 510(k), or an IDE must also include a brief statement on hold a meeting of stakeholders "to ensure a full record to support the publication of such document" to introduce a device intended for human use into interstate commerce, to report to the Secretary. This notification requirement is part of the 510(k) premarket approval pathway, a process that is unique to medical devices and if successful results in FDA clearance. The manufacturer must demonstrate that a new device is substantially equivalent to a device already on the market (a predicate device) Substantial equivalence is determined by comparing the new device to a predicate device already in the market. The FDA requires the manufacturer to provide a list of the class in which the device is classified and the actions taken to comply. S. 2503 would amend FFDCA Section 510 by adding a new subsection (q), "Reusable Medical Devices" It would require the Secretary, not later than six months after enactment, to identify and publish a list of reusable device types. Reports issued after the publication of this list would be required to include instructions for use and validation data, as specified by the Secretary. It also would require reports under Section 510(k) must include (1) instructions for Use and (2) validation data regarding cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization. Reusable medical devices are those devices that may be reprocessed and used on multiple patients. In March of 2015, FDA released final guidance on the reprocessing of reusable medical devices: Reprocessing Medical Devices in Health Care Settings: Validation Methods and Labeling. This guidance states that, among other things, certain reusable devices, such as duodenoscopes, bronchoscopes and endoscopes should submit to the FDA for approval to be sold in the U.S. of combination products, but would take a different approach than the Senate legislation. The H.R. 6 section would amend FFDCA Section 503(g)(4)(C) to require that the Secretary "issue final guidance that describes the responsibilities of each agency center" Increasingly, health care facilities are using computer systems for routine administrative and financial transactions. One area that is undergoing especially rapid growth and innovation is mobile health. This term refers to the use of portable devices, such as smartphones and tablets. FDA published final guidance on the least burdensome provisions on October 4, 2002. Under the guidance, FDA may allow the use of non-clinical data in place of clinical data for the approval of PMA devices. When clinical data are needed, FDA allows manufacturers to consider study designs to shorten the length of the study. Such study designs include the use Of "surrogate" study designs, which can be done in a variety of ways, such as by using a computer or mobile phone. S. 1622 would amend FFDCA Section 515(c), adding a new paragraph that would require the Secretary to "consider the least burdensome appropriate means necessary to demonstrate device safety and effectiveness" A summary of the audit findings would be required to be submitted to the Senate HELP Committee and the House Energy and Commerce Committee and posted on the FDA website. It would define the term necessary to mean "the minimum required information that would support a determination by the Secretary that an application provides a reasonable explanation" supervisors, receives training on the "meaning and implementation of the least burdensome requirements" and to periodically assess the implementation of such requirements. Under the Senate bill, 18 months after enactment, the FDA ombudsman responsible for device premarket review would be required to conduct an audit of training, including the effectiveness of the training. The audit would also include "interviews of persons who are representatives of the industry" and a list of the measurement tools used to assess training effectiveness, the bill says. bill would add a new FFDCA section 565A, "Priority Review to Encourage Treatments for Agents that Present National Security Threats" This section would establish a new priority review voucher program, funded by user fees. Section 8 of this bill would require GAO to report on the effectiveness of the priority review vouchers program. There is no comparable provision in the House bill. Congress has had a long-standing interest in developing the future biomedical research workforce. Recent concerns have focused on ways to improve biomedical research. The new section would require the Secretary to establish a program to provide priority review for medical devices. Such requests would be evaluated by a team of experienced FDA staff and senior managers. The section would allow requests for priority review from device sponsors of PMA medical devices and one other type of regulatory decision involving a medical device. If the Secretary approves a priority review designation for a device, the Secretary would not be able to withdraw the designation because another "breakthrough" device was subsequently cleared or approved. issue, not later than one year after enactment, guidance on the implementation of the new Section 515B of the FFDCA. The Secretary would be required to issue a report, on January 1, 2017, to the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee and the House Energy and Commerce Committee. The provision in H.R. 6 regarding priority review for breakthrough devices (Title II, Subtitle L, Sections 2201) is comparable to S. 1077 . Importantly, the Secretary would have to report on the program added under the new FFD CA Section 5 15B. The House bill contains a comparable provision. This provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress on workforce planning and certain specified elements with regard to the FDA workforce. The House provision would allow the HHS Secretary to determine pay (not to exceed the annual rate of pay of the President) for the purposes of retaining qualified employees, notwithstanding certain General Schedule pay rate requirements. Unlike the Senate bill, the House provision wouldn't require a GAO study with regardto the FDA's ability to hire, train, and retain qualified scientific, technical, and professional staff. hired; however, some subsets of employees are hired under alternative government-wide or agency-specific authorities. Numerous hiring authorities target scientists and other technical workers. For example, FFDCA Section 714 authorizes the Secretary to appoint employees to positions in FDA to perform, administer, or support activities related to review of medical device applications and human generic drugs. The FDA Commissioner would be allowed to determine pay (not to exceed the annual rate of pay of the President) for the purposes of retaining qualified employees. provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle P, Section 2285, "Hiring Authority for Scientific, Technical, and Professional Personnel"), which would add a new FFDCA Section 714A, Additional Hiring Authority. Like the Senate bill, the House provision would allow the Secretary to "appoint qualified candidates to scientific, technical, or professional positions" The House provision specifies that these positions would be within FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Center for Biologics evaluation and research, and other centers. FDA regulatory authority over medical product safety and effectiveness covers drugs, biological products, and medical devices. House provision would not require a GAO study with regard to the FDA workforce. Senate bill would not requirement the allocation of a certain percentage of funding for this research.of funding for such projects. The agency generally divides responsibilities for the review of marketing applications in its product-centered offices. The Center for Drug Evaluation and Research reviews new drug applications for approval, the Center for Biologics evaluation and research reviews biologics license applications for licensure. As part of the Vice President's Cancer Moonshot Initiative, the Obama Administration has proposed an Oncology Center of Excellence. The proposed center of excellence would streamline collaboration across FDA's Human Drugs, Biologics, and Devices and Radiological Health programs. According to the FY2017 Congressional Justification, "FDA needs to take an integrated approach in its evaluation of products for the prevention, screening, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer" Although the Administration's proposed center is not set to go into effect immediately, it is expected to be in place by 2018. and treatment of cancer." This provision would add a new FFDCA Section 1014, "Food and Drug Administration Intercenter Institutes" Such institutes would be responsible for coordinating activities applicable to cancer. Some groups have suggested that such pilots could also be done in other areas (e.g., cardiology, neurology, and infectious disease) The proposed center of excellence is specific to cancer, but there has arguably also been an increase in the number and complexity of diagnostics and therapeutics for other diseases. Such institutes would be responsible for coordinating activities applicable to specific disease area(s) H.R. 2700 would require the Secretary to establish at least one institute within one year of enactment of the bill. It would also require a public comment period while each institute is established. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the first quarter of 2014. It is currently under consideration in the Senate and the House of Representatives, both of which are expected to vote on the bill this week. and 43% of their time in completing pre- and post-award requirements. The most commonly experienced administrative responsibilities included those related to federal project finances, personnel, and effort reporting. For researchers engaged in projects that required human or animal subjects, the related Institutional Review Board (IRB) and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) requirements were by far the most time-consuming. Other areas viewed as particularly time- consuming were those involving clinical trials, subcontracts, and cross-agency differences. H.R. 6 would amend FFDCA Section 505(c) to permit the Secretary to rely upon "qualified data summaries" to support the approval of the supplemental NDA. This section defines qualified data summary as a "summary of clinical data that demonstrates the safety and effectiveness of a drug with respect to a qualified indication" The Senate provision does not include treating cancer in its definition of "qualified indication," as determined by the Secretary. The House provision would add a new Section 505H, which would address the data requirements. The House provision would require the sponsor to submit the full data sets used to develop the qualified data summaries. The definition of "qualified data summary" in the House provision is similar to the Senate bill: "a summary of clinical data intended to demonstrate safety and effectiveness with respect to a qualified indication for use of a drug" The House provision also would require that the FDA Commissioner issue implementation guidance for the streamlined data review program and would allow the Commissioner to issue regulations for implementation. The Senate bill would allow for the FDA to make approval decisions for certain supplemental applications based on qualified data summary. This provision would require the Secretary to post guidelines on the FDA website, with input from experts, that detail best practices for drug safety surveillance using FAERS. This provision would also amend FFDCA Section 505(r)(2)(D) to remove the requirement that the Secretary prepare a summary analysis of the adverse drug reaction reports received for a drug "by 18 months after approval" This provision also would expand the authority to evaluate the ETASU for a drugs to include "or other advisory committee," compared with current law. and expanded the risk-management authority of FDA. A REMS may include "an elements to assure safe use" (ETASU), which is a restriction on distribution or use. This provision would require the Secretary to conduct regular screenings of the FAERS database instead of the bi-weekly screenings required by current law. It would also require the Department of Health and Human Services to post more information on the drug on the FDA's FAERS website. The provision would amend FFDCA Section 505(k)(5) to require the department to post the information on its website. The Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ) required FDA to take several actions regarding how it informs the public. The law required biweekly screening of the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) database and quarterly reporting on the FAERS website regarding new safety information or potential signals of a serious risk. The FDAAA also required the development and maintenance of a database of drug safety and effectiveness information for use by the public and expert committees. The FDAAA also required the development and maintenance of a website with extensive drug safety information. The Secretary of Health and Human Services must prepare a summary analysis of the adverse drug reaction reports received for the drug, including identification of any new risks not previously identified, potential new risks, or known risks reported in an unusual number. The FDAAA named the risk-management process "risk evaluation and mitigation strategies" (REMS) and expanded therisk-management authority of FDA. A REMS may be used to identify and mitigate serious risk. H.R. 6 would amend FFDCA Section 505 by deleting bill. The new 505(x) would restate the deleted 505(d) requirement for the Secretary to "implement a structured risk-benefit assessment framework in the new drug approval process" This provision would define "patient experience data" as "patient-focused drug development tools as part of approved applications" It would also require the FDA Commissioner to publish, no later than June 1, 2021, 2026, and 2031, on the FDA website. observational studies and other analyses conducted to assist in the understanding of the natural history of a rare disease or condition and in the development of a therapy..." H.R. 6 contains a related provision (Section 2151. Extension of Exclusivity Periods for a Drug Approved for a New Indication for a Rare Disease or Condition). Unlike the Senate bill which would broaden the use of grants for development of rare diseases, the House provision would add a new FFDCA Section 505I. approval authorities, or to entitle sponsors to obtain information in another sponsor's application without permission of the other sponsor. S. 1597 would amend FFDCA Section 569C by adding a new subsection (b), "Statement of Patient Experience," which would require the Secretary, upon approval of a new drug application, to make public any patient experience data and related information submitted and reviewed. It would also allow for identification of patient representatives who do not have any, or have minimal, financial interests in the medical products industry. FDA reports the number of investigational drug requests it receives, manufacturers do not. The provision would add a new FFDCA Section 561A, "Expanded Access Policy Required for Investigational Drugs" Some sponsors have been reluctant to provide investigational drugs outside of the standard investigational new drug (IND) processes. H.R. 6 would require a manufacturer to make its policies on responding to compassionate use requests publicly available.resources, and need for data to assess safety and effectiveness. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . FFDCA Section 505 and accompanying regulations provide the framework for FDA's approval of sponsors' drug marketing applications. For a drug whose active ingredient has never been FDA-approved, the law requires the sponsor to submit a new drug application that includes data to provide evidence of the drug's safety and effectiveness for its intended use. Once a product has been approved by the FDA, it can be sold in the U.S. without approval. FDA issues more than 100 guidances each year. Some Members of Congress have expressed concern with FDA's use of guidance documents in lieu of the rulemaking process in certain instances. This provision would amend FFDCA Section 701(h)(1)(C) by adding clause (iii), this provision would add clause (ii) to this section to make the guidance documents available to the public in written form and, as feasible, through electronic means. The provision would also add a clause ( iv) to the section that would allow the Secretary to make such documents available in written and electronic form. provision would amend FFDCA Section 701(h)(1)(C) by adding clause (iii), which would require the Secretary, when proposing or finalizing a guidance document, to include in that guidance document a statement explaining why the interpretation or policy set forth in such guidance is being provided in a nonbinding guidance document. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . PHSA Section 319 authorizes the HHS Secretary to determine the existence of a public policy that is not established through rulemaking. that revises Section V of the current guidance. Section 2228 of H.R. 6 (Title I, Subtitle M) is substantively identical to the Senate legislation. Section 205 of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997 (FDAMA, P.L. 105-115 ) amended Section 513 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA), adding two provisions. Not later than one year after the comment period for the draft guidance closes, the Secretary would be required to publish final revised guidance. Section 3 would require the Secretary to report to Congress at least every two years on the number of requests for approval. Section 4 states that S. 185 should not be construed to alter premarket approval for such antibacterial drugs for limited populations. It also would require GAO to report on the coordination of monitoring activities required by S.185, and the extent to which this limited pathway has streamlined pre market approval for the drugs. For a broader indication, this legislation would allow the secretary to remove any post-marketing conditions (e.g., labeling requirements) S. 2700 would amend 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35 to exempt NIH research from the requirements of the PRA. Through various amendments to the FFDCA, Congress has required the Secretary (sometimes through the delegation of authority to FDA) to submit specified reports to Congress or to contract with other entities (e.g., the Institute of Medicine [IOM]), to conduct specified studies. This provision would remove the following: Section 505(k)(5), which required the secretary to report to Congress not later than two years after the enactment of the FDAAA in 2007 on certain FDA procedures addressing post market safety issues. that of the 392 postmarket surveillance studies ordered by FDA between May 1, 2008, and February 24, 2015, 88% were inactive, 10% were ongoing, and 2% were complete. Activities related to implementing the least burdensome provision, including training for staff and advisory panels, are posted on FDA's website. S. 1622 would amend FFDCA Section 513 by adding a new subsection (j), "Training and Oversight of Least Burdensome Requirements" The Secretary would be required to ensure that each FDA employee involved in the review of premarket submissions, including supervisors, receives training. the Secretary to contract with the IOM, not later than three years after the enactment of the Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act of 2007, to conduct a study, which was further specified in this section. Section 505B(l), which required the Secretary, within three years of the enactment. of the Pediatric Research Equity Act, to "conduct a study and report to Congress regarding the pediatric. studies conducted pursuant to this section or precursor regulations" Section 523(d), whichrequired the Secretary to conduct. a study related to devices, as early as January 10, 2007. Patients that have serious or life-threatening infections and unmet medical needs due to the lack of an effective approved antibiotic. This streamlined approach would result in more uncertainty about potential risks posed by the product, and therefore a greater need for post-market scrutiny. Section 2121, subsection (g) would add a new subsection 317U to the PHSA requiring the HHS Secretary to establish a monitoring system for the use of antibacterial and antifungal drugs, including products approved under the LPAD pathway. limited population of patients with unmet needs; (2) the standards for new drug application approval are met; and (3) the Secretary receives a written request from the sponsor to approve the drug as an LPAD drug. It would require that the Secretary's determination of the safety and efficacy of a limited population antibacterial drug "reflect[s] the benefit-risk profile of the drug in the intended limited population" Products approved using this pathway must carry prominent labeling noting the intended use. Each year in the United States, at least 2 million people become infected with bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics. At least 23,000 of them die from these infections. Addressing barriers to antibiotic drug approval may help counter this problem. One such proposal is the so-called Limited Population Antibacterial Drug (LPAD) approval pathway for new antibacterial drugs. Such a pathway would involve smaller clinical trials in a limited population of patients that have serious or life-threatening infections and unmet medical needs. the use of antibacterial and antifungal drugs, including products approved under the LPAD pathway, as well as changes in bacterial and fungal resistance to drugs. The Secretary would be required to make summaries of data from this system publicly available. Section 3 would create new FFDCA Section 506(g), "Limited population pathway for antibacterial drugs" This review pathway would allow the Secretary to approve an antibacterial drug as an LPAD drug if certain conditions are met. states that S. 185 should not be construed to alter current prescribing or other medical practices. The House provision would add a new FFDCA subsection 505(z), "Approval of certain antimicrobial and antifungal drugs for use in a limited population of patients" This would be an expedited review pathway for certain antibacterial and antIFungal Drugs. It would be intended for use for patients that have severe, life-threatening infections for which current treatment options are inadequate. that have severe, life-threatening infections for which current treatment options may be limited or absent. Products approved using this pathway could outweigh harms that would not be acceptable in broader population use. The Secretary could consider limited data sets and non-clinical data as substantial evidence of safety and effectiveness, recognizing the smaller populations available for study of an LPAD drug, and the different balance of benefit versus harm in these populations. Some elements of the review pathway proposed in the House bill are comparable to those in the Senate bill. Firms may lack the financial incentives to sponsor products to treat small patient populations. Orphan drugs receive their designation pursuant to FFDCA Section 526(a), a designation created by the Orphan Drug Act of 1983. Since the law's passage, FDA has approved over 400 new orphan drugs and biological products. The House bill contains an identical provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle E, Section 2083, "Finalizing Draft Guidance on Expanded Access"). Incentives for sponsors of orphan drugs include seven years of market exclusivity, tax credits for clinical trial expenses, user fee waivers, and federal grants to cover costs of qualified clinical testing expenses. The FFDCA contains provisions to grant market exclusivities for statutorily defined time periods (in months or years) to the holder of the NDA for a product that is, for example, a drug used in the treatment of a rare disease or condition, the first generic version of a drug to come to market, certain pediatric uses of approved drugs, and new qualified products. Section 5 of the Orphan Drug Act (21 U.S.C. 360ee) allows the Secretary to make grants and enter into contracts with certain entities to assist in "defraying the costs of qualified clinical testing expenses" This provision would expand the definition of qualified testing to include "prospectively planned and designed observational studies and other analyses conducted to assist with the development of drugs for rare diseases and conditions" During the period of exclusivity, FDA does not grant marketing approval to another manufacturer's product. an exemption for a drug for a rare disease or condition under section 505(i) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. preclinical testing involving a drug is designated under section 526 of such Act and before the date on which an application with respect to such drug is submitted under section505(b) or under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act. Preclinical testing involves a drug that occurs after the date of such drug's designation and before an application is submitted. States or affects more than 200,000 persons in the United States and for which there is no reasonable expectation that the cost of developing and making the drug available will be recovered from U.S. sales. S. 2030 would define genetically targeted drugs, genetically targeted technology, and variant protein-targeted drugs. New Section 529A should not be construed to limit the Secretary's product approval authorities. The comparable provision in the House bill ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle C, Section 2041, "Precision Medicine Guidance and Other Programs of Food and Drug Administration") would add a new Subchapter J, Precision Medicine. Subchapter J, Precision Medicine, to Chapter V of the FFDCA would include a new Section 592, "Precision medicine regarding orphan-drug and expedited-approval programs" For a precision drug or biological product application where the product is for the treatment of a serious or life-threatening disease or condition, the new Section would allow the Secretary to rely on information about a drug. First, as with the Senate bill, the Secretary would be allowed to rely upon information about the drug. Targeted therapies are generally first developed for patients with the most frequent disease-causing mutations. To provide therapies for the full spectrum of certain genetic rare diseases, additional targeted therapies would need to be developed. Targeted therapies, because they may be treating small subsets of patients, sometimes qualify as "orphan drugs" Such drugs are called orphan drugs. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. drugs to address an unmet medical need in one or more patient subgroups, including subgroups of patients with different mutations of a gene. This legislation would authorize the Secretary to allow the sponsor of a new drug application for a genetically targeted drug or a variant protein-targeted drug to rely on data and information that has been previously developed and submitted, either by the same or a different sponsor (with permission) for a drug that incorporates or utilizes the same genetically targeted technology or for a similar drug. Biological products must be licensed by FDA, pursuant to PHSA Section 351, before they can be marketed in the United States. Senate bill would amend Section 351(j) of the PHS Act by adding that the provisions of the FFDCA that refer to an "official compendium" as developed and published by the U.S. Pharmacopeia would not apply to biological products regulated under PHS act Section 351. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6. standards development for cellular therapies and regenerative medicine products in March 2014. This section would amend the FFDCA by adding a new Section 506G, "Standards for Regenerative Medicine and Advanced Therapies" It would require the Secretary, in consultation with the National Institute of Standards and Technology and specified stakeholders, to facilitate the development of standards. The term "regenerative medicine and advanced therapies" is defined as including cell therapy, gene therapy, and stem cell therapy. "advanced therapies" is defined as including cell therapy, gene therapy and gene-modified cell therapy. Rules (or regulations) generally start with an act of Congress. In lieu of or in addition to rulemaking, agencies may issue guidance that, although not legally binding, explains the agency's interpretation of, or policy on, a regulatory or statutory issue. Guidance may be used, among other things, to explain the agency’s interpretation of a law or regulation that it is considering. Regenerative medicine is defined by NIH as "the process of creating living, functional tissues to repair or replace tissue or organ function lost due to age, disease, damage, or congenital defects" The regulation of cells or tissues intended for implantation or infusion into a human patient is the responsibility of the FDA Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research. FDA refers to such cells as HCT/Ps, which stands for human cells, tissue, and cellular and tissue-based products. an approved drug already on the market when FDA approves a supplemental application for that drug for a new indication to prevent, diagnose, or treat a rare disease or condition. The sponsor of a drug that receives the extended exclusivity under this provision would be required to notify the Secretary "of any discontinuance of the production of the drug for solely commercial reasons" The six-month extension would not be available for aDrug that had already received a six- months extension under this provisions. Regenerative medicine is defined by NIH as "the process of regenerative medicine" Clinical trials are conducted in three phases. Phase I trials try to determine dosing, document how a drug is metabolized and excreted. If the Phase II trials indicate that the drug may be effective, the drug moves to Phase III. This phase further tests the product's effectiveness, monitors side effects and, in some cases, compares the drug's effects to a standard treatment, such as a flu vaccine or an anti-depressant. The drug is studied in a larger number of participants with the disease (approximately 1,000-3,000) Section 11 of S. 2742 would extend NCATS's authority to support clinical trial activities through the end of Phase IIB. The Senate bill would add material to the NCATS annual/biennial report. The next NCATS report, following enactment, would include a complete list of all such methods and tools developed by research supported by NCATS. The House provision would extend the exception for treatment of a rare disease or condition through theend of Phase III (instead of PhaseIIB) some cases, compares the product's effects to a standard treatment, if one is already available. As more and more participants are tested over longer periods of time, the less common side effects are more likely to be revealed. Under current law, although the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) may develop and provide infrastructure and resources for all phases of clinical trials research, it may support clinical trial activities only through the end of Phase IIA, with specific exceptions. NCATS may support clinical trial activities through the end of Phase IIB for a treatment for a rare disease or. "Data and information" refers to patient experience data, information on patient-focused drug development tools, and other relevant information, as determined by the Secretary. S. 1597 would require the Secretary, acting through the FDA Commissioner, to develop a plan to issue draft and final guidance, over a period of five years, regarding the collection of patient experiencedata and the use of such data in drug development. This section describes the content of those required guidance documents and defines "patient experience data" as data that are collected by any persons. "patient experience data" would be defined as data collected by patients, parents, caregivers, patient advocacy organizations, disease research foundations, medical researchers, research sponsors, or other parties determined appropriate by the Secretary. The new subsection would also require the Secretary to issue implementation guidance after holding several methodological workshops and a public meeting. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), each year in the United States, at least 2,000 people die of cancer. and nonmanufacturer groups. manage information in order to facilitate research, and to consult with specified experts. The Secretary would be required to include information on demographics, relevant risk factors, and diagnostic and progression markers. Optional data elements would include information about the epidemiology, natural history, prevention, detection, management, and treatment approaches for the diseases. The bill also would authorize the Secretary to furnish grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements with public or private nonprofit entities to implement this provision. The secretary would berequired to make information and analysis obtained from the data obtained. The Secretary would be able to ensure that clinical trial design is as efficient as practicable. Agreements on clinical protocols would be considered binding, but may be subject to change under certain circumstances. Section 1121 of H.R. 6 would instruct the Secretary to enter into a seven-year cooperative agreement, contract, or grant with one or more eligible entities (i.e., tax-exempt academic institutions) to implement a pilot. The provision would be required to begin implementation of the provision within 18 months of enactment. eligible entities (i.e., tax-exempt academic institutions) to implement a pilot program to enable registered users to conduct further research on reported clinical trial data. Eligible entities seeking funding would have to submit an application that contains certain specified information, including a description of the system the eligible entity will use to store and maintain such data. The eligible entity must also prove that it will allow onlyregistered users to access and use de-identified clinical trialData. The application must also include evidence demonstrating the ability to compile clinical trial Data in standardized formats. use de-identified clinical trial data; (4) evidence demonstrating the ability of the eligible entity to. ensure that registered users disseminate the results of their research; and (5) evidence that the eligible. entity has a proven track record of protecting confidential data. Prior to FDA approval, medical products are tested in a clinical trial using human volunteers to see how the products compare to standard treatments or to no treatment. FDA uses the data from clinical trials to determine whether to approve a manufacturer's application for marketing a medical product. FDA allows for substitution of laboratory data in certain circumstances. The absence of problems in laboratory testing may not always predict what happens to a device over time in the human body. For example, "the malfunction of [Medtronic and St. Jude Medical] implantable cardioverter-defibrillator leads, which resulted in a widespread recall, and the hazards posed by particles," according to the study. The study used "surrogate endpoints and statistical methods, such as Bayesian analyses" consultation with the IC Directors, would be required to conduct annual progress reviews for each strategic focus area. The plans would be reviewed and updated every five years. Minorities traditionally have been underrepresented in clinical trials. There can be biological differences in how people process or respond to medical products, based on, for example, genetic predispositions. For more information, go to www.clinicaltrials.gov or call the National Institutes of Health at 1-800-273-8255. Products approved using this pathway must carry prominent labeling noting the intended use for a limited and specific population of patients. Sponsors must submit promotional materials to FDA for review 30 days prior to dissemination. FDA would be required to issue draft implementation guidance within 18 months of enactment. This provision should not be construed to alter current prescribing or other medical practices (such as off-label prescribing). Other elements of the review pathway were found only in the House provision, for example: FDA may enter into written agreement with the sponsor to define the process and data needed to review the limited population use application. would be allowed to rely on information about a drug or biological product that has been previously submitted, either by the same or a different sponsor (with permission) This may be for either a new product, or for a different indication for an existing product. In contrast to the Senate bill, it would allow the Secretary to consider the application for expedited review programs, including accelerated approval. Similar to S. 2030 , new Section 592 should not be construed to limit the Secretary's product approval authorities. its approach. This section would require the Secretary, not later than 18 months after enactment, to issue and periodically update guidance. It would also, for a precision drug or biological product application where the product is for the treatment of a serious or life-threatening disease or condition and has been designated as an orphan drug, allow the Secretary to consider the application for expedited review programs. For more information, see S. 2030 , the Advancing Targeted Therapies Act of 2030, which would require drug companies to develop precision drugs and biological products. The House provision would allow priority review requests from device sponsors of both 510(k) devices and PMA medical devices. The provision would also allow a manufacturer or distributor to revise its policy at any time. This provision would become effective on the later of the date that is 60 days after the enactment of S. 2700 or "the first initiation of a phase 2 or phase 3 study ... with respect to such investigational drug" The House bill contains a comparable provision ( H.R. 6 , Title 6, Section 2201) of any consultation concerning the sponsor's device that [FDA] intends to undertake with external experts or an advisory committee. The House provision adds specific details regarding efficient clinical trial design. The agreement on clinical protocols and any subsequent changes must be agreed to in writing, the provision says. The provision does not specify a deadline on the requirement for FDA guidance on clinical trial protocol changes, the House provision says, but it does not mention a deadline for the FDA to issue guidance on the matter. The FDA says it will provide guidance on "the adoption of shorter or smaller clinical trials, application of surrogate endpoints, and use of adaptive trial designs and Bayesian statistics" requiring the NIH Director to inform responsible parties of the option to request that information for a medical device clinical trial be publically posted prior to the date of clearance or approval. A clinical trial for a combination product would be considered a drug clinical trial, if the Secretary determines that the primary mode of action of the product is that of a drug or biological product. The Secretary would also need to determine if the product was a device or a combination of two or more products. The NIH Director would need to decide if the trial was for a drug, a combination, or a device. FDA may grant expanded access to a patient with a serious disease or condition for which there is no comparable or satisfactory alternative therapy. The widespread use of expanded access is limited by an important factor: whether the manufacturer agrees to provide the drug. Manufacturers may consider several factors in deciding whether to provide an investigational drug, such as available supply, perceived liability risk, limited staff and facility resources, and need for data to assess safety and effectiveness. FDA does not have the authority to compel a manufacturer to participate. FDA regulates the U.S. sale of drugs and biological products. Under certain circumstances, FDA may permit the sponsor to provide an unapproved or unlicensed product to patients. One such mechanism is expanded access to investigational drugs, commonly referred to as "compassionate use" If you or a family member have contemplated taking an investigational drug, contact the National Institutes of Health at 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. manufacturing process, and the drug labeling. FDA requires that the manufacturer submit a supplemental NDA each time the manufacturer wants to change the labeling, the manufacturing process, or the dosing, or when it wants to add a new indication (a new intended use) of the drug. Regulations at 21 C.F.R. Sections 314.50 and 314.54 describe the required contents of those applications. Regarding clinical data, the regulations direct the applicant to submit, in addition to descriptions and analysis of controlled and uncontrolled clinical studies. drugs outside of the standard investigational new drug (IND) processes because of the uncertainty of how FDA would consider potential adverse events associated with the expanded access use. This provision would require that the HHS Secretary finalize the guidance "Expanded Access to Investigational Drugs for Treatment Use—Qs & As," issued in draft form in May 2013. The final guidance "clearly define how the Secretary of Health and Human Services interprets and uses adverse drug event data reported by investigators," the provision says. uncontrolled clinical studies, (iv) A description and analysis of any other data or information relevant to an evaluation of the safety and effectiveness of the drug product. (21 C.F.R. 314.50(d)(5)(iv) The clinical data submission must also include an "integrated summary of the data demonstrating substantial evidence of effectiveness for the claimed indications" The application must be submitted by the end of the month, and the drug must be approved within 30 days of the submission. FDA released a nonbinding guidance document on mobile medical apps in September 2013. The agency does not plan to regulate smartphone or tablet manufacturers. In February 2015, FDA released updated guidance on its risk-based approach to regulating mobile medicalApps. The updated guidance includes examples of mobile apps that do not meet the statutory definition of a medical device and so are not subject to its regulatory authority. They include apps used to automate general office operations in health care settings. The guidance also gives examples of apps that may meet the definition of medical device but for which the agency intends to exercise enforcement discretion. interested in mobile apps that could pose a risk to patients if they malfunction. These include apps used to display and transfer data from a patient monitor. Apps that transform a mobile platform into a medical device (e.g., an app that allows patients to use their smartphone to record electrocardiograms using a lead that connects to the phone) Apps that help asthmatics track inhaler usage and asthma episodes; apps that give patients a portal into their own EHR. apps intended for individuals to log, track, or make decisions related to general wellness. H.R. 6 would exclude various types of software applications from FDA's regulatory oversight. Excluded applications include products that provide administrative and health management functions. The House bill also would establish a risk-based exception allowing FDA to exert regulatory authority. But the bill would create a narrower exception for CDS software that the agency determines "poses a significant risk to patient health" The bill also includes provisions on mobile medical apps, which are similar to those in S. 1101. The health software provisions in H. R. 6 , Sections 2241-2243, are similar. a medical device, and they pose a significant risk to patient safety if they do not function as intended. Examples include apps that connect to an existing device for the purpose of controlling its operation, function, or energy source. S. 1101 would exclude certain types of health software from the FFDCA definition of medical device. The updated guidance did not address regulation of CDS software. That topic remains under consideration, according to the FDA's updated guidance on CDS tools and devices.. The number of health-related mobile apps being developed, downloaded, and used is increasing at an almost exponential rate. Some apps simply access stored medical information, while others capture and input patient data into an electronic health record (EHR) Many apps now provide clinical decision support (CDS) using algorithms that use clinical information to generate customized (i.e., patient-specific) diagnosis and treatment recommendations. Regulators are particularly interested in mobile apps that could pose a risk to the health of patients. S. 2511 would require ONC to convene stakeholders to develop a trusted exchange framework and a common agreement among existing networks to exchange electronic health information. ONC would be authorized to refer instances of information blocking to the Office for Civil Rights if a HIPAA privacy consultation would resolve the matter. The Secretary would be required to establish a digital contact directory for health care professionals, practices, and facilities. And it would extend federal privilege and confidentiality protections to HIT developers who report and analyze patient safety information related to HIT use. S. 2511 would require GAO to conduct a review of the methods used for secure patient matching. ONC and OCR would be required to develop policies that support dynamic technology solutions for promoting patient access. OnC would have to ensure that HIT standards and certification support patients' access to their electronic health information. The bill would also require ONC to help educate individuals and providers on patients' rights under HIPAA. It would be funded by the 21 st Century Cures Act, which includes Section 3001 of the Act.  MACRA requires the Secretary, in consultation with stakeholders, to establish interoperability metrics to measure progress toward achieving the national objective of widespread interoperability of certified EHR technology by July 1, 2016. ONC released a report to Congress on health information blocking in April 2015. The report defined information blocking as knowingly and unreasonably interfering with the exchange or use of electronic health information. MACRA also requires eligible hospitals and physicians, beginning April 2016, to indicate through meaningful use attestation (or some other process specified by the Secretary) that they use EHRs. plan to improve the rating, or risk having the product decertified. Hospitals and physicians would be exempted from the Medicare EHR payment adjustment if their EHR technology was decertify. Developers, exchanges, and networks found to have engaged in information blocking would be subject to civil monetary penalties. Health care providers found to be blocking information would be given incentives and disincentives to change their behavior. ONC would give the HHS Office of Inspector General the authority to investigate and penalize information-blocking practices. the administrative and other burdens of using EHR technology, and increase patient access to electronic health information. ONC also would be required to encourage the certification of HIT for use in medical specialties and sites of service. (§2) S. 2511 would establish a program and methodology for calculating and awarding a star rating to each certified HIT product—based on criteria for pediatricians and other specialties. It would also require ONC to adopt certification criteria for HIT used by pediatricians. HIT developers would be required to report on these criteria for each of their certified products. The rating program's methodology and criteria would be posted online. Each developer of an HIT product that received a one-star rating would have to develop and implement a plan to improve the rating, or risk having the product shut down. It would be based on criteria such as the product's security, user-centered design, interoperability, and conformance to certification testing. The star rating system must use at least three stars.  MACRA declared it a national objective to achieve widespread interoperability. A key challenge is overcoming legal and governance barriers to trusted information exchange. The law defines interoperability as the ability of health information systems to not only exchange clinical information but to also use the information based on common standards in order to improve care and patient outcomes. In addition, MACRA instructed the Secretary, within one year of enactment, to submit a report to Congress on ways to help health care providers compare and select certified EHR technology, such as through surveying EHR users and vendors. ONC released a national interoperability roadmap in October 2015. The roadmap establishes interoperability goals for the next 10 years. 2017 set as the deadline for individuals and health care providers along the care continuum to be HIT interoperable by. ONC expects the roadmap to evolve in partnership with the public and private sectors as technology and policy dictate. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. changes to the meaningful use program in response to the concerns of health care providers about the challenges and burdens they face in making EHR technology work. CMS eliminated several clinical documentation objectives, and instead focused on a few objectives that capture more advanced uses of the technology. The 2015 Edition final rule for the certification program established new transparency requirements for HIT developers. It also seeks to improve interoperability, for example, by requiring certified HIT products to adopt new and updated vocabulary and content standards for structured health information. giving patients access to their electronic health information and exchanging patient data during transitions of care. Beginning in 2015, hospitals and physicians that are not meaningful EHR users are subject to a Medicare payment adjustment (i.e., penalty) unless they qualify for a hardship exception. CMS published a final rule in October 2015 modifying the meaningful use Stage 2 objectives and establishing the objectives for Stage 3, which hospitals and Physicians must meet by 2018. The agency made significant changes to the meaningfulUse program in response to the.  ONC released a report on patient identification and matching (i.e., linking patient records with the correct individual) in February 2014. Certified EHR systems must be able to create a summary-of-care document that includes the following standardized patient data: first name; last name; previous name; middle name (including middle initial); suffix; date of birth (year, month, and day are required fields) The Improving Health Information Technology Act ( S. 2511 ) includes multiple provisions to promote HIT interoperability. software that the agency determines "poses a significant risk to patient safety" based on the same four criteria specified in S. 1101. The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act of 2009 authorized Medicare and Medicaid incentive payments to acute-care hospitals and physicians who attest to being meaningful users of certified electronic health record (EHR) technology. The law instructed the Secretary to make the measures of meaningful use more stringent over time, which CMS has done in stages. and physicians to use EHR technology to meet a series of meaningful use objectives. Providers must use Ehr technology that has been tested and certified as having the capability to perform these functions. Testing and certification entities are authorized by the HHS Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) Stage 2 ofmeaning use requires eligible hospitals to use their EHRTechnology to perform more advanced functions, such as giving patients access to their electronic health information and exchanging information with each other. For more information on EHR certification, visit the ONC's website. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule gives individuals the right of access to inspect, obtain, and transmit to a third party a copy of their health information. One of the meaningful use objectives that must be met by hospitals and physicians using certified EHR technology is to provide individuals with the ability to view, download and transmit (VDT) their electronic health info. As part of the HIPAA Privacy Rule, hospitals must ensure that they have not knowingly and willfully taken any action to limit or restrict the interoperability of their certified Ehr technology. In 1986, in order to stabilize the pediatric vaccine market, Congress established the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program. There are no comparable provisions in H.R. 6. An exception is made under current law for new vaccines that are routinely recommended by CDC for use in children, which are automatically included in the Injury Table. In 2013, the Advisory Commission on Childhood Vaccines advised the Secretary that current VICP authority may discourage the growing use of vaccines for pregnant women, as the law does not allow for addition of such vaccines if they are not also recommended for children. Section 6 of S. 2742 would require the Secretary to incorporate into the list of covered vaccines any vaccine recommended by CDC for routine use in pregnant women. It also would clarify that both the woman and a child or children in utero when the vaccine was administered would be eligible for compensation. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . It would apply to vaccines that are not also recommended for children, and does not clearly cover injury to an infant born to a woman who was vaccinated during pregnancy. vaccine availability, and may recommend routine use of a vaccine for only a subset of the population for whom FDA has licensed its use. Vaccine manufacturers have an interest in understanding the factors considered by ACIP and CDC, as well as FDA, in making vaccine use and licensing decisions. Section 7 of S. 2742 does not explicitly require that CDC personnel meet with vaccine developers. It does, however, require the CDC Director to ensure that CDC centers and offices coordinate their vaccine program and policy efforts. compensation. A vaccine may be both a commercial product and a public good. Congress has established several federal payment mechanisms and health insurance coverage requirements to support the production and use of vaccines in the U.S. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 for a vaccine that is a "commercial product" or a "public good" or both. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year or early next year, depending on how it fares in the Senate. The Senate's medical innovation package is that chamber's companion effort to the House's 21 st Century Cures initiative. H.R. 6 is the result of a series of hearings and roundtable meetings hosted by the House Energy and Commerce Committee dating back to spring 2014. The Senate's package includes S.2742, Promoting Biomedical Research and Public Health for Patients Act; and S. 2700, FDA and NIH Workforce Authorities Modernization Act. The House passed the 21 st century Cures Act on July 10, 2015, on a vote of 344 to 77. H.R. 6 is primarily focused on efforts to increase strategic investments in medical research at NIH. The hearings and roundtables focused on a broad range of topics, including modernizing clinical trials, incorporating patient perspectives into medical research and regulatory processes. This report provides for each of the 18 bills in the Senate medical innovation package: (1) background on the bills; (2) details of each bill; and (3) a summary of the bills' provisions. For more information, visit: http://www.senate.gov/health-innovation-package. Both the House and the Senate are considering legislation to support medical innovation. Reforms to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and changes to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Both NIH and FDA are agencies within the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Senators Lamar Alexander and Patty Murray, chairman and ranking Member of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, announced the start of a bipartisan initiative to "examine the process for getting safe treatments, devices and cures to patients and the public" Section 1028 of H.R. 6 (Title I, Subtitle B) addresses high-risk, high-reward research. It would not establish OT authority, nor would it require a report to Congress. Section 1028 would require the NIH institute directors to establish programs to pursue innovative approaches to major contemporary challenges in biomedical research. The Senate bill would not. More information, see S. 2030 , the Advancing Targeted Therapies for Rare Diseases Act of 2015 (S. 2030) into law on April 19, 2016 (P.L. 114-146) The remaining 18 bills that comprise the Senate's medical innovation legislative effort include the following: S. 1878, The Advancing Hope Act of 2015; S. 1622, The FDA Device Accountability Act of2015. S. 2503, Preventing Superbugs and Protecting Patients Act; S., 2030, Theadvancing Targeted Therapies for Rare Diseases Act of 2014. S., 800, The Enhancing the Stature and Visibility of Medical Rehabilitation Research at NIH Act; and S. 849, Advancing Research for Neurological Diseases. 2015; S. 2511, Improving Health Information Technology Act. S. 1077, The Advancing Breakthrough Medical Devices for Patients Act of 2015. S 2055, The Medical Countermeasures Innovation Act of 2014. S 1597, Patient Focused Impact Assessment Act of 2013. S 2713, Advancing Precision Medicine Act of 2016; S 2745, Adv advancing NIH Strategic Planning and Representation in Medical Research Act; and S. 2742, Promoting Biomedical Research and Public Health for Patients. getting safe treatments, devices and cures to patients and the roles of the [FDA] and the [NIH] in that process. This initiative culminated in a package of 19 bipartisan bills that were reported out of the Senate Health, Labor, Education, and Pensions (HELP) Committee. One of these 19 bills, The Adding Zika Virus to the FDA Priority Review Voucher Program Act (S. 2512), subsequently was passed by both chambers and signed into law on April 19, 2016. H.R. 6 addresses a number of areas not covered by the Senate bill. It would eliminate the HIT Standards Committee and require the Secretary to contract directly with standards development organizations. Beginning in 2020, hospitals and physicians demonstrating EHR meaningful use would have to attest that they are not engaged in information blocking. But the bill would repeal the interoperability provisions in MACRA. It also would extend federal privilege and confidentiality protections to HIT developers who report and analyze patient safety information related to HIT use. H.R. 6 would not establish a star rating program for certified HIT products. It would not address patient access to electronic health information, patient record matching, or the regulatory and administrative burdens of using EHR technology. The bill would repeal the interoperability provisions in MACRA. The Project BioShield Act would provide additional medical countermeasures to respond to an attack using chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear (CBRN) agents. It was passed by the Senate and is now being considered by the House. HHS Human Subject Regulations are a core set of federal standards for protecting human subjects in HHS-sponsored research. These regulations are commonly referred to as the Common Rule because the same requirements have been adopted by many other federal departments and agencies. For a summary of all the provisions in H.R. 6, including an explanation of how the bill would change current law, see CRS Report R44071, H.r. 6: The 21st Century Cures Act.in the House and Senate bills is substantively identical. Century Cures Act ("Ensuring Interoperability of Health Information Technology") includes a series of HIT interoperability provisions. Like S. 2511 , the House bill would give the HHS Office of Inspector General new enforcement authority to investigate claims of HIT developers engaged in information blocking. However, in place of the Senate bill's star rating program, H.R. 6 would put a star rating system in place for HIT developers. Other provisions in H.r. 6 have no counterpart in the Senate bills. in the Senate medical innovation package: (1) background on the issue, or issues, addressed by the bill; (2) a summary of the bill's provisions; and (3) where applicable, identification of comparable provisions in H.R. 6 that address the same topic. In a few instances, the language in the House and Senate bills is substantively identical. In other cases, the House or Senate legislation address the topic in a similar way but with key substantive differences. For Section 1122 would add a new PHSA Section 399V-6, "Surveillance of Neurological Diseases" The bill does not include an authorization of appropriations. The Secretary would be required to make information and analysis in the surveillance system available, subject to HIPAA privacy laws. The bill would require the Secretary to establish a National Neurological Disease Surveillance System to track the epidemiology of neurological diseases, including multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease. It would also make data available to researchers. The bill would define medical rehabilitation research as "the science of mechanisms and interventions that prevent, improve, restore, or replace lost, underdeveloped, or deteriorating function" The PHSA does not explicitly authorize or require surveillance of neurological diseases in general, although the Secretary may conduct such activities under general authorities in PHSA Title III. S. 849 would take action to avoid duplication among those programs through actions such as entering into interagency agreements. The bill would also require the Secretary of Health and Human Services to report back to Congress on the progress made on the bill. amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and autism spectrum disorder). S. 849 would add a new PHSA Section 399S-1, "Advancing Research for Neurological Diseases" It would authorize the HHS Secretary to improve the collection of data on neurological diseases. The Secretary would be explicitly authorized to establish a new registry, using existing data sources. In doing so, he would be required, among other things, to focus on up to five of the most prevalent or burdensome diseases (as determined by the Secretary) S. 800 would amend Section 452 of the PHSA instructing the Director of the Center to develop and update a comprehensive plan for medical rehabilitation research. The research plan would have to include goals and objectives for such research. Within 30 days of revising and updating the plan, the director would be required to transmit the plan to the President, the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, and the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. S. 800 also would require the Secretary, with the other federal agencies, to review their medical rehabilitationResearch programs. Section 452 of the PHSA established the National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research (the Center) within the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (the Institute) at NIH. It also required the NIH Director to create a Medical rehabilitation Coordinating Committee and a National Advisory Board on Medical rehabilitation Research. The Director of the Institute is required to develop, and periodically revise and update, a comprehensive plan for the rehabilitation of individuals with physical disabilities. It is also required to create and update a medical rehabilitation plan. consultants and individual scientists (not just NIH IC Directors) as stipulated by Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993. Section 301(a) of the PHSA establishes the general research authorities of the Public Health Service through the Secretary of Health and Human Services. It requires the Secretary to "conduct in the Service, and encourage, cooperate with, and render assistance to other appropriate public authorities, scientific institutions, and scientists in the conduct of, and promote the coordination of, research" Section 4 would amend Section 301(a) of the PHSA to allow the Secretary to direct the contractors to collect payments for the costs incurred to make available these substances and organisms. These amounts would be credited to the appropriations accounts that incurred the costs of making the substances and organism available. There are no changes to this section of the law that would affect federal funding for biomedical and behavioral research. It would only apply to research substances and living organisms that are made available to researchers through contractors. The bill would not affect federal funds for research substances or living organisms. the PMI, and by allowing specified components and authorities in the carrying out of the PMI as well as identifying requirements of the initiative. Amend PHSA Section 301(d) to require the Secretary to issue a Certificate of Confidentiality to research investigators of federally funded research in which sensitive, identifiable information is collected to protect the privacy of research participants. The provision would prohibit the individual with the certificate from disclosing sensitive information about the research participants, with certain exceptions, as specified, and would make this type of information immune from the legal process. from the legal process (§3) Amend PHSA Section 301 to allow the Secretary to exempt from disclosure under FOIA exemption (b)(3) specified biomedical information that identifies an individual or that has an associated risk that the information may be reidentified. Add a new PHSA to require recipients of NIH grants or agreements to share data generated from such NIH grants and agreements in a manner consistent with all applicable federal law (§5) The Secretary would be required to make each such exemption available in writing and to the public, upon request (§4) consideration of certain vaccines. Sponsors of clinical trials for drugs, biologics, and devices regulated by the FDA are required to submit registration and summary results information to ClinicalTrials.gov. There is no comparable provision in S. 2742. Subparagraph 402(j)(2)(B) requires the NIH Director to ensure that the public may, in addition to keyword searching, search the entries in the data bank by various specified criteria. The NIH Director is instructed to add search categories as deemed necessary. Section 1101 of H.R. 6 would add new language to Section 402(j) of the PHS Act. The language would require the NIH Director to ensure that the registry and results data bank is easily used by the public. The House provision would strike the information in ClinicalTrials.on, the website where the data is stored. It would also require that standard terminologies and code sets are used, to the extent possible, to facilitate electronic data matching, among other things. September 2008, and submit adverse events information since September 2009. The Secretary is required, by rulemaking, to expand the requirements for submission of summary results information. Section 9 of S. 2742 would require the Secretary, acting through the NIH Director and not later than two years after enactment, to submit to Congress a report that "describes education and outreach, guidance, enforcement, and other activities undertaken to encourage compliance with Section 402(j) of the PHSA" The Secretary would also have to submit a report on registered clinical trials, as specified. compliance with the requirements in Section 402(j) The Secretary would be required to submit an initial report not later than two years after the compliance date of the final rule. Two follow-up reports would be needed, which include information on actions taken to enforce compliance with the ClinicalTrials.gov reporting requirements. Section 1101 of H.R. 6 is comparable to S. 2742, but the House provisions address public access to, and research on, the information in ClinicalTrialing.gov. Section 2 of S. 2742 would eliminate an annual reporting requirement regarding the number of experts and consultants whose services are used by NIH. Section 5 also would eliminate the report on Centers of Excellence. Section 10 of the bill would amend Section 405 of the PHSA, eliminating the National Institute on Nursing Research biennial report. The bill also would make a minor modification to the doctoral degree reporting requirement, and make a technical correction to a vaccine reporting requirement. It would also eliminate the periodic reports on rapid HIV testing, and the annual NCATS annual report. information is collected from 10 or more respondents within a 12-month period. PRA does not apply to certain types of scientific research, including collections that are neither sponsored nor conducted by the agency and those that are subject to a clinical exception. The provision would amend Section 301 of the PHS Act by adding a subsection stating that the PRA would not apply during the conduct of NIH research. The Exemption for the National Institutes of Health from the Paperwork Reduction Act Requirements provision (Title I, Subtitle B, Section 1024) is comparable to S. 2700. The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) specifies nine categories of information that may be exempted from the rule of disclosure. Exemption 3 allows agencies to withhold applicable records if the data are specifically exempted from disclosure by a statute other than FOIA, if that statute meets criteria laid out in FOIA. These types of Exemption 1 and Exemption 2 statutes are included in this list of exempted records. The full list is available at the bottom of the page. For more information, visit the FOIA website. out in FOIA. These types of Exemption 3 statutes are often referred to as b(3) exemptions. A Certificate of Confidentiality protects investigators from being compelled to disclose information that would identify research subjects in any civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceeding. This requirement can help promote participation in research by adding an additional layer of privacy protection. NIH currently issues Certificates of Conf confidentiality pursuant to §301(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. §241(d)) the HHS Secretary to determine the existence of a public health emergency, which in turn authorizes certain further actions to enhance response flexibility. The Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA) ensures that federal agencies do not overburden the public with federally sponsored data collections. Section 17 would add an additional provision to PHSA Section 319 to waive requirements for voluntary data collection under the PRA. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 .. The PRA requires review and pre-clearance of federal data collection proposals by the Office of Management and Budget. The current requirement is that funds received from the Treasury be held in separate accounts. The provision would change the requirement. The House bill provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle P, Section 2283, "Reagan-Udall Foundation for the Food and Drug Administration") is the same as the Senate bill. The Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA, 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35), enacted in 1980 and amended in 1995, established the Office of Information. 1980 and amended in 1995, established the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) Congress required that agencies seek OIRA permission before collecting information from the public. The PRA requires that federal agencies receive clearance from OIra before requesting most types of information. PRA clearance is required when standardized information is collected from 10 or more respondents within a period of time. The first of 11 stated purposes was to "minimize the paperwork burden for individuals ... and other persons resulting from the collection of information by and for the Federal Government" The Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act ( P.L. 109-417 ) established the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) BARDA contracts with companies to develop and commercialize potential countermeasures. The Project BioShield Act established a special process and funding mechanism through which the HHS Secretary may obligate funds to procure countermeasures that still need up to 10 more years of development. These contracts specify development activities for the company to perform and may extend multiple years. improve efficiency and decision making, and enhance BARDA program effectiveness and accountability. Section 4 would require ASPR to provide additional information in its "coordinated 5-year budget plan" The budget plan would also need to consider the development of countermeasures and products for emerging infectious diseases that may present "a threat to the nation" Section 5 would allow the HHS Secretary to partner with "an independent, non-profit entity" to "foster and accelerate the development" of medical countermeasures. requirement to specify the recipients of the report. The report would be required by "March 1 of each year in which" the amount available drops below $1.5 billion. Section 3 would move contracting authority for Project BioShield and BARDA advanced development from ASPR to BARDA. Such a move was recommended by the Blue Ribbon Panel on Biodefense to "reduce unnecessary bureaucratic delays, improve efficiency and decision making, and enhance BARDA program effectiveness," the panel said. technology innovation and successful partnering with the federal government. The HHS Secretary acting through the BARDA Director would provide the entity with the government needs and requirements and a description of the work to be done under the agreement. The entity would be required to provide regular reports on the spending of funds provided by HHS and on progress meeting the identified needs. The bill would require the Government Accountability Office to evaluate this partnership four years after enactment. This authority would sunset on September 30, 2022. Section 6 would remove the current need for the President to approve use of the funds. HHS has two mechanisms to support CBRN countermeasure advanced development and commercialization. Up to half of the total amount of the Project BioShield contract may be paid out for the company meeting specified developmental milestones. Section 2 of S. 2055 would require the HHS Secretary to provide "timely and accurate recommended" guidelines for using the medical countermeasures in the Strategic National Stockpile. The Medical Countermeasures Innovation Act of 2016, as reported, has several provisions that would change the manner as reported. remove the current need for the President to approve use of the Project BioShield special reserve fund. The Blue Ribbon Study Panel on Biodefense recommended this change to streamline the ProjectBioShield contracting process. The Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, and the appropriation committees in each chamber would be notified of a decision to use Project Bio Shield funds. Other than the provisions relating to Food and Drug Administration priority review (discussed elsewhere in this report), the 21 st Century Cures bill would not change much. radiological, or nuclear (CBRN) agents. Implementation of the federal countermeasure strategy requires coordinated activities by several separate agencies. An interagency working group, the Public Health and Emergency Medical Countermeasure Enterprise (PHEMCE), is responsible for coordinating these activities. The Project BioShield Act ( P.L. 108-276 ), the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act (PAHPA, P. l. 109-417 ), and Pandemic and All Hazard's Preparedness Reauthorization Act of 2013 (PAHPRA, P l. 113-5) established new authorities and programs in the Department of Health and Human Services. coordinating these activities to ensure federal countermeasure needs are addressed efficiently. The PHEMCE is headed by the HHS Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR) and includes representatives from the Food and Drug Administration, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institutes of Health, Department of Defense, and Department of Homeland Security. In addition, the Pandemic and All-Hazards Prep preparedness Reauthorization Act of 2013 ( P.L. 113-5 ) requires the ASPR to develop an annual "coordinated 5-year budget plan" of medical countermeasures; ... promote the development of new and promising [countermeasure] technologies; ... [and] address unmet public health needs. The U.S. intelligence community has successfully used a similar strategic investor model to address its unmet technology needs through In-Q-Tel. This bill would establish certain criteria for the partner, including prior experience in technology innovation and successful partnering with the federal government. The bill would also provide business advice and use venture capital practices to invest in companies developing medical counter Measures. may contribute up to 10% of a Service member's pay to that person's already established retirement system at the institution of higher education at which the member had been employed. The provision would rename the SBRS as the Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (the Service) It would increase the number of authorized members to 2,000, and would add "biomedical product assessment" as a desired field of expertise. Finally, the provision would require GAO to study the changes to the Service and their effects on HHS departments and agencies. analysis in the surveillance system available, subject to HIPAA privacy and security protections, to the public. The Secretary would be required to report to Congress regarding the system within four years of enactment. The provision would authorize the appropriation of $5 million for each of fiscal years 2016 through 2020. The Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research Service (SBRS), established in PHSA Section 228, is a special hiring mechanism used by the HHS Secretary to attract and retain accomplished scientists to work in Public Health Service (PHS) agencies. other HHS employment systems to offset the number of new employees in the Service. The provision would require the Secretary to appoint experts to agencies within HHS, "taking into account the need for the expertise of such expert" It also would authorize the appointment of persons who hold "a master's level degree in engineering, bioinformatics, or a related or emerging field" It would increase the upper pay rate limit to that of the President (currently $400,000 per year) but would eliminate the authority to contribute to a member's preexisting retirement system. would clarify that the Secretary is not required to reduce the number of employees serving in other HHS employment systems. The House bill would require the Secretary to report on the HHS website regarding the changes to the Service and whether they "have improved the ability of the [FDA] to hire and retain qualified experts to fulfill obligations specified under user fee agreements" Title 5 of the U.S. Code provides the broad framework of requirements under which many federal employees are hired; however, some subsets of employees are hire under alternative methods. SBRS is not subject to civil service requirements under Title 5 of the U.S. Code. It is distinct from other PHS hiring mechanisms, such as the PHS Commissioned Corps. Currently, SBRS is limited to 500 members, who are accomplished doctoral-level scientists in biomedical research or clinical research evaluation. The rate of pay may not exceed that for Level I of the Executive Schedule (currently about $206,000 per year) unless approved by the President. The Secretary may contribute up to 10% of a Service member's pay. and appoint new members by majority vote, without regard to the balance of expertise and affiliation required by current law. It would limit to 30% of the membership "representatives of the general pharmaceutical, device, food, cosmetic, and biotechnology industries" The obligation to ensure specific expertise among the members would be broadened to rest with all members of the board, not only ex officio appointees. That broader group would also decide other administrative matters. As with the current law, each board member's term of office would last for four years. initially appointed board members' terms would expire on a staggered basis, as determined by the ex officio members. The provision would remove the salary cap of the foundation's Executive Director, which is now set at the compensation of the Commissioner. Also amended would be the language regarding separation of funds. The current requirement is that funds received from the foundation can only be used for the purpose of the board's duties and responsibilities, and not for the benefit of the general public. This provision would add that for the additional board members appointed pursuant to S. 2700 , Section 6, the terms of office for the initially appointed persons can expire onA staggered basis. officio members, nine from candidates provided by the National Academy of Sciences, and five from candidates from advocacy groups. Section 770 specifies the number of members to be appointed representing each type of group and requires that the ex officio members ensure specific expertise among the members. The provision would amend FFDCA Section 770 to change the membership of the Board of Directors to allow the voting members to increase the size of the board and appoint new members by majority vote, without regard to age or gender. animals and make appropriate revisions to reduce administrative burden on investigators. Fifth, the Secretary would be required to clarify the applicability of OMB Uniform Guidance requirements regarding documentation of personnel expenses for entities receiving HHS grants. Finally, within one year of enactment, the OMB Director would be needed to establish a Research Policy Board, consisting of up to10 federal and 9 to 12 non-federal members. The board would have to make recommendations on harmonizing regulations related to federal research requirements. The board would have to make recommendations on harmonizing regulations and policies to minimize administrative burden across federal research agencies. The board would sunset on September 30, 2020. Within four years of enactment, GAO would be required to conduct an evaluation of board activities regarding its purpose and responsibilities. The report would provide recommendations on scientific research policy, including regulatory benefits and burdens. It would also provide a review of the board's activities and provide a report on its effectiveness and effectiveness to Congress and the White House. option to achieve a compelling purpose." Under the Senate provision, if attendance at a scientific meeting is directly related to the professional duties of scientific or medical professionals, then the meetings would not be considered to be conferences. Each HHS operating division would be required to post on their website an annual report on scientific meeting attendance and related travel spending for each fiscal year. The Senate bill would also require the Department of Health and Human Services to report on the number of people who attended scientific meetings and the amount they spent on travel. scientific meeting attendance and related travel spending for each fiscal year, including details as specified. The NIH travel (Title I, Subtitle B, Section 1025) and the enabling FDA scientific engagement provisions in H.R. 6 are comparable to S. 2700. FFDCA Section 770, as added by the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ), created the Reagan-Udall Foundation for the. Research. NIH and FDA participation in or sponsorship of scientific conferences and meetings is essential to the mission of the agencies. the Secretary to provide a public comment period while each institute is being implemented. This provision also would allow the Secretary to terminate any such institute if the Secretary determines that it is no longer benefitting the public health. No comparable provision in H.R. 6 . Following allegations of misspent funds during a 2010 General Services Administration meeting held in Las Vegas, the Office of Management and Budget imposed restrictions on conference travel for federal employees in memorandum M-12-12. The memorandum directed agencies, beginning in FY2013, to spend at least 30% less than what was spent in FY2010 on conferences. least 30% less than what was spent in FY2010 on travel expenses. Senior-level agency approval is required for all conferences sponsored by an agency where the conference expenses to the agency exceed $100,000. Agencies are prohibited from spending more than $500,000 on a single conference. However, this restriction may be waived if the agency head "determines that exceptional circumstances exist whereby spending in excess of $500k is the most cost-effective option to achieve a compelling purpose"