Cognizant federal agency (CFA) is responsible for establishing forward pricing rates, final indirect cost rates, and administering cost accounting standards for all contracts in a business unit. CFA is the agency with the largest dollar amount of negotiated contracts, including options, with the contractor. The Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government provide the overall framework for establishing and maintaining internal control and for identifying and addressing areas at greatest risk of fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement. These standards provide that—to that the contractor exceeds at its own risk. officials said that they did not have a process to identify the contractors, including CMS contractors, for which HHS would be the CFA. Without a list that is periodically updated for the contractors’ portfolio of federal government contracting activity, HHS and its components do not know the contractors for which CFA oversight is needed. The confusion over roles and responsibilities increases the risk that CFA responsibilities are not being timely performed. Without effective coordination, contractors may not receive the necessary oversight and the government may not be positioned to protect itself from the risk of improper payments or waste. As of July 2009, neither HHS nor CMS had developed such policies and procedures or a mechanism to track the CMS contractors for which additional oversight is needed. Roles and responsibilities for the performance of CFA duties were not clear among HHS and its components, including CMS. HHS officials said that they did not have a process to developed policies and criteria that provide clear procedures for staff to follow during the pre-award stage. While FAR and HHSAR provide regulations agencies must follow, it is up to agency management to develop agency-specific policies and other guidance that implement those regulations. The deficiencies identified in this report, especially those associated with FAR requirements unique to specific contract types, further highlight the need for additional guidance for contracting officers. Roles and responsibilities for implementation of CFA responsibilities not clearly defined. Revise the Verification and Validation Plan for DCIS Accuracy and Improvements policy to require all relevant errors be corrected and their resolution documented. Develop and implement policies and procedures for tracking contract audit requests, monitoring the results of contract audits and evaluations, and resolving the audit findings. OAGM established a Verification and Validation Plan for DCIS Accuracy Improvements (V&V) The V&V plan contained several actions, including a secondary review of data entered into DCIS for every 50th contract action. The plan lacks key elements and controls to ensure that the resolution of potential errors is properly documented and errors are corrected in a timely manner. As of July 22, 2009, CMS management had not taken substantial actions to address our prior recommendations. For example, OAGM could not determine if all errors identified during the file reviews were properly resolved and the appropriate adjustments to DCIS were made. CMS did not have quality assurance activities, such as formal data entry reviews or database training, over the data contained in the DCIS database. In December 2007, OAGM established a Verification and Validation Plan for DCIS Accuracy. For example, CMS entered codes for “potato farming” and “tortilla manufacturing” in the industry code field for two contract actions. The data analysis on the population of fiscal year 2008 contract actions identified that certain required fields such as contract type and competition were not in DCIS. were maintained by OAGM, regardless of location, were considered during our review. CMS’s current procedures regarding the accuracy of data entered into the Departmental Contracts Information System (DCIS) do not include procedures that would ensure that the resolution of potential errors are properly documented and errors are corrected in a timely manner. We further found that O AGM was not fully implementing its contract information system. The steps CMS described that it plans to take will be important for ensuring that contract office staff have the information needed readily available. tested are key to effective administration of the contract in that the lack of implementation would significantly increase the risk of improper payments or waste. To test internal control procedures over contract actions, we selected a stratified random sample of 102 contract actions totaling $140.7 million in fiscal year 2008 obligations. We stratified the contract actions by type of action, namely contract awards and contract modifications, recorded in CMS’s PRISM database from October 1, 2007, through September 30, 2008. Each contract action was either a through September 30, 2008. Each contract action was either a new contract award or modification to an existing contract. With this probability sample, each contract action in the sample frame had a non- zero probability of being included and that probability could be computed from any contract action. Results from this statistical sample were projected to the population of contract actions made from October 1, 2007, through September 30,. 2008. See table 2 for the results of the statistical sample and the results from the analysis of each stratum. such as contract number, vendor name, and amount obligated. PRISM is used to develop contract documents and for internal reporting and acquisition planning. The Enhanced Departmental Contracts Information System (DCIS) is an HHS database that is used for department-level acquisition management and to satisfy external reporting requirements. DCIS collects and forwards information to the Federal Procurement Data System Next Generation (FPDS-NG), which is a publicly available database of governmentwide acquisition information. Likewise, FPDS- NG feeds into www.usaspending.gov, a Web site created in response to the federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006. risk of improper payments or waste. inaccurate or incomplete data hinder CMS’s ability to mitigate through additional policies or enhanced oversight any high-risk areas. The errors in DCIS, including the unrecorded actions, also impact governmentwide reporting. Since HHS submits DCIS data to the FDPS-NG, which in turn feeds into OMB's publicly available database at www.usaspending.gov, the errors can have a significant impact on the government's ability to monitor spending.  acquisition data errors are due in part to a lack of sufficient quality assurance activities over the data entered into the acquisition databases. Without accurate data, CMS program managers do not have adequate information to identify and monitor areas that pose a high risk of improper payments or waste. Moreover, inaccurate or incomplete data can also pose a risk to the agency's internal control and operational responsibilities, the report says. The report was published by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) at the request of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. contractor’s progress, including the surveillance and assessment of performance and compliance with project objectives. According to OAGM invoice review policy, project officers review certain invoice elements, such as labor and direct costs, and are required to certify whether the invoice is approved for payment by signing a Payments and Progress Certification Form. CMS utilizes two different databases of acquisition information for a variety of internal and external reporting on its acquisition activities. The PRISM database contains basic information such as contract number, vendor name, and amount obligated. a result of being a logical follow-on to a previous contract. The award type field in PRISM did not capture consistent information. Combining these options into one data field prevents CMS from determining the total number of each award type and each contract type. OAGM officials told us that the data entered into PRISM are not subjected to the same scrutiny as other data entered in the government's database. The data entered are not subject to the usual review by the Office of Government Ethics. We estimate that for at least 34.9 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, PRISM contained at least one error in the selected critical fields we reviewed. DCIS contained errors in current contract value and ultimate contract value fields, as well as the extent of competition, contract type, and award type fields. Further, 11 sample items, or approximately 10 percent of the sample, were not in DCIS. Our high-level data analysis on the data feeds into OMB’s publicly available database at www.usaspending.gov. Contracts Information System (DCIS) and PRISM by (1) performing electronic testing of required data elements, and (2) interviewing both CMS and HHS officials on quality assurance activities performed on the databases. We determined that only basic contract information maintained in the PRISM database, such as vendor name and obligation amount, was reliable for purposes of this report. The historical obligation amounts presented in the background section of the report come primarily from CMS’s PRISM. In addition, we used a statistically random sample selected to test the application of controls. MMA required CMS to transition its Medicare claims processing contracts, which generally did not follow the FAR, to the FAR environment. CMS projected that the transition, referred to as Medicare contracting reform, would produce administrative cost savings due to the effects of competition and contract consolidation. As of September 1, 2009, 19 contracts have been awarded to Medicare Administrative Contractors, totaling about $1 billion in obligations to date. The transition would subject millions of dollars of CMS acquisitions to the rules, standards, and requirements for the award, administration. CMS reported total obligations for CMS contracts in fiscal year 2008 were $3.6 billion. This amount includes obligations against contracts that process Medicare claims. Obligations for other- than-claims processing activities, such as the 1-800 Medicare help line, are also included in the total. Since 1998, obligations to fiscal intermediaries, carriers, and Medicare Administrative Contractors have decreased approximately 16 percent. The $3 million obligated in 2008 represents a 71 percent increase since 1998, when $2.1 billion was obligated. Obligations for other- than-claims processing activities have increased 466 percent. These trends may be explained in part by recent changes to the Medicare program. The movement of functions, such as the help line, data centers, and certain financial management activities, from the fiscal intermediaries and carriers to specialized contractors is part of the change. These specialized contractors are categorized below as other-than-Claims processing contractors. They include beneficiary contact center contractors and enterprise data center contractors, among others. of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies to the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and interested congressional committees. Copies will also be available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9095. of this magnitude. Audits and inquiries into the issues we identified in our report should be made as soon as possible. We acknowledge that the time frames for implementing the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 added schedule pressures for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) At the same time, the compressed time frames and resulting contracting practices added risk to the contracting process. Many of the findings in the November 2007 report were a result of the 2003 Act. background section of the report come primarily from CMS’s PRISM database. We received written comments on October 2, 2009, and have summarized those comments in the Agency Comments and Our Evaluation section of this report. Our response to certain specific CMS comments appears in the GAO Comments section of appendix III. We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings. system reviews and invoice reviews help to reduce the risk of improper payments or waste before they occur. A control activity can be preventive, detective, or both based on when the control occurs in the contract life cycle. We found pervasive deficiencies in internal control over contracting and payments to contractors. The internal control deficiencies occurred throughout the contracting process, that is both pre- and post-award. It is more effective and efficient to prevent improper payments to prevent waste and improper payments in the first place. and Policy at the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) We selected 11 internal controls over contracting and payments to contractors to test for this report. The controls we tested are key to effective administration of the contract in HHS. We selected controls to test based on our review of GAO’s standards for internal control, the Federal Acquisition Regulation requirements, and agency policies and procedures. We also took into consideration prior audit findings and the contract types most frequently awarded in the HHS program. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and mechanisms that enforce management’s directives. The standards further provide that information should be recorded and communicated to management and oversight officials in a form and within a time frame that enables them to carry out their responsibilities. An entity should have internal control monitoring activities in place to assess the quality of performance over time and ensure that the findings of audits and other reviews are promptly resolved. Control activities include both preventive and detective controls. Preventive controls—such as invoice review prior to time of audit. preventive and detective controls. Preventive controls are controls designed to prevent errors, improper payments, or waste. Detective controls are designed to identify errors or improper payments after the payment is made. A sound system of internal control contains a balance of both preventive and Detective controls that is appropriate for the agency’s operations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. of fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement. An entity’s management should establish and maintain an environment that sets a positive and supportive attitude towards control and conscientious management. A positive control environment provides discipline and structure as well as a climate supportive of quality internal control, and includes an assessment of the risks the agency faces from both external and internal sources. Control activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and mechanisms that enforce the agency's objectives. The standards provide that—to be effective—an entity's management should. establish both a supportive overall control environment and specific control activities directed at carrying out its objectives. At least 84.3 percent of FAR-based contract actions made by CMS in fiscal year 2008 contained at least one instance in which a key control was not adequately implemented. Not only was the number of internal control deficiencies widespread, but also many contract actions had more than one deficiency. The high percentage of deficiencies indicates a serious failure of control procedures, thereby creating a heightened risk of making improper payments or waste.discussed later. We determined a control to be “key” based on our review of the standards for internal control as well as the FAR, HHSAR, and agency policies. agency policies and whether inadequate implementation would significantly increase the risk of improper payments or waste. See appendix I for additional details on the controls we tested and the statistical sample results. We project the results of our statistical sample conservatively by reporting the lower bound of our two-sided, 95 percent confidence interval. The control deficiencies we found were primarily caused by a lack of agency-specific policies and procedures that would help ensure that applicable FAR requirements, agency policies, and other control objectives were met. We also took into consideration prior audit findings and the contract types CMS most frequently used. over contract management activities. CMS stated its belief that “virtually all’ 1, 2007, through September 30, 2008. See table 2 for specific details related to contract actions selected in the sample. Table 3 provides further details on the control procedures we tested, the criteria or source for the procedure, and detailed results. We assessed the reliability of CMS’s two acquisition databases, Departmental Contracts Information System (DCIS) and PRISM. We also obtained information from agency officials regarding contract closeout, cognizant federal agency responsibilities, audit funding, and staff resources. used correctly, the CRB can be an effective tool for risk-based quality assurance and for reviewing the internal controls throughout the contract award and administration process. CMS’s control environment is characterized by the lack of strategic overall control environment, and ultimately increases risk in the contracting process. Although CMS has generally reliable information on basic attributes of each contract action, such as vendor name and obligation amount, CMS lacks reliable management information on other key aspects of its FAR-based contracting operations. The number of certain contract types awarded, the extent of competition achieved, and total contract value. had not taken substantial actions to address our prior recommendations to improve internal control in the contracting process. Only two of GAO’s nine 2007 recommendations had been fully addressed. The seven substantially unresolved recommendations represent a lack of action on the part of CMS management to resolve key control deficiencies. Policies and criteria for pre-award contract activities have not been developed. In its comments, CMS expressed concerns about the scope and timing of our work with respect to our November 2007 recommendations and disagreed with our assessment of the status of 5 of the 7 recommendations. both pre- and post-award, and increase the risk of improper payments or waste. These deficiencies were due in part to a lack of agency-specific policies and procedures to ensure that FAR requirements and other control objectives were met. Careful and prompt consideration of audit results, including tracking and pursuing findings, helps to reduce the risk, the authors say. It is imperative that CMS take immediate action to address its serious contract-level control deficiencies, they say, and take action on their previous recommendations to improve. CMS’s control environment is characterized by the lack of strategic planning to identify necessary staffing and funding. CMS management has made limited progress in substantively addressing most of the broad-based recommendations from our 2007 report. We found that many of our findings in this review could be, at least in part, attributed to CMS management’S lack of attention given to resolving the control deficiencies. We are reiterating our previous recommendations to (1) develop policies for pre-award contracting activities, (2)Develop policies to help ensure CFA responsibilities are performed, and (3) prepare guidelines on what should be done. an entity to effectively manage contracts and payments to contractors. OAGM management has not analyzed its contract management workforce and related funding needs through a comprehensive, strategic acquisition workforce plan. Such a plan is critical to help manage the increasing acquisition workload and meet its contracting oversight needs. We reported in November 2007 that staff resources allocated to contract oversight had not kept pace with the increase in CMS contract awards. A similar trend continued into 2008. While the obligated amount of contract awards has increased, the number of contractors has not. the contractor submitted one invoice for the entire amount of the contract. CMS increases its risk of making improper payments when it does not properly review and approve invoices prior to payment. OAGM also did not perform required audits and reviews of CMS purchase cards to identify fraud or waste. As of July 15, 2009, OAGm’s purchase card program had issued 123 cards with 20 percent having monthly spending limits of up to $1,000. The agency did not conduct any audits or reviews because of the authorized spending limits. purchase card program by annually auditing cardholder transactions using such methods as statistical and nonstatistical sampling, data mining, and spot checks. We spoke with an OFM official who stated that OFM does not review purchase card transactions for fraud or inappropriate use, but instead pays the purchase card invoice based on the authorizing official’s approval. OAGM did not perform the oversight activities because the supervisor viewed those activities as the responsibility of the Office of Financial Management (OFM) 123 cards with 20 percent having monthly spending limits of at least $50,000. Eight card holders had monthly spending limit of $100,000, the highest spending limit authorized by CMS. Without sufficient oversight of the purchase card program, CMS does not have assurance that only allowable transactions are procured through purchase cards. The purchase card coordinator, which at CMS is within OAGM, is required to conduct surveillance of the program by annually auditing cardholder transactions using such such such cards. The obligated amount of contract awards has increased 71 percent since 1998. OAGM staffing resources have increased 26 percent. CMS has not yet determined the amount of total FTEs needed for the fiscal year and beyond. The documents did not contain information on CMS’s current FTE level, skill mix, or analysis of any skill gaps. Without this information, O AGM has limited insight into appropriate staffing levels for the year. The number of full time equivalents (FTE) has also increased by 26 percent in the past decade. At CMS, OAGM manages contracting activities and is responsible for, among other things, developing policy and procedures for use by acquisition staff. Multiple key players work together to monitor different aspects of contractor performance. All but one of the key roles described below are managed centrally in O AGM. The last, project officers, are assigned from CMS program offices.. Contracting officers are responsible for ensuring performance of all necessary actions for effective contracting, overseeing contractor compliance with the terms of the contract, and safeguarding the interests of the government. OAGM has limited insight into appropriate solutions, such as the use of contractor support staff. Using contractors for contract administrative functions may increase the risk of unauthorized personal services contracts. According to its staff and management, OAGM is challenged to meet the various audit requirements necessary to ensure adequate oversight of contracts that pose more risk to the government. The use of contractors has in recent years become commonplace in the federal government. It is prohibited by FAR to use contractors for inherently governmental functions, both of which are prohibited. were properly reviewed by both the project officer and contracting officer or specialist. To strengthen the control environment, we recommend that OAGM management: Develop and implement a comprehensive strategic acquisition workforce plan. The plan should include, at a minimum, elements such as performance goals, time frames, implementation actions, and resource requirements, and address issues such as O AGM workload, full time equivalents needed, and a workforce skills analysis, as well as an estimate of the amount of resources OAGm needs to fulfill audit and other FAR requirements. CMS’s OAGM established the Contract Review Board (CRB) reviews as a key control procedure. Of the 22 contracts selected to be reviewed by the CRB in 2008, only 7 were actually reviewed. Also, the contracting officer for the contract action being reviewed is neither required to reach consensus on the resolution of issues identified nor to document the justification for not resolving CRB issues. CMS confirmed that only contracts nominated by division directors are reviewed. If used correctly, theCRB can be an effective tool for CMS. circumstances under which negotiation memorandums should be used and the content of such, and any required secondary reviews. Specify Contract Review Board review documentation to include, at a minimum, documentation of the number of contracts reviewed each year. Require Division Directors to periodically assess, document, and report to senior management on the results of their review of whether the contract files contain documentation that invoices were properly reviewed by both the project officer and contracting. The requirements are in light of HHSAR requirements and current OAGM practice. CMS also stated that a reasonable amount of time had not yet elapsed since the issuance of our November 2007 report to allow for corrective actions to have taken place. A significant number of our current report findings, including weaknesses in the control environment, were based on observations and interviews with OAGM officials and reviews of related documentation such as policies and strategic plans. Our current review was completed in September 2009, nearly 2 years after the release of our report in November 2007. While CMS also said that the contract actions we reviewed took place in fiscal year 2008, it said that they took place during fiscal year 2007. and recommendations related to CMS’s control environment are based on conditions that continued to exist in September 2009. CMS disagreed with our determination that their actions to address five of the seven prior recommendations were not sufficient. Preventive controls, such as policies and criteria for pre-award activities and a sound invoice review process prior to payment, are the first line of defense in reducing the risk of improper payments or waste. We continue to believe that the limited actions OAGM management has taken, and in some cases, management's inaction, fall short. valid sample of contract files involved the lack of documentation that the controls were performed. Lack of documentation reduces management’s ability to ascertain whether these important controls were appropriately implemented and therefore is a serious internal control deficiency. Setting an appropriate control environment, especially “tone at the top,” is key to ensuring that staff take all appropriate steps to mitigate risk and protect tax dollars from fraud, waste, and abuse. CMS also stated that a reasonable amount of time had been spent on the project. We further found that OAGM was not fully implementing its policy because it reviewed every 88th action, rather than every 50th as provided for in the plan. However, we are encouraged by the recent initiatives described in CMS’s comments, such as the scorecard, and the commitment to review current policies and procedures. Staff members who made key contributions to this report include Marcia Carlsen and Phil McIntyre (Assistant Directors), Sharon Byrd, Richard Cambosos, Abe Dymond, Patrick Frey, Jason Kelly, John Lopez. implementing those requirements and to tailor the policies to address the specific operational environment. Agency-specific policy may include guidance on applicable approval levels, time frames, agency forms, and routing processes. The HHSAR does not specifically address all of the pre-award contract activities that we identified as needing improvement. It does not delineate the roles and responsibilities of the different staff involved in the contracting process. The deficiencies identified in this report, especially those associated with. the contract process, need to be addressed. We conducted our audit work in Washington, D.C. and Baltimore, Maryland from July 2008 through September 2009. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) reported that the policy and criteria for pre-award contracting activities are already established in the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and the Health & Human Services Acquisition Regulation. There was no action taken on this issue. Report: To determine the extent to which the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) implemented effective internal control procedures over contract actions, we focused on contracts that were generally subjected to the Federal Acquisition Regulation. We interviewed senior management of CMS’s Office of Acquisition and Grants Management (OAGM), contracting officers and specialists, and cost/price team members. Major contributors to this report are acknowledged in appendix IV.and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Services Acquisition Regulation (HHSAR), (b) that existing policies would be reviewed and changes would be made as appropriate, and (c) certain pre-award activities, such as the need for adequate accounting systems for cost reimbursement contracts. CMS has not developed policies and criteria that provide clear procedures for staff. The Office of Acquisition and Grants Management (OAGM) did conduct internal training on various pre-AWard activity topics, but the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Service’s actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. actions we reviewed took place in fiscal year 2008. For example, CMS’s Acquisition Policy 02-03, which identifies level of approvals required by agency officials based on the estimated dollar value for acquisitions awarded through other than full and open competition, was implemented in April 2008. We applied these approval levels only to the awards and modifications in our sample that were made after the policy was implemented. Furthermore, our observations and recommendations related to CMS's control environment are based on CMS's own data. in the November 2007 report were a result of the increased risk together with inadequate compensating controls to mitigate risk. Virtual Acquisition Office is an off-the-shelf acquisition software that provides Web links to acquisition regulation and templates to aid in completion of common acquisition activities. It does not represent the agency- specific policies and criteria we recommended that CMS implement for pre-award activities. As such, CMS’s actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. Agency-specific policies provide guidance on CMS develop policies for certain pre-award contract activities, such as analysis to justify the contract type selected. No new policies or guidance were developed, because in CMS’s view, policies and criteria are already established in the FAR and HHSAR. While the FAR provides requirements for federal acquisitions, it is up to the agencies to develop and provide their contracting workforce with specific policies and day-to-day procedures that guide them in implementing those requirements, the agency says. The agency says it will tailor the policies to address the specific needs of its contracting workforce. deficiencies and take action on our previous recommendations to improve contract-level and overall environment controls. CMS will continue to place billions of taxpayer dollars at risk of fraud, or otherwise improper contract payments. We make the following nine recommendations to the Administrator of CMS to develop and implement policies and procedures to ensure that FAR requirements and other control objectives are met. Document compliance with FAR requirements for different contract types. At a minimum, enhance current documentation, such as the contract checklist, to ensure the contract file documents authorizations for letter contracts. The contract file document checklist employed by CMS at the time of our review identified key documents that may be included in a contract file. This checklist is usually completed by either the contract specialist or contracting officer. It did not reflect certain requirements in which we found CMS to be deficient, such as ensuring contractors had adequate accounting systems prior to the use of a cost reimbursement contract. We are encouraged that CMS is taking additional actions to address these issues and other deficiencies in its contract file system. The cost reimbursement rate increased by 5.46 percent. the purchase card invoice based on the authorizing official’s approval. During the tests of control procedures, we observed that the contract files did not always contain all required documentation to support the contract actions we reviewed. Standards for internal control call for transactions and other significant events to be clearly documented, and the documentation should be readily available for examination. The contract files shall be sufficient to constitute a complete history of the contract action for the purpose of providing a basis for informed decisions at each step in the acquisition. Incomplete or inadequate contract files and documentation hinder the ability of the contracting officers to perform their oversight duties. Documenting the history of a contract action is an important tool that provides management with assurance that the agency has complied with applicable regulations and has made well-informed decisions for efficient contract management.basis for informed decisions at each step in the acquisition process, and providing information for reviews and investigations, among other things. CMS contract files did not always contain documentation necessary for the life of the contract. CMS’s acquisition function. CMS stated its belief that “virtually all’ of the errors we identified related to “perceived documentation deficiencies” CMS stated it was encouraged that the errors did not involve more substantive departures from the FAR or HHSAR. We disagree with CMS's overall assessment of our findings and message of the report. A number of the findings we identified during the testing of a statistically valid sample of contract files involved the lack of documentation. The internal controls we tested are key to ensuring that contracting activities, both pre and post-award, mitigate risks. T&M contracts, the FAR requires contracting officers to prepare and sign a determination and finding that no other contract type is suitable for the acquisition. The justification is required to set forth enough facts and circumstances to clearly and convincingly justify the specific determination made. In cases when the justification memorandum was prepared, contracting officers merely quoted language from the FAR but did not set forth clear and convincing findings. We found that the determination andFinding was either not documented or insufficient in six T&M contract awards we reviewed. is, the particular circumstances, facts, or reasoning essential to support the determination—for why other contract types could not be used. When the contracting officer does not clearly and convincingly document the findings that support using a T&M contract type, OAGM does not have assurance that the appropriate contract type was used. In addition, for three of the contract actions, the contract specialist told us that the actions the document listed to mitigate the risk of awarding a T &M contract were not performed. the letter delegating duties to the project officer and the training certificate for the project officers were not in the file. Also, a chronological list of contracting officers and their dates of responsibility was consistently absent. CMS’s use of negotiation memorandums was inconsistent. The HHSAR provides that the negotiation memorandum is a complete record of all actions leading to the award of a contract and should be in sufficient detail to explain and support the rationale, judgments, and decisions. It was inconsistent with the HHSAR.  negotiation memorandums were not always prepared for actions in which they were clearly required, according to HHSAR. While many negotiation Memorandums we reviewed had signature blocks for both the contract specialist and the contracting officer, the memorandum was not always signed by the contractingOfficer. CMS’s OAGM established the Contract Review to help ensure that contracts are signed on time and in a manner that is consistent with the terms of the contract. The Contract Review was established by CMS to help the agency ensure that the contract was signed on the time and manner it was intended. We estimate that at least 46.0 percent of fiscal year 2008 CMS contract actions did not meet the FAR requirements applicable to the specific contract type awarded. Sixteen contract actions we tested had deficiencies. 1 related to a letter contract, 9 related to cost reimbursement contracts, and 6 related to T&M contracts. In the case of the letter contract,. the contract file did not contain the authorization for use of the. letter contract. The results of the other control procedures we tested can be found in appendix I. contract. CMS contract files did not always contain documentation necessary to support the action. In numerous instances, we determined that the letter delegating duties to the project officer and the project manager was not properly written. In addition, two contract files. did not maintain any information regarding the General Services Administration schedule contract. that was valid at the time of the award of the task order. We found a contract file was missing a statement of work and another file wasMissing a copy of the actual contract. mitigation strategies used to justify the selection of the T&M contract type, it increased its exposure to the risk of improper payments or waste. We estimate that for at least 52.6 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, CMS did not have support for final indirect cost rates. 23 contract actions we tested didn't have documentation of final indirectcost rates or support for the prompt request of an audit of indirect costs. For an additional 19 of the total invoice amount, the agency did not maintain adequate support for provisional indirect rates. applicable FAR requirements, agency policies, and other control objectives were met. CMS did not always meet FAR requirements for specific contract types that were awarded. The agency did not timely perform or request audits of incurred direct and indirect costs, which provide assurance that costs billed by the contractor are allowable and reasonable under the terms of the contract and applicable government regulations. These control deficiencies are discussed in detail below and the results of the other tests are shown in the next section of this report. For more information, visit CMS.gov. We are encouraged that CMS is taking additional actions to implement the checklists developed by the Department of Health and Human Services to be used in fiscal year 2010. During our review and as a result of multiple conversations with OAGM staff including the team of contract auditors, we revised our testing procedures to consider and accept provisional indirect cost rates that were not maintained in the individual contract file but were maintained by the cost/price team in its central files. Therefore, all Provisional indirect cost rate determinations, regardless of location, were considered during testing. indirect cost rates for the contractor. For an additional 19 contract actions, the provisional rates either did not match the indirect rates billed on the invoices or could not be matched because the invoice did not provide sufficient detail. Provisional indirect cost rates provide agencies with a mechanism by which to determine if the indirect costs billed on invoiced are reasonable for the services provided. The amounts a contractor billed using provisional indirect cost. rates are adjusted annually for final indirect cost Rates providing a mechanism for the government to timely ensure that indirect costs are allowable and allocable to the contract. Contracting officers and other contracting oversight personnel may perform a comprehensive review of contractor invoices to determine if the contractor is billing costs in accordance with the contract terms and applicable government regulations. The establishment of provisional and final indirect cost rates helps to ensure that the government makes payments for costs that are allowable, reasonable, and allocable to the extent prescribed by the contract. For T&M contracts, the government agrees to pay fixed per-hour labor rates and contract file documents authorizations for letter contracts, adequacy of the contractors accounting systems. by the FAR for cost reimbursement contracts. Using a cost reimbursement contract when a contractor does not have an adequate accounting system hinders the government’s ability to fulfill its oversight duties throughout the contract life cycle. It increases risk of improper payments and the risk that costs billed can not be substantiated during an audit. In one instance, the contracting officer was aware that a contractor had an inadequate accounting system resulting from numerous instances of noncompliance with CAS. When choosing to use T&M contracts, the FAR requires contracting officers to prepare and prepare. of the letter contract, which is required by HHSAR. Of the contract awards in our sample, we found 9 cases in which cost reimbursement contracts were used without first ensuring that the contractor had an adequate accounting system. An adequate contractor accounting system is key to the government’s ability to perform the various contract oversight activities required by the FAR. In particular, contracting for cost reimbursement is required to ensure that the government is getting the best value for its money. The FAR states that a cost reimbursement contract may be used only when the contractor’‘s accounting System is adequate for determining costs applicable to the contract. The government agrees to pay a set price for goods or services regardless of the actual cost to the contractor. A fixed price contract is ordinarily in the government’s interest when the risk involved is minimal or can be predicted with an acceptable degree of certainty. The government assumes most of the cost risk because the contractor is only required to provide its best effort to meet contract objectives within the estimated cost. If this cannot be done, the government can provide additional funds to complete the effort, decide not to provide extra funds, or terminate the contract. fixed price contracts, cost reimbursement contracts, and time and materials (T&M) contracts. These contract types may be used to provide the flexibility needed by the government to acquire the large variety and volume of supplies and services it needs. As discussed below, these three types of contracts place different levels of risk on the government and the contractor. Generally, the government manages its risk, in part, through oversight activities. The FAR places limitations on the use of cost reimbursement and T&M contract types. the invoice paid in 2008, nor the related file included evidence that the charge was investigated or further evaluated by either the project officer or contracting specialist. CMS has not set criteria for the use of negative certification. Reviewing invoices prior to payment is a preventive control which may result in the identification of unallowable billings, especially on cost reimbursement and T&M Invoices. Training on invoice review procedures still needed. The report found that OAGM’s invoice review policy was not revised to address this recommendation. unresponsive to the recommendation. The revised policy still contains the use of negative certification as a default. HHS reported that they have implemented the Acquisition Career Management Information System (ACMIS). ACMIS is a centralized tracking mechanism that maintains training records for the personnel assigned to contract activities. HHS’s implementation of the centralized system to track training addressed our recommendation. Actions taken do not achieve the intent of the recommendation and are insufficient. However, since CMS has provided training on invoice review procedures. instances in which the contracting officer or specialist did not identify items that were inconsistent with the terms of the contract. For example, facilities capital cost of money is generally disallowed by HHSAR. However, we found two instances where the contractor billed, and CMS paid, this cost. Another contractor submitted invoices under its fixed price contract that were contrary to the payment schedule stipulated in the contract terms. The contract required the contractor to submit four invoiced of equal amount every 3 months during the 1-year performance period. receipts, and subcontractor invoices, all of which are necessary to confirm if the amounts billed were compliant with the terms of the contract or otherwise allowable and allocable to that contract. In one instance, invoICES reported labor costs based on labor categories, but did not show hours worked by employees or their respective labor rates. In another example, a contractor submitted an invoice in 2008 for services that were provided in 2003. The contractor did not provide supporting documentation for the $36,944 billed. CMS’s Acquisition Policy Notice 16-01 requires the project officer to review each contractor invoice and recommend payment approval or disapproval to the contracting officer. This review is to determine, among other things, if the expenditure rate is commensurate with technical progress and whether all direct cost elements are appropriate, including subcontracts, travel, and equipment. Based on his or her review, theproject officer is then to approve the invoice for payment by signing a Payments and Progress Certification Form or disapprove by issuing a suspension notice. disapprove by issuing a suspension notice. In one case, although a contractor submitted over 100 invoices for fiscal year 2008, only 8 were certified by the project officer. The total value of the contract through January 2009 was about $64 million. The contracting officer or specialist is also required to review invoiced for critical elements such as compliance with the terms of theContract. The contract was signed in 2007 and has been in the works since 2007. It was awarded to a contractor in 2008. The cost/price team serves as an in-house consultant to others involved in the contracting process at CMS. The team, which consists of four contract auditors, provides support for contract administration including reviewing cost proposals. Project officers serve as the contracting officer’s technical representative designated to monitor the contractor's progress. The contract specialist assists with the invoice review process. The project officer is responsible for the surveillance and assessment of performance and is not authorized to commit or bind the government. The cost/ price team is available by request to assist with contract administration. CMS did not timely perform contract closeout procedures resulting in a backlog of 1,300 contracts. Contracting officers or specialists did not always identify instances where invoices did not comply with contract terms and conditions. CMS has not taken sufficient actions to investigate and recover questionable payments. CMS described several actions it has taken to investigate payments made to 3 of the 12 contractors for which we identifiedquestionable payments. The actions CMS has taken are described in the next section of this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. same contractors rely on the oversight and monitoring work of the CFA. CMS policies did not provide guidance on what constitutes sufficient detail to support amounts billed on contractor invoices to facilitate the review process. The continuing weaknesses in contracting activities and limited progress in addressing known deficiencies raise questions concerning whether CMS management has established an appropriate “tone at the top” regarding contracting activities. Until CMS management addresses our previous designated to perform functions supporting HHS as the C FA, CMS will develop appropriate procedures for monitoring Cost Accounting Standards compliance. CMS revised invoice review policy and determined that new invoice payment procedures contain clear roles and responsibilities. No action taken. The revised policy does not specify the documentation the contractors would be required to submit to support the invoices or what would be needed for the project officer, contracting specialist, or contracting officer to validate information in the invOices. CMS’s actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. The new policy still contains the same requirements as the old policy. It is not clear if the new policy will be implemented in the future. CMS officials told us that during fiscal year 2008, OAGM closed 581 contracts and reduced the overdue backlog to 400 contracts. Yet O AGM officials could not provide support for these closures or a list of the contracts overdue for closeout. HHS reported that CMS will review the questionable payments identified in GAO-08-54 to determine whether CMS should seek reimbursement from the federal government. The fiscal year 2009 plan only contained three bullets stating that OAGm would provide quarterly reports to the division directors. procedures resulting in a backlog of 1,300 contracts, of which 407 were overdue for closeout as of September 30, 2007. We recommended that CMS develop a plan to reduce the number of contracts in the backlog. CMS did not provide us a closeout plan for fiscal year 2008 and the fiscal year 2009 plan was insufficient. For example, it did not contain a workload analysis. Agency-specific policies provide guidance on how CMS staff are expected to perform their day-to-day duties. Since September 30, 2007, the number of contracts eligible for closeout has increased by 24 percent, from 1,300 in 2007 to 1,611 in 2009. CMS could not fully support the analysis it provided and it related only to the time period between April 2007 and September 30,. 2007. The contract file document checklist employed by CMS was not fully supported by the data provided to us by CMS during this current review. It was only available for the period from April 2007 to September, 2007. contracts eligible for closeout by contracting officer or specialist or an estimate of the number of hours or audit funds it would need to close the contracts. The FAR establishes time standards for closing out a contract after the work is physically completed (i.e., goods or services are provided) The contract closeout process is an important internal control, in part, because it is generally the last opportunity for the government to detect and recover any improper payments. The complexity and length of thecloseout process can vary with the extent of oversight performed by the agency during the period of closeout. The total contract value of contracts eligible for closeout has increased from $3 billion to at least $3.8 billion. This is a substantial increase over the balances at the end of fiscal year 2007. The closeout process is particularly important for cost reimbursement contracts because a contractor is allowed to bill costs it incurred to provide the good or service. The government audits these billed costs to determine if they were allowable and allocable to the contract, the report says. It says insufficient progress has been made to reduce the backlog of contracts. of 2006, which required a single searchable Web site, accessible by the public for free, that reports key information for each federal award. The contract life cycle includes many acquisition and administrative activities. Prior to award, an agency identifies a need; develops a requirements package; determines the method of contracting; solicits and evaluates bids or proposals; and ultimately awards a contract. After contract award, the agency performs contract administration and contract closeout. Contract administration involves monitoring the contractor’s performance as well as reviewing and approving (or approving) the contractor's request for payment. The contract closeout process involves verifying that the goods or services were provided and that administrative matters are completed. Other tasks may include audits or reviews of the contractor’s costs and compliance with CAS. Agencies may choose among different contract types to acquire goods and services. This choice is the principal means that agencies have for allocating risk between the government and the contractor. Contract types can be grouped into three broad categories: fixed price contracts, fixed-price contracts, and long-term contracts. to a third prior recommendation that CMS review the questionable payments we identified. After reviewing this information, we revised our assessment of the status of efforts taken by CMS from “No Actions Taken” to “Actions Insufficient” No other changes were made to the report as a result of agency comments. See appendix III for a discussion of the remaining two prior recommendations (points 2, 3, and 4) for which CMS disagreed with our assess of its progress. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. The actions CMS has taken to date are insufficient to fully resolve the issues identified and more remains to be done to recover funds that may have been inappropriately paid to contractors. CMS relies on incurred cost audits that are conducted at the end of contract performance when the contract is closed to validate the overall propriety of payments. The $67 million we questioned related to costs incurred in fiscal years 2004, 2005, and 2006 and therefore would not be covered or investigated in an audit of fiscal 2008 incurred costs. CMS’s resolution of questionable payments of the magnitude we identified ($88.8 million) should be performed expeditiously. allocable to the contract. Putting off the control activity until the end of contract performance increases the risk of overpaying for indirect costs during contract performance. We estimate that for at least 54.9 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, CMS did not promptly perform or request an audit of direct costs. We found that 25 contract actions for which this control applied did not have an Audit of Direct Costs promptly performed or requested. Similar to the previous article, this article is based on a report by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services. that such an audit may be necessary for closing out the contract at the end of contract performance. Not annually auditing direct costs increases the risk that CMS is paying for costs that are not allowable or allocable to the contract. CMS had policies for invoice certification and purchase card oversight; however, these policies were not consistently followed. The failure to follow established agency policy increases CMS’s risk of improperly paying contractor invoices or purchase card transactions. We estimate that for at least 59.0 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, the project officer did not always certify the invoiced. they generally adjust for final indirect cost rates during contract closeout at the end of the contract performance rather than annually due to the cost and effort the adjustment takes. When CMS is not the CFA, CMS must wait on the C FA to perform the necessary audit work required to establish the final indirect Cost Rates. Not annually adjusting for finalirect cost rates increases the risk that CMS is paying for costs that are not allowable or allocable to the contract. Furthermore, putting off the control activity puts off the necessary control activity. of direct costs promptly performed or requested. Similar to the audit of indirect costs, audits of direct costs allow the government to verify that the costs billed by the contractor were allowable, reasonable, and allocable to the contract. The audit ofdirect costs is the responsibility of the contracting officer. The contracting officer may request, for a fee, that the CFA for the contractor perform the audit work. The FAR does not provide time frames or other requirements for when the audit should be performed except that such an audit may be necessary for closing out a contract. ensure adequate oversight of contracts that pose more risk to the government, specifically cost reimbursement contracts. While officials told us they could use more audit funding, we found that OAGM management had yet to determine what an appropriate funding level should be. Without knowing for which contractors additional CFA oversight is needed, CMS does not know with certainty the number of audits and reviews that must be performed annually. Without this key information, CMS can not estimate an adequate level of audit information that it needs. CMS officials told us incurred cost audits are not performed annually due to insufficient resources. A shortage of financial and human resources creates an environment that introduces vulnerabilities to the contracting process, they said. The shortage of resources hinders management’s ability to sustain an effective overall control environment, and ultimately increases risk in the contracting, they added. The report was published by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) at the request of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) entity is complying with applicable acquisition laws and regulations. Audit report dated September 30, 2008, questioned approximately $2.1 million of costs that CMS paid to a contractor in fiscal year 2006. OAGM management confirmed that no action has been taken to investigate and recover the challenged costs. CMS has not established a formal procedure or system for tracking and pursuing the results of contract or contractor audits and had not provided its contracting officers guidance or procedures for when to request the assistance of internal and external audit. audits are best conducted annually, rather than at the end of contract performance. CMS’s backlog of contracts eligible for closeout delays investigations and makes recovery more difficult. CMS does not track, investigate, and resolve contract audit and evaluation findings for purposes of cost recovery and future award decisions. Tracking audit and Evaluation findings strengthens the control environment in part because it can help assure management that the agency's objectives are being met. It can also help management determine whether the entity is complying with applicable acquisition laws and regulations. when to request the assistance of internal and external audit and evaluation services. OAGM did not provide direction on when (what stage(s) in the contract life cycle and under what circumstances) the contracting officer should utilize the service of the cost/price team or other contract auditors. By not timely acting on audit results, CMS is forgoing the potential benefits from those audits and evaluations. A well-established tenet for recovery of improper payments is that it becomes increasingly more difficult with the passage of time.