are practicing in hospitals, for-profit health centers, or other settings (see fig. 3). See appendix VI for more detailed information on the results of our survey of facilities. We estimate that almost all physicians practicing on January 1, 1996, whose waivers were processed through federal agencies were practicing in primary care specialties. Overall, more than half of them werepracticing in internal medicine. The other major primary careSpecialties were pediatrics and family practice. One-third of the waiver physicians who had primary carespecialties also had subspecialties. The most prevalent subspecialty was nephrology (medicine concerned with kidney disease) Other subspecialties included infectious diseases, cardiology, and gastroenterology. Requesting facilities and state officials had mixed views on the usefulness of subspecialies for meeting their needs. Some states have policies to not request waivers for physicians who have sub Specialties. In other states, physicians with sub Specialities are not as desirable because they may not remain in the area to practice primary care. waivers come through the states, other agencies do not. This leads to situations where the states are unaware of the level of placements that are occurring. Waivers for physicians also are not well-coordinated with other programs addressing underservice, such as those operated by HHS. When combined with NHSC physicians, federal agencies and states have requested waivers for more physicians than are needed to remove the shortage designations in some states, authors say. They found that for eight states, the number of physicians who received waivers in 1994 and 1995 (or had waivers in process) exceeded the number in service at the end of 1995.  Waiver physicians are practicing in virtually every state; most are primary care physicians. The number of waivers being processed for physicians to practice in underserved areas each year has grown from 70 in 1990, to 1,374 in 1995. In 1996, waiver physicians were practicing in 49 states and the District of Columbia—every state except Alaska. In five states, the number of physicians for whom waivers were processed equaled more than more than 1,000. The degree to which they are relied on to relieve physician shortages varies greatly from state to state. In some cases, a facility made the request and then determined that the physician was no longer needed. In at least one case, it appears that the employer made this determination before the waiver was even granted. Here are examples in which the facility changed its mind: In letters asking USDA to request waivers, the facility asked for a physician to be removed from the facility. In the states we visited, several reasons they were not practicing at the location had to do with changes made by the facility that initiated the request. waiver physician in a medical shortage area is no guarantee that the needs of the underserved will be addressed. An area’s underserved may be only a specific part of the population (such as migrant workers or low-income people) Not all federal agencies’ and states’ policies contain requirements or monitoring to ensure that a physician’'s practice includes such groups. For example, if the underserving part of. the population is low- Income, the requesting agencies' and states' policies do not all require. that a waiver physician in such an area accept Medicaid, have a sliding fee scale, or accept anyone for services. have a sliding fee scale, or accept anyone for services regardless of his or her ability to pay. Establishing penalties against a facility for failing to comply with agency policies. The new regulations and the 1996 amendments do not establish any penalties for facilities that fail to comply. In one area where the identified need was care for migrant farm workers, a waiver physician was in a group practice a block away from a federally funded migrant health center. The waiver physician did not impact the center’s patient load because they both served different patient populations. In 1995, about half of the foreign physicians that were supposed to return home were granted waivers of this requirement to practice in an underserved area in the United States. The number of waivers being processed for physicians was greater than the number of NHSC physicians practicing in underserved areas. It was enough to offset about 27 percent of the total physician shortage identified by HHS. In responding to our survey and during our visits to health centers, physician offices, clinics, we asked why facilities want to employ foreign physicians through the use of the waivers. Be a “travesty’ to health care in rural areas if these waiver physicians were not available. Other reasons cited for hiring these physicians are their superior foreign language skills and cultural familiarity with a facility’s patient population. The sudden increase in the number of waivers being processed in 1994 and 1995 probably reflects the fact that facilities had additional places to turn, says Dr. John Sutter, a professor of medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, and author of the book, “Wage Waivers: The New Science of Medicine.” of physicians for whom waivers were processed equaled more than 75 percent of the number of physicians needed to remove these designations in the state. In other states, such as California, such physicians equal less than 10 percent. More than one-third of physicians who received their waivers through federal agencies are practicing in nonprofit community or migrant health centers. About one-fourth are in a private or group practice. The rest arepracticing in hospitals, for-profit health centers, or other settings program. State and federal health officials said they have been inundated with inquiries from physicians. Some facility officials and physicians reported paying up to $25,000 in immigration attorney or recruiter fees for assistance in matching a physician with a facility and processing the waiver. In addition, officials at several facilities said that they were contacted by professional recruiters or immigration attorneys regarding the availability of a physician to meet their facility’s needs if the physician could obtain a waiver. During our site visits to facilities where this waiver was offered, we found that the waiver was available. Agency officials said that they would like to limit the number of waivers processed by their agencies, but have not found a way of effectively restricting them. The four federal agencies have no formal process for coordinating their waiver requests and they have overlapping jurisdictions. Coordination between the agencies involved in the requests and other programs to address medical underservice is important. For example, not all the agencies processing the waiver requests have expertise in addressing health care issues, the authors say. In USDA, waivers for physicians are processed in the department’s Agricultural Research Service by an office that has experience processing waiver requests. Warrant policies vary considerably between agencies, authors say. This can lead to ‘shopping’ by physicians seeking the most advantageous terms, they say. ARC restricts physicians to practice locations in federally designated Health Professional Shortage Areas, they write. ARC practice in other areas, including designated Medically Underserved Areas, the authors add. They say there is no mechanism for each federal agency to know how many waivers the other has requested to address the physician shortage in an area. Transportation (DOT) has requested waivers for a handful of physicians to practice in one rural area where the U.S. Coast Guard operates. The rapid growth in waivers began in late 1993 and 1994, when the Departments of Agriculture (USDA) and Housing and Urban Development (HUD) began requesting them for physicians to serve their rural and urban constituents. Senior officials at both agencies said that they initially responded to a constituent request to support a specific physician; but their offices were subsequently flooded with requests for waivers for other physicians. underservice in the United States. Federal efforts to address physician shortages are not coordinated among the federal agencies or with the states. Despite some improvements, monitoring efforts to ensure that physicians fulfill the terms of their agreements remain spotty. The rapid growth in waivers for physicians makes this an opportune time for the Congress to reassess what it wants the waiver provision to accomplish. The running disagreement between HHS and other federal agencies about the role of waivers in physician supply is a major problem, authors say. waivers for these physicians fits into the overall federal strategy to address medical underservice. Designating leadership responsibility for managing the program could be given to a single federal agency, such as HHS. Establishing penalties against facilities that fail to comply with requirements of the waiver could be delegated to the states. Directing the entity(ies) managing theprogram) to implement procedures and criteria for the program, for example, could be done through a memorandum of understanding or through a delegated responsibility. care Health Professional Shortage Area designations in that state as of December 31, 1995. We used the shortage area dedesignation level because it is the primary measurement used by HHS and the requesting agencies to establish the need for physicians. We identified instances where physicians did not comply with the terms of the waiver through (1) discussions with the ARC Inspector General and (2) a identified by HHS as needed to remove primary care Health Professional shortage areas from the state. Although physicians with waivers may also practice in designated Medically Underserved Areas, HHS does not remove this designation. number of physicians needed to remove the shortage area designations in the state. Another HHS program with which physician waivers are not well-coordinated with other underservice programs or with waiver requests by other agencies. The problems of overlapping jurisdictions and the lack of information on the practice locations of waiver physicians could result in more physicians practicing in an area than are needed, as identified by HHS. Ensuring that the use of waivers for physicians is a last resort is key to ensuring that the need for a physician is real. case and forwards its recommendations to the INS Commissioner. For waiver requests made by interested U.S. government agencies or states, INS may only grant the waiver if USIA submits a favorable recommendation. While HHS is the federal agency responsible for addressing physician shortages it does not use waivers to do so. HHS endorses the philosophy that exchange visitors return home after completing their training to make their new knowledge and skills available to their home countries. As a result, HHS does not support waivers for physicians to remain in the United States to practice. Another HHS program with which physician waivers are not well-coordinated is the Community Health Center program. This means that federal agencies and states may not know of problems identified by HHS when considering requests from community health centers. For example, waivers were requested through HUD for several physicians to practice at a health center that had its HHS funding discontinued due to financial management problems. HUD officials did not know that HHS had identified problems with the health center. As a result, they could not take those problems into consideration when deciding whether to grant the waivers. agency, USDA, also expressed concern about the lack of available funding to operate its program effectively. USDA suggested that an alternative to funding the program from appropriated research funds would be to initiate a fee-for-service type application fee to offset operational costs. We concur that any entity involved in managing waiver requests for physicians should commit adequate resources for oversight and operational support to ensure that the physicians address unmet needs for physician resources. Although we did not examine financing options for managing the waivers in our review, Examine financing options for managing the waivers in our review, we did note that a few states, such as Michigan, have been requiring user fees of up to $500 per application. We also received comments on technical matters from several of the agencies, which we considered in preparing our final report. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, Housing and Urban Development, and Transportation, as well as the Director of the United States Information Agency. USIA has proposed regulations to make the waiver requests more consistent. Recent amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act impose additional requirements for waivers obtained through federal agencies. The new regulations, if finalized, and the 1996 amendments could address many of the coordination and compliance problems. But not all of them.violation of the policy receive additional scrutiny to ensure that the problems have been corrected. The growth in the number of waiver physicians has not gone unnoticed by federal agency officials and legislators. They have recently taken actions that could address some of the compliance problems identified. Director of the department’s Office of International Affairs told us that his office had fully reviewed the draft report and was in general agreement with the findings. HHS favored the option of delegating responsibility for the waivers to the states. The three agencies that provided formal written comments also expressed their support for the need for better coordination between the participating agencies, states, and other programs to address medical underservice. One agency, USDA, also expressed concern about the lack of available Regional Commission, and the Attorney General. managing the program to implement procedures and criteria for the selection and placement of physicians. We provided a draft copy of this report to seven agencies that are involved with waivers for physicians to practice in underserved areas. ARC, USDA, and USIA provided formal written comments (see apps. VIII, IX, and X). These comments indicate general agreement with our of the facilities that requested such waivers for Physicians. We obtained and analyzed data on requests for waivers for. physicians from USIA and the requesting federal agencies. our survey of states regarding waivers for physicians and follow-up telephone calls to state officials. Our scope did not include waiver requests from VA or requests from other agencies for physicians to conduct research. Because the agencies requesting waivers do not consistently track the practice dates of the physicians, we could not identify the number of physicians in practice at any given point in time. Instead, we used the dates that the agencies and states submitted their requests for waivers to USIA and assumed that those physicians whose waivers were requested in 1994 or 1995 were either already practicing at the time. elderly, and private and group practices affiliated with both public and for-profit hospitals. To determine the number of waivers for physicians granted at the request of ARC, USDA, and HUD, we requested copies of the agencies’ databases. We used the date that the agencies sent the request to USIA in our calculations because neither USIA nor INS has a cost-effective means of identifying waiver requests by occupation. USIA and INS officials said they recommended or approved virtually all the physician waiver requests made by the interested U.S. government agencies. requirement for physicians requested by interested government agencies and states. USIA and INS officials said that they recommend and approve virtually all waiver requests. Insiders said that refusal of the waiver is extremely rare if USIA has given a favorable recommendation for the waiver. INS officials are not in a position to second-guess USIA or the interested government agency as to whether the public interest would be served if the waiver was granted. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. requested in 1994 or 1995 were either already practicing at the facility listed in agency data on December 31, 1995, or had their waivers in process to begin practicing shortly thereafter. We used the number of full-time-equivalent physicians identified by HHS as needed to remove primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations in the state. We compared this number with the number who received NHSC scholarships or NHSC federal loan repayment in return for practicing in an underserved area. We obtained these data from HHS’ Health Resources and Services Physicians Practicing on January 1, 1996. from NHSC at the time of our review. As shown in table VII.1, the degree to which the identified physician shortage can be offset by the waiver physicians practicing in a state varied between the states. When combined with the NHSC physicians practicing there, the number exceeded the number of physicians needed to remove some states’ primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations. OtherStates’ identified physician needs were not met by these two physician sources. In addition to those named above, the following individuals made important contributions. placements, we cross-tabulated the agency data on waiver requests received by the agencies between 1994 and 1995 by state. We obtained the number of physicians who were NHSC scholarship or federal loan repayment recipients who were practicing in each state as of December 31, 1995, from HHS’ Bureau of Primary Health Care. This is a conservative number of NHSC physicians; however, because it does not include the number-time-equivalent physicians practicing in shortage areas, which was not available by state at the time of our review. HHS administers other federal programs, such as NHSC, to address physician shortages in the United States. NHSC supplies physicians and other health professionals to underserved areas primarily by awarding scholarships to students who agree to serve in a shortage area. On December 31, 1995, 848 NHSC physicians and 685 other NHSC professionals who received scholarships or federal loan repayment for each year of service in the shortage area, for a total of 848 physicians. For more information on NHSC's programs, visit www.nhsc.org. a physician never practiced at the intended facility, unbeknownst to the agency processing the request. We estimate that 90 percent completed the minimum employment period required by ARC. On January 1, 1996, over one-fourth (28 percent) were still practicing at the same facility that requested the waiver. Nearly half of these (13 percent) had been there for more than 4 years. We also examined the shorter-term compliance record of all physicians practicing on January 1. 1996, after receiving waivers through federal agencies between 1994 and 1995. ARC minimum contract period at that time, which was 2 years. We used 1.75 years of practice as our measure of compliance to allow for vacation and other leave. At a 95-percent confidence level, the rate of compliance among the 1990 to 1992 requests is at least 80 percent. The percent still at the requesting facility on January 1, 1996, is at at least 19 percent. We counted those physicians who were working for the facility listed in agency data as in compliance as in 1995. Federal agencies and states have different controls to help ensure that physicians comply with waiver agreements. HUD and USDA officials said that they do not have the staff resources to monitor physician compliance. HUD officials also said that their monitoring efforts were limited by the availability of staff resources. Under existing procedures, locating a waiver physician in a medical shortage area is no guarantee of success, the authors say. The authors say that the use of waivers to address physician shortages is not authorized or funded as a program, and their agencies do not know how to effectively manage it. not have the resources available to effectively manage it as a program. In its site visits to monitor compliance, ARC’s Inspector General attributed most of the problems identified to the employers. For waivers requested through both federal agencies and states, the applicable federal laws and regulations do not specify penalties against employers that fail to comply with agency policies. ARC tries to address this shortcoming by requiring employers to sign a statement certifying that they will comply with the waiver policy, and applications from employers found to be in violation of the policy receive additional scrutiny. hospital and when USDA officials told him he could not because the hospital was not in a shortage area, the physician broke off contact with them. In the second instance, the facility reported the physician’s firing directly to INS, which revoked his nonimmigrant work status. Six of eight reviews conducted by the Inspector General from 1994 to 1995 found that contrary to agreements, conditions of agreements were not met. The facility official said that he had heard that the physician was pursuing additional graduate medical education in the United States. through (1) discussions with the ARC Inspector General and a review of reports from that office. We also reviewed case files at the requesting agencies and USIA. If a facility indicated that the physician never worked there, we contacted the facility, INS, or both to obtain information on the reason the physiciannever worked there and to confirm that a waiver had been granted. If the physician was supposed to be practicing, we made site visits to facilities where the physicians were supposed to have been practicing, and we also contacted USIA and other agency officials. provided by the federal agencies. For each physician, we asked the contact person to tell us if the physician worked or planned to work at the facility. We received responses for 39 of the 40 physicians in our 1990 to 1992 ARC sample and for for the 1990-1992 ARC sample. We also asked for the physician’s medical specialty, subspecialty, and practice setting, and the date he or she stopped working at a facility. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/healthcare/cnn-healthcare-reputation-reporter-cnn/2013-01-29/index.html. changed its mind: In letters asking USDA to request waivers for three physicians, a clinic in Illinois said that the physicians were needed to help meet an urgent primary care delivery crises. Six months after one of the physicians began working there, she was terminated because the clinic had determined that it was overstaffed. She is now practicing in another city in Illinois that has an identified shortage of physicians who serve Medicaid patients. The second physician was transferred from the location on the waiver request to another location that has a shortage. A medical group asked HUD to request waivers for three physicians to work at a practice purchased from a retiring physician outside of Atlanta. When we called the practice site, we were told that only one of the three physicians was working there. The third physician was practicing only part-time at the practice sites for which the waiver was requested. He said that because there were not enough patients in that location, he spends about half his time working at the main clinic in Champaign, Illinois. The location on the waiver request to another location that is not in a federally designated shortage area. One physician never worked at the site, one physician worked a brief period and then went to practice at a prison in Michigan. One physician remained to work for the new employer after the practice was sold. INS officials said that waivers had been approved for all three physicians, including the one who was never employed there. Before we notified them, HUD officials were notified of the situation before we did, and HUD officials said they would look into the matter and get back to us in a few days. never employed there. HUD officials were unaware that the facility had been sold and that two of the physicians were not practicing there. We also found instances in which the reason for not meeting the requirements of an agreement resulted from the physician’s actions. For example, in two separate cases, physicians were fired when they refused to complete the requirement for working 40 hours a week at the requesting facility. In one instance, the fired physician notified USDA that he was going to practice at another hospital and when USDA officials told him he could not. The exchange program was authorized in 1948. The 1956 amendment provided for a waiver of the foreign residence requirement on the basis of a request from an interested U.S. government agency. In 1970, participants could no longer meet the 2-year foreign residence requirements by residing in other foreign countries but had to live in the United States for a certain period of time. The language of the House bill was modified other institutions to permit the waiver on the request of an interested government agency in the public interest. requirement before they are eligible to apply for nonimmigrant visas (H and L) There was no 2-year foreign residence requirement or waiver provision in the exchange visitor program authorized with the passage of the U.S. Information and Educational Exchange Act of 1948. The act required participants to depart the United States after completing their programs. The requirement and its related waiver provision evolved through a number of legislative changes after the exchange visitors program was authorized in 1948. “the amendment would make perfectly clear ‘I am an immigrant,’” the amendment states. Under the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961, the Director of USIA establishes programs intended to promote mutual understanding. Under these exchange visitor (J-1 visa) programs, designated organizations sponsor nonimmigrant aliens’ temporary visits to the United States for the purposes of teaching, instructing or lecturing, studying, observing, conducting research, consulting, demonstrating special skills, or receiving training. After completing this program, it is expected that participants will return to their home countries and impart what they have learned and experienced to the people of their country. programs accredited by ACGME was an exchange visitor in August 1995. Only these exchange visitor physicians are subject to the J-visa 2-year foreign residence requirement. Policy changes regarding waivers for exchange visitors will affect more than one-third of the international medical graduates in graduate medical education or training. Most international medical Graduates will not be affected by the changes. Does not include graduates of Canadian medical schools. Medical school type was not listed. Medical schools were not listed in this article. We obtained these data from HHS’ Health Resources and Services Administration. To estimate the number of physicians who completed graduate medical education and training in 1995 who would be subject to the 2-year foreign residence requirement, we subtracted number of exchange visitor physicians who were continuing applicants in the 1995-96 academic year. We also compared number of waivers with number of NHSC physicians practicing in underserved areas on September 30, 1995, including physicians who did not have NHSC scholarship or federal loan repayment obligations. number of physicians sponsored by ECFMG in the prior academic year. The number of waiver requests for physicians to practice in underserved areas that the agencies sent to USIA in 1995 (1,374) The total number of exchange visitor physicians with J-1 visas who completed graduate medical education or training who would be required to return home without a waiver to remain in the U.S. in 1995. The total amount of visas issued to exchange visitors to the United States in that year. also reviewed case files at the requesting agencies and USIA to check for documentation, if any, of the physician’s departure from the facility or noncompliance. For physicians that did not work at or left the facilities, we tried to locate the physician through AMA data. Exchange visitors are only a portion of physicians in graduate medical education programs. As shown in table II.1, about 1 in 10 physicians in programs accredited by ACGME was an exchange visitor in August. For more information, visit the American College of Physicians website. to those named above, the following individuals made important contributions to this report: Sarah F. Jaggar, Issue Area Director, Susan Lawes, Susie Anschell, Julie Rachiele, Evan Stoll, Jerry Aiken, Stan Stenersen, Lisa DeCora, Kathleen Belfi, William J. Carter-Woodbridge. Council on Graduate Medical Education. First Report of the Council, Vols. I and II. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1988. Report: Managed Health Care: Implications for the Physician Workforce and Medical Education. Institute of Medicine. The Nation’s Physician. Workforce: Options for Balancing Supply and Requirements. Pew Health Professions Commission. Critical Challenges: Revitalizing the Physicians Workforce. The National Academy Press, 1996. The New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 334, No. 25 (1996), pp. 1679-83. The Journal of the. American Medical Association, Vol 273, No., 19 (1995), p. 1521-27. Health Care Shortage Areas: Designations Not a Useful Tool for Directing Resources to the Underserved. National Health Service Corps: Opportunities to Stretch Scarce Dollars and Improve Provider Placement. U.S. Information Agency: Inappropriate Uses of Educational and Cultural Exchange Visas. Pew Health Professions Commission. Critical Challenges: Revitalizing the Healthprofessions for the Twenty-First Century. San Francisco: University of California San Francisco Center for the HealthProfessions, 1995.pp. 1521-27. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past, call (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. affidavits to INS attesting that they would return to their home countries upon completion of the education or training for which they came to the United States. U.S. officials were required to issue an annual report to the Congress on participants who had submitted affidavits. The House Committee on the Judiciary “notes the flagrant abuse of the exchange program during the past decade,” it said. It said that the bill seeks to alleviate possible ‘brain drain’ from various countries. of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. The list will be available on a daily, weekly, monthly and annual basis. For more information, please visit the Washington Post's website or call (206) 456-6000. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In 1981, USIA asked the Congress to extend the limit up to 7 years for medical doctors to encourage them to study in the United States rather than in a Communist country. The House Committee on the Judiciary questioned USIA officials regarding the likelihood that physicians would be willing to return home after 7 years. The Congress increased the usual permissible duration of stay to7 years, but it imposed additional requirements. Graduate medical education or training participants were required, as a continuing reminder, to furnish annual affidavits to INS attesting that they would return to their home countries. The amendments subject physicians seeking waivers through interested U.S. government agencies to some of the same requirements as those sponsored by state agencies. For example, the amendments require such physicians to (1) agree to work for at least 3 years for the health facility named in the application, (2) work in an area designated by the Secretary of HHS as having a shortage of health care professionals, and (3) begin work within 90 days of receipt of the waiver. If the alien physician States with a J-visa or acquiring such status through May 31, 2002. obtain a waiver of this requirement and remain in the United States. No single agency has management responsibility for use of the waivers to address physician shortages. Because of the lack of coordination, the number of waivers processed for physicians to practice in some states has been more than the amount needed to alleviate the identified physician shortage in that state. USIA reviews the program, policy, and foreign relations aspects of the case and forwards its recommendations to the INS Commissioner. For waivers are being used, see table 1. If the alien physician is otherwise contractually obligated to return to a foreign country, that country’s government must furnish a statement to the Director of USIA that it has no objection to a waiver. If the physician fails to fulfill the contract, he or she must reside and be physically present in the country of his or her nationality or last residence for at least 2 years after departing the United States before becoming eligible to apply for an immigrant visa, for permanent residence, or for any other change of nonimmigrant status. The regulation would condition approval on the physician’s commitment to practice primary care for at least 3 years in a designated Health Professional Shortage Area or a Medically Underserved Area. In the preamble to the proposed regulation, USIA noted that with the entry of USDA and HUD into the waiver process, inconsistency in the administration of waiver requests among the different agencies has created some confusion. To prevent physicians from shopping between agencies, the foreign medical graduate would be required to practice in a shortage area. By 1995, four U.S. government agencies and 23 states were requesting waivers of J-1 visa requirements for physicians. Before 1993, the only agency requesting waivers for a number of physicians to practice in underserved areas was ARC. HUD officials have recently decided to reassess the department’s waiver policy and stopped accepting requests after August 30, 1996, to conduct a review. Health care facility officials, as well as state and federal health officials, said they would like consistency in waiver policies across federal agencies. weak controls mean there is little to deter physicians or their employers from failing to comply if they choose to break these terms. It is unclear whether agencies would devote sufficient resources to effectively monitor compliance. The use of waivers is now a ready means for acquiring physicians, some of whom are being actively marketed by the physicians themselves or placement specialists such as recruiters. The current statute and regulations do not require waivers to be used only as a last resort, the authors say.. Many health care facilities and many health care institutions.experience processing waiver requests for a small number of research scientists. for physicians who have subspecialties. Requests for waivers for physicians with J-1 visas are not coordinated effectively. No single entity is responsible for coordinating practice locations of waiver physicians. HHS, perhaps the most logical candidate for doing so, opposes the way in which the waivers are being used. Because no single entities is responsible, HHS should not be responsible for the waiver program, says Dr. David Gergen, a professor of medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, and a former director of the American College of Obstetric and Gynecology. Disagreement between HHS and other federal agencies about the role of waivers in addressing physician shortages in underserved areas needs resolution. Better coordination and management of the overall effort are needed if it is to be continued. Congress should consider requiring that the use of such waivers be managed as a program. Clarifying how theUse of waivers for these physicians fits into the overall federal strategy. The use of waivers should be considered part of a larger strategy to address medical underservice in the United States. HHS did not submit formal comments by the end of our 30-day comment period. HUD and Justice (the parent department for INS) chose not to provide formal comments. DOT has had limited involvement in waivers for physicians with J-1 visas and did not have comments on the draft report. The Director of the department’s Office of International Affairs (who also also works for HUD) raised no objections to our findings. These comments indicate general agreement with our conclusions and matters for congressional consideration. The Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act, 1997, included amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act that create greater consistency among waiver efforts. The amendments strengthen penalty provisions for federally sponsored waiver physicians by prohibiting them from obtaining permanent residence or U.S. citizenship without completing the required 3-year agreement. If they fail to complete the 3- year agreement, they must fulfill the 2-year foreign foreign. If the foreign medical graduate would have to certify that he or she is only requesting a waiver through one agency. complete the 3-year agreement, they must fulfill the 2-year foreign residence requirement. These changes (1) make the waiver conditions much more consistent, which may help to alleviate the confusion cited by agency officials. (2) help to strengthen controls with regard to penalties for waivers requested through federal agencies. While the efforts of the interagency group and enactment of the 1996 amendments should improve coordination of the waiver requests for physicians with J-1 visas, they will leave several problems unaddressed. The 1994 amendments apply only to exchange visitors who were admitted to the United States under a J-visa or acquired J-Visa status before June 1, 1996. Other amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act regarding waivers for physicians with J-1 visas were passed in the 104th Congress. The amendments were included in the Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act, 1997. They impose additional requirements for waivers requested by interested U.S. government agencies. They also extend authorization for waivers for aliens entering the U States with a J/Visa or acquiring such status through May. requirement by residing in other foreign countries but had to reside in the countries of their nationalities or their last foreign residences before coming to the United States. This requirement still applies. The 1970 act also established two additional bases for waivers: persecution because of race, religion, or political opinion and statements by the participant’s home countries that they had no objections to the waivers. These bases still apply except that the statement of no-objection waiver is no longer available to participants in graduate medical education or training. medically underserved area/population (MUA/MUP) 29% Whether other state J-1 visa waiver physicians are practicing in the area. 27% Whether physicians under National Health Service Corps (NHSC) obligations are practicing. 85% Whether the facility has tried recruiting in the past without success 0% None of the above factors J- 1 VISA WAIVERS REQUESTED BY U.S. GOVERNMENT AGENCIES 9. Which of the following activities does your state conduct for interested government agencies’ requests for J1 visa waivers for physicians in your state? (check all that apply) How many J-1 visa waivers did your state receive from employers between October 1, 1995 and March 31, 1996? (enter 0 if no applications were received during that time) 112 (total) applications please continue on next page--> ) 5. Based on your current situation, how adequate is the annual limit of 20 state J- 1 visa waivers to meet your state’s needs for physicians under this program? (check one) 6. We require periodic reports by the 6% less than adequate 0% much more than adequate 27% adequate 35% There is no longer an insufficient number of physicians and surgeons in the United States. Amendment of the Immigration and Nationality Act in 1994 established another basis for physicians to obtain waivers of the J-1 visa foreign residence requirement. Under the amendment, up to 20 waivers may be granted at the request of a statedepartment of public health or its equivalent each fiscal year. The law imposed several conditions for state-requested waivers: The alien physician must (1) demonstrate a bona fide offer of full-time employment at INS service centers. and (4) maintain a nonimmigrant status until their 3-year commitment is completed. Physicians who do not fulfill this commitment become subject to the 2-year foreign residence requirement. The U.S. General Accounting Office is conducting a review of J-1 visa waivers for physicians to practice in medically underserved communities. We are sending this questionnaire to all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. You can use the enclosed pre-addressed envelope or send it via FAX on (206) 287-4872. areas that the agencies sent to USIA in 1995 (1,374) is about 64 percent of this figure. To identify characteristics of the physicians who received waivers of the J-1 visa foreign residence requirement, we selected a random sample of 40 from 355 physicians for whom ARC requested waivers between 1990 and 1992. We also obtained comments on the use of waivers for physicians from the survey respondents. We analyzed the practice specialties and practice settings for the 150 physicians who were practicing on January 1, 1996, for the facilities listed on agency data. other NHSC professionals who received scholarships or federal loan repayment were practicing in underserved areas of the country. In addition to NHSC, HHS has other programs to address medical underservice. For example, HHS provides federal grant funding to community health centers that are required to accept all patients regardless of their ability to pay. Begun as an exceptions policy, the number of physicians receiving waivers of the 2-year foreign residence requirement for J-1 exchange visitors has grown more than tenfold in the past 5 years. whether the public interest would be served if the waiver was granted. “In summary, this Department has viewed the J-1 visa to be a means of sharing advanced medical knowledge and allowing the benefits of training to accrue to the home country.” “The Department does not view waivers as a mechanism to help resolve the problems of shortage areas. Without any overall management of the use of waivers, waiver use can be abused,” says the Department of Health and Human Services. In 1995, over 9,000 foreign physicians with J-1 visas were in the United States for graduate medical education or training. These exchange visitors constituted about one-tenth of all individuals receiving medical education. Each year a few thousand new physicians receive J- 1 visas and enter the United states. These physicians are required to return to their home country (or to their country of last legal residence) for at least 2 years after completion of training. However, they may obtain a waiver of this requirement and remain in the U.S. Many officials said that their facilities had turned to these physicians because they were unable to recruit U.S. physicians. This procedure, however, does not ensure that the use of waivers for physicians is the option of last resort for areas with physician shortages. In some cases it appears that other qualified physicians are available, but the facility prefers to hire the physicians with J-1 visas. For example, officials from one multispecialty clinic told us that they interviewed several applicants for a specialist physician position, including candidates who were not under J- 1 visas.