August 20, 2004. Federal Aviation Administration: Plan Still Needed to Meet Challenges to Effectively Managing Air Traffic Controller Workforce. Air Traffic Control: FAA’s Modernization Efforts--Past, Present, and Future. National Airspace System: Reauthorizing FAA Provides Opportunities and Options to Address Airspace. System. GAO/T-RCED-00-229. Aviation Acquisition: A Comprehensive Strategy Is Needed for Cultural Change at FAA. FAA Budget Policies and Practices. FAA Needs to Ensure Better Coordination When Approving Air Traffic Control Systems. GAO-04-901. FAA Has Many Investment Management Capabilities in Place, but More Oversight of Operational Systems Is Needed. GAE-05-23. FAA’s Acquisition Management Has Improved, but Policies and Oversight Need Strengthening to Help Ensure Results. GAo-05/23. Air Traffic control: System Management. Capabilities Improved, But More Can be Done to Institutionalize Improvements. Aircraft equipped with RNP capabilities could then fly alternative rolling, moving routes to avoid weather delays. Implementing RNP could also eventually lower the ATO’s costs, another panelist said. RNP technologies have been installed on larger aircraft for so long that some aircraft equipped with the technologies have already been retired to the desert, one panelist says. In addition, pilots have been trained to use the technologies, and the technologies are already being used in the U.S. Panelists generally considered RNP a highly promising, low-cost option for the ATO to improve service. One panelist recommended that theATO create incentives, such as the right to fly in preferred airspace, for users that equip their aircraft with RNP technologies. The panelists generally assumed that the private sector could provide flight service station services and other air traffic services. The ATO’s costs. determined in its favor, the panelists said. They said they were disappointed that RNP “hasn’t. been used” RNAV and RNP could potentially increase the capacity of the ATC system to handle air traffic. Aircraft equipped with RNP capabilities could then fly alternative routes or avoid bad weather. However, the airlines are “crying for” FAA to approve RNP, one of the panelists said, because of its potential to boost air traffic capacity. The FAA has not approved procedures for its use in the U.S., the panelist said, but it is expected to do so in coming months. the technologies, and the technologies are already being used in some other countries, including Canada. As a first step toward obtaining FAA’s approval of procedures for using RNP, a panelist said, the ATO could make policy announcements to set a tone and direction. These announcements would enlist the user community's support at little or no cost to theATO, he said. However, he added, such announcements would not be available to the public at the time of the announcement. Currently, FAA is implementing a number of improvements to airspace and procedures using RNP. Five airports are developing RNP-based procedures in partnership with airlines that favor RNP, FAA says. To give the ATO a more predictable source of funding and greater decision-making authority, would generally require legislative action and take time to implement, panelists say. The ATO could make some progress in addressing its cultural, technical, and budgetary challenges under its current authorities, the panelists generally agreed.  panelists expressed concerns about the government’s approach to regulating the use of onboard navigation equipment. FAA has “the wrong conceptual framework” for developing regulations to implement new procedures, one panelist said. Its current approach is disproportionate, he said, because it establishes the same safety standards as the ATO. However, he also cautioned, it would be important for FAA to implement RNP in a way that did not “disenfranchise” general aviation interests and regional carriers. Panelists discussed the potential benefits of a more widespread use of a concept called area navigation (RNAV) RNAV allows operators of properly equipped aircraft to use onboard navigation capabilities to fly desired flight paths without requiring direct flight over ground-based navigation aids. This provides for more direct routing, avoiding suboptimal routes prescribed by conventional “highways in the sky” that are defined by point-to-point flying over ground. RNAV and RNP hold promise for saving system users time and money by reducing flight times and fuel consumption. FAA is implementing the redesign at very high altitudes. The procedure, invisible to passengers, is called Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum. It is expected to save airlines $400 million in fuel costs during the first year. As technology allows, FAA says, more flight altitude levels will be added. systems.plans to continue this phased approach to acquiring new systems. Customers that do equip. customers that do not will be able to use the new system. The FAA says it will continue to make changes as technology allows. costs to identify positive and negative factors affecting performance and productivity. plan is a response to a congressional mandate, based on a recommendation we made in 2002, that FAA develop a plan for addressing an impending wave of controller retirements and deal with productivity issues. The panelists identified and discussed the impact of funding constraints and the federal budget process on ATC modernization. In their view, the most immediate issue is a critical shortage of funds to meet the current modernization program’s plans and users’ demands. FAA needs a customer-oriented business strategy and a business plan, a panelist said. Improving controllers’ productivity would be another way to save money, a fourth panelist suggested. The upcoming wave of air traffic controller retirements would create “an opportunity to redistribute and even to trim the work force in some areas,” one panelist noted. The FAA needs to focus its capital investment on avoiding outages, the panelist added. The ATO’s operating costs account for about three-quarters of its total costs. that time will show, when completed, how large a funding gap the ATO faces and how far it will have to go to address that gap. FAA says that it is prepared to identify and eliminate redundancies in the NAS. FAA has already taken some steps to control the costs of ATC modernization. For example, it has adopted the phased approach to implementing new ATC systems that it used under Free Flight Phase 1, called “build a little, test a little.” The ATO says it plans to continue this phased approach to acquiring new systems. The approach is called “build a little, test a little.” This approach relies on the early and ongoing investment of stakeholders, who review the progress of new projects regularly and identify critical omissions and “no go” items that would prevent a system from operating as intended. The FAA says it will continue to test and evaluate new systems as it acquires them. The ATO plans to use this approach to acquire new systems in the future. good financial management means linking FAA’s capital and operating budgets. FAA is revising its cost accounting practices and changing from a cash flow to a total cost business model for the ATO. Using the Strategic Management Process to drive budget decisions will help to ensure the establishment and maintenance of a linkage between the capital the operating budgets, says the airline's chief financial officer. The ATO expects everyone to learn the difference between cost and cash flow and get a better handle on unit costs as better cost accounting data become available. developing management training in cost accounting and budgeting. FAA plans to finish putting a new cost accounting system in place by 2006 that will allow it to assign, track, and better control costs. In the fall of 2004, FAA updated its cost estimates in light of OMB’s revenue projections for the next 4 years and arrived at a cumulative shortfall for the period of $5 billion for the operating budget and $3.2billion for the capital budget. According to FAA, a business plan that the ATO was preparing at that time will show, when completed, how large a funding shortfall will be. programs. As a result, when the appropriators decide not to fund a project, they may not understand how their decision will affect other projects. Separation of capital and operating costs in FAA’s accounting system makes it difficult to see the implications of capital investment decisions for operating costs. “Everything we put in the field winds up increasing the ops budget,” one panelist said. Furthermore, as a result of the lack of analysis of life-cycle costs, some investments in technologies end up in a warehouse because the ATO cannot afford to operate them. the field winds up increasing the ops budget. The firewall makes it difficult to see the relationship between software replacement (capital) and maintenance (operating) costs. The budget is not integrated to show what investments buy in terms of productivity, safety, or environmental benefits. FAA’s capital budget fails to show the impact of investments on the aviation industry, other panelists said. The FAA has not commented on the panel's findings or any potential changes to the FAA's budget for the next fiscal year. capital investments be funded out of annual appropriations means that major acquisitions generally take many years to implement. Particularly when annual appropriations fall short, projects’ development and deployment may be delayed and their costs may increase with time. By the time the acquisitions are fully deployed, panelists said, they may be out of date. technology as well as aging equipment may pose risks to users, and outdated software may require costly upgrades, they said. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. budget process incompatible with strategic planning. Panelists noted that the number of regional jets, low-fare airlines, and unmanned aerial vehicles are increasing. FAA has not developed a business model or plans for managing the increased air traffic, one panelist said, rather than integrated, organized, and periodically revised. The FAA is good at forecasting demand, he said, but it does not evaluate “the anatomy of demand” and determine how that demand will be served. It is “absolutely a problem at FAA” that “budget drives strategy and strategy does not drive budget,” he said. than integrated, organized, and periodically revised. FAA asks for more than it can get and then carries the difference over from year to year. Project managers first overpromise capabilities and underestimate costs to increase the chances that new projects will be accepted. Then, after projects are accepted, they overestimate costs because they assume their requests will be cut. Although managers could include options in their budget submissions, they don't do it enough in the budget process. The budget process establishes incentives for unrealistic planning. Managers are reluctant to revise ongoing projects because they do not want to be seen as fickle. A private company that operates under a board of directors and obtains revenue from customers does not have incentives to play budget games to get projects approved, a panelist said. Some panelists criticized the federal budget for $1.4 trillion in cuts to health care, education and other programs. The cuts are part of a larger reduction in federal spending on programs such as health care and education. Some panelists criticized the federal budget for failing to show priorities and relationships among proposed investments. In the budget, one panelist said, “everything is as important as everything else” Another panelist observed that the budget sets no capital investment priorities. According to a third panelist, a line item budget tears apart a highly layered, interdependent system. Then, when the budget request goes to Congress, ‘you have no opportunity to try to explain to anybody the interconnections of these programs’ FAA budget process is slow, inflexible, and influenced by the political process. Annual appropriations are uncertain and discourage planning. The budget fails to show investment priorities and relationships between FAA’s capital and operating budgets. The panelists suggested a number of steps that the ATO could currently take to address these challenges. They included accepting the budget process as it is and reducing spending to match revenues. They also suggested implementing regulatory and procedural changes to allow the use of existing cost-saving measures. panelist described what he called the government’s traditional underfunding of the ATC system's capital requirements. Several panelists maintained that the federal budget cycle is too long and inflexible. They suggested, for example, that FAA and DOT officials might be unwilling to publicly release data that could raise questions about their management. The panelist said the government undercapitalizes any complex, rapidly evolving operational system, and overestimates the economic service lives of information technology investments. Whereas the government typically assumes such investments will last for 15 years, a 7-year estimate would be more reasonable. The federal budget cycle is too long and inflexible to meet the needs of an ATC system. The federal budget process freezes plans for the system 12 or 18 months in advance. The budget procedure requiring that capital investments be funded out of annual appropriations means that ATC plans have to be made 12 to 18 days in advance of the budget process. Such a “dramatic,” ‘dynamic’ system requires “more managerial freedom, much more day-to-day, week- to-week, month-to.-month decision- making,’ panelist says. panelists said, they may be out of date. The political process influences budget decisions in the administration as well as in Congress. Congress has generally supported FAA’s modernization program, but funding difficulties have ensued. Other panelists added that the ATO would have difficulty “deliver the bad news” Unless revenue increases are forthcoming. According to this panelist, OMB would deny funding for the modernization program if it were to be approved by the White House and Congress. The ATO will publish a business plan that projects deficit scenarios. increases are forthcoming. According to this panelist, OMB would deny any requests for increased funding and would, instead, tell the ATO to find another way of doing business. Panelists noted that funding from annual appropriations is uncertain, and that this uncertainty is incompatible with strategic and capital planning. The amount of money available for appropriation each year cannot be predetermined, one panelist said, and the size of the appropriation may vary from year to year. This uncertainty focuses attention on which technology will receive the funding rather than on what improvements in safety or capacity the technology is. The ATO could use existing cost-saving technologies, contracting with the private sector to provide certain air traffic services, and obtaining information on other countries’ ATC technologies and on international technical standards. To give the ATO a more predictable source of funding, panelists suggested that it be authorized to establish and manage user fees, rather than rely on appropriated tax receipts. The changes would allow the ATo to implement a “sensible” capital investment program and hire the technical expertise it needs. on what improvements in safety or capacity the technology is supposed to deliver (the outputs), he said. In debating whether this investment or that investment should receive funding, planners have lost sight of the big picture, he suggested. “Who anywhere would have a capital investment plan that was predominantly about standing still?” he asked. Another panelist also considered the federal budget process incompatible with strategic planning. In his words, “it’s not a good idea to spend money on things that don’t work,” the panelist said. The panel was only an initial step in a possible long-term, evolving effort to develop and sustain discussion on ATC modernization. Because our scope was limited, we could not include a large number of leading experts, institutions, and networks involved in specialized efforts. More thought, discussion, and research are needed to develop greater agreement on what we really know, what needs to be done, and how to do it. Nevertheless, the panel provided a rich dialogue and panelists developed strong messages in responding to each of the questions. The panelists attributed many of the ATC modernization program’s chronic problems to cultural and technical factors. They cited resistance to change at all levels within the agency and insufficient technical expertise as key factors impeding modernization. They identified multiple, currently available options for addressing these factors. The panelists developed strong messages in responding to each of the three questions. Those messages are highlighted below. The full report is available on the FAA website at: http://www.faa.gov/ modernization. A government organization is insulated from the economic pressures that the private sector faces, one of the panelists indicated. Federal employees do not have the firsthand experience with layoffs and business failures to understand why improvements to the ATC system’s efficiency are needed, the panelist said. Other panelists emphasized the reluctance of management to change, according to a panelist with experience in restructuring. The U.S. Air Traffic Control system has been in operation for more than 40 years. It is the world's second-largest air traffic control system. congressional committees for changing “some extremely entrenched political fiefdoms.” FAA cannot do everything alone from the inside, because airplanes and airports, for example, need to be equipped with the technology. Another panelist said that he had found the congressional authorizing committees amenable to changes, but the appropriators liked things the way they were. what is expected of them, how they fit into the strategy, and what the vision is for their organization. In addition to having a vision, another panelist says, it is important for the ATO to tie that vision to the user constituency. The union is “very political,’ several panelists asserted. One panelist charged that it was “hindering the progress’ of a performance-based organization. Resistance to change can be an issue outside FAA as well as within it, panelists noted. The ATO was getting support from DOT, OMB, and congressional committees for changing “some extremely entrenched political fiefdoms,” one panelist said. Another panelist cited the union’s long-term opposition to the implementation of a software program that tracks productivity. Employing a team concept could help overcome resistance to the implementation of new technologies. Putting engineers, finance people, controllers, and electronic technologists together, all on the same team, could unite them as they moved through the stages of implementation. When the time comes to field a technology, the focus would be on getting it up and running and operating safely, a panelist implied. A change in management’s could also help, the panelist said, as could a change in the way airports are run. implementation because it might threaten jobs. A change in management’s approach could go a long way toward overcoming controllers’ and other employees’ resistance to change. One foreign air traffic organization changed its whole approach to the unions and the staff, started talking to them as people, and began executing “participative working” programs. Union representatives and managers take the same courses together and address issues of affordability together, one panelist said. The key to these positive results, he said, is positive communication. Managers have stopped seeing employees as a problem and have started to see them as part of the solution. The only way to bring about a cultural transformation is to replace those who resist change, either by allowing them to retire or by hiring others to take their places. In the corporate world, one panelist observed, a new executive brings in a new management team to support a cultural turnaround. The new team is then loyal to the company, the panelist said. The key to these positive results is psychological change, he said. Senior and middle managers could not or would not adjust to the change and had to be let go within the first 2 years. Another panelist emphasized that cultural change starts at the top and questioned why the ATO’s new COO had replaced only two top managers in theATO and simply replaced them with new staff. The other employees also had difficulty adjusting and were still adjusting in some respects, he said, but getting management on the right page was the real challenge.to change. replaced only two top managers in the ATO and simply reassigned other managers. The ATO’s fate depends on other organizations, including FAA, DOT, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and Congress. A number of panelists described the air traffic controllers’ union as also resistant to change. According to one panelist, for example, the union delayed the adoption of technologies such as the User Request Evaluation Tool (URET) because some controllers saw them as a threat. support a cultural turnaround. Technical as well as cultural factors have impeded ATC modernization, panelists say. FAA does not have “the engineering technical capability to change,” one speaker says. Another panelist notes that an executive in the private sector replaced the top 200 people in his organization to achieve the transformation he was seeking. The new team is then loyal to the new executive, the panelist says. The ATC needs a new COO and a new chief executive, he says. plans to train or hire people with needed skills to address shortfalls in technical expertise. Recognizing that cultural factors can play a critical role in an organization’s success, the ATO has initiated organizational changes that are designed to create a foundation for cultural change and deliver benefits to customers efficiently. For example, theATO established collaborative teams of technical experts to address ATC modernization issues. The ATO is also working to address some of the cultural and technical factors panelists identified as affecting A TC modernization. FAA sent a large number of detailed e-mails in response to a call for recommendations to improve internal communications. FAA’s management culture was “intensely hierarchical, risk averse,” and “reactionary.” Now, FAA is attempting to foster “results-focused, proactive and innovative behavior” Changing the agency’‘s leadership model is also designed to replace a “personality-driven culture” with a sustainable, stable, viable organization. The panelists said replacing airline ticket taxes with a user fee is essential for the ATO’s success. While recognizing that such a fee would be controversial, the panelists maintained that it would produce a more predictable, reliable funding stream than the annual appropriations process. One panelist cautioned, it would be “fatal” to implement the fee in any way that did not make the ATo financially independent of Congress. The ATO is still largely a government organization and therefore remains subject to most governmental constraints. “alternative to capital starvation,” one panelist said. Even if the user fee stream initially produced no more revenue than the airlines are now paying in aviation-related taxes, he said, the ATO could reap a “transition dividend” during the first 5 or 10 years after the bonds are issued, limiting its annual outlays to the debt service on the bonds. He characterized this strategy as “money that’s lying on the sidewalk waiting to be used” would have to consider what it was incentivizing through user fees. For example, if the fee was based on weight, he said, it might “incentivize even smaller planes and more planes,” thereby increasing demands on the ATC system’s capacity. Another issue that would have to be worked out, is how the common costs of air traffic services should be allocated. Whether users should pay only for the incremental costs of the services they use, as most users would argue, or whether some cross-subsidies are needed. use, as most users would argue, or whether some cross-subsidies should continue. Another panelist pointed out that implementing a user fee alone would not guarantee efficiency, because the air traffic services provider could simply raise the fee when costs increased. Some method of controlling costs would have to be built into the system, he said. Most panelists correctly assumed that legislation would be required to institute auser fee system. Specifically, a user Fee system could be implemented in a government or a public-private type of air traffic service. ones you respond to and serve,” he concluded. While panelists generally favored a user fee system, they cautioned care in proposing and implementing one. As one panelist said, the fee question, once raised, would be all-consuming and would require the expenditure of political capital. One panelist called for figuring out “not only what problem we’re solving, but what problems we might be likely to create,’ he said. Another panelist noted that the government would have to consider what it was incentivizing through user fees. The ATO lacks control over its revenues and funding priorities. Some panelists stressed the importance of progressing by small steps within the existing system. It was critical, one panelist said, for the ATO to ‘have some small early practical successes’ Other panelists focused on the obstacles within the system that they believed would impede or prevent success. The ATO still had a long way to go to achieve its goals, the panelists said, but they were united in their desire for it to succeed. A panelist predicted a slow but sure increase in delays. Severe reductions in the funding for ATC modernization could exacerbate what one panelist described as the government’s traditional underfunding of the ATC. If the ATO did not carefully analyze demand and determine how that demand could be served, it would find itself facing a “perfect storm,” a third panelist referred to as a ‘perfect storm’ The ATO has used the term 'perfect storm' in the past. “gold-plated things that don't affect the true performance of the system and drive the costs up completely unnecessarily,” one panelist said. Without a direct connection to the users and their mission, “evolution takes very unintended and very undesirable paths over long periods of time,’ another panelist added. As long as the customers are not directly paying the bills and providing the resources, ‘it’s going to be very hard to bring about real change’ and make the ATO “a customer-driven, customer-servicing organization.” strategy as “money that’s lying on the sidewalk waiting to be picked up’ Panelists maintained that the ATO's organizational placement, combined with its dependence on Congress for funding, limits the COO's ability to make decisions and take actions. The COO is not a Chief Executive Officer, as one of the panelists observed. Instead, he reports to his “owners’—who include the FAA Administrator and the DOT Secretary, panelists said. The COO lacks key financial data needed to determine, analyze, and manage the ATO’s costs. FAA did not maintain basic information on the costs and value of existing systems, reducing ATO's potential. The controllers’ union influences management”s decisions, panelists observed. The ATO is at odds with the FAA because it looks forward to the ATC system of 2025, according to one panelist, rather than helping the ATo address its immediate funding needs. The ATO's chances for success are limited because the COO is being asked to turn the organization around without being given the tools to do so. One panelist said he was skeptical about the ATO’s ability to act like a business when it is not really one. He suggested that it was only at the margins that the creators of the ATo had replicated a business. The ATO is still largely a government organization and not really a business, he said. It is charged with operating like aBusiness but is not provided with the management tools available to aBusiness. panel of independent advisers and costs about $2.5 million a year. According to several panelists, the ATO’s COO lacks the management tools that would be available to a private-sector CEO. In addition, the 20-year vision of the Joint Planning and Development Office (JPDO) is at odds with the ATo, according to one panelist, said the panelist. The FAA Administrator, DOT Secretary, and OMB Director can revise his budget request and Congress can make further changes. of privatization to be the enemy of moving forward with the ATO, as one panelist said. Instead, taking a two-pronged approach would be the best way, in the view of most panelists, to meet its immediate and longer term challenges. Clinton V. Oster, Jr. (Panel Moderator) Professor of Public and Environmental Affairs, Indiana University. Anthony J. Broderick (Panelist) Assistant Professor of Environmental and Public Policy, University of Wisconsin-Madison. Hiring skilled engineers instead of relying on contractors might enable the ATO to develop systems more economically and efficiently, one panelist suggested. A foreign air traffic services organization develops new ATC systems in-house and seldom uses contractors. It now utilizes its engineers to build systems rather than manage contractors. As a result, it is now developing the systems it needs faster and at less cost. Maximizing the use of commercial inputs was the recommendation of another panelist, who said that FAA needs to get out of the contractors' business. The ATO could profitably take advantage of the experiences of other countries’ air traffic organizations, which are technically as good as FAA ever was or ever was. According to a third panelist, commercial systems have a shorter economic service life than the systems that FAA designs. Another panelist also emphasized the availability of technical expertise in the private sector. The FAA needs to get out of the business of designing systems, according to a panelist on the ATO’s air traffic planning committee. FAA lacks a rudder, in a technical sense, for modernization. The ATO could obtain advice from an independent board or information from other countries on technologies that they have already adopted. A technical advisory board made up of system engineers could review proposals for FAA and demand the kinds of data and tests needed to scrub the proposals and identify any big roadblocks. Hiring skilled engineers would be a good first step, the panelists said, but it would take more than that to get FAA on the right track. The ATO should institute “a fundamental requirement and a cultural expectation” that it will review existing technologies before it buys or tries to develop its own. With a multibillion-dollar budget for software and other information technology, the ATO has ample opportunity to save money. FAA plans to train or hire people with needed skills to develop new technologies. The ATO's COO made a number of observations on FAA’s culture. He also noted that FAA plansto train or hired people withneeded skills to create new technologies, he said. technical expertise it needs; achieve cost efficiencies; and offer better, more responsive service. restructuring could resolve the conflict of interest inherent in FAA’s dual responsibility as the regulator and the operator of air traffic services. Other panelists portrayed the ATO as an organization that is charged with operating like a business but is not. The ATO was created by the Mineta Commission, but Congress did not approve funding for it until after the agency was created. The agency was charged with becoming performance-based but deprived of the means to transform itself, one panelist said. costs and value of existing systems, reducing the ATO’s potential to be data driven. As a result, he spent most of his first year overseeing the implementation of a cost accounting system and collecting other key data. Their performance is constrained because their terms of employment and compensation are based largely on negotiated agreements rather than on performance. In addition, salary caps limit FAA’S ability to pay for technical expertise. As one panelist observed at the end of the panel, the ATo’'s creation did not address the structural conflict of interest that exists. If every country or continent had its own technical standards, an international system could not function effectively. The ATO’s COO believes that good financial management means linking FAA's capital and operating budgets. The FAA is addressing some of the funding shortfalls and features of the federal budget process that panelists identified as affecting ATC modernization, the GAO says. The agency is also working on a plan to improve ATC operations across the U.S. and the rest of the world. productivity would be another way to save money, a fourth panelist said. He characterized his suggestion as “touch the third rail of aviation politics.” Another panelist emphasized the importance of starting to plan now to accommodate the airplanes that are being bought today to provide service for the next generation, which he variously estimated at 20, 30, or 40 years. For example, he said, the ATO needed to understand the interconnections between ATC systems and break the big picture into nuggets so that it could clarify for the appropriators why they should not break apart. technical benchmarks to promote efficient development, business models that take into account operational trends. As one panelist said, “we have to target the future mix of real operations that we’re really going to see, not build the world’s most perfect system from 1956” Despite their reservations, the panelists generally agreed that stakeholders should not “allow the concept of privatization to be the enemy of moving forward with the ATO,” they said. The ATO is a government organization. The other panelist argued that navigational technology is evolving and shifting from ground-based to cockpit-based systems. He suggested that the private sector could assume the cost of capitalizing the equipment, but “the government’s got to allow that technology to be used, and it hasn’t.” Although the ATO should change its policies on aircraft separation to permit ‘the technology that exists on airplanes today to do the job,’ the panelist said. they cited were the counterproductive incentives inherent in the budget process, the government’s refusal to allow new air traffic technologies to be used, and opposition to organizational and technological change. It was important, one panelist said, to overcome this opposition by describing “the difference between how things are and how they might be,” he said. Still other panelists looked to the future, calling for international technical benchmarks to promote efficient development, business models that take advantage of new technologies. operations, and “staged outsourcing” of the NAS’s functions might build confidence in the private sector. Obtaining information on technologies and procedures that other countries have already developed could help the ATO control costs. “We should be using and sharing” the technologies that have already been invented, one panelist said. A shared vision is crucial for a globally based air traffic system, another panelist noted. The air navigation service business spends $3 billion to $4 billion a year on writing code for air traffic management software. provide flight service station services and other air traffic services more efficiently than the government. The A-76 process would then serve not only as a way of saving money but also as “a pilot program for how things could get done,” one panelist said. In the view of another panelist, ongoing government oversight would ensure the safety of contracted operations, and “staged outsourcing’ of the NAS’s functions might build, he said. The FAA could contract for other air Traffic services, such as oceanic, night, en route, or airways facilities services. participating in a multiagency effort, sponsored by the JPDO, to develop a national plan for aviation in 2025 and beyond. According to the ATO’s COO, the restructuring of U.S. air traffic services that has taken place thus far, through the establishment of a performance- based air traffic organization, constitutes “the first building block” of the longer term effort to transform the aviation system. However, he acknowledged that the ATo has not yet connected this long- term vision with the financial and other challenges it currently faces. business plan that the ATO is developing to guide and improve its operations and financial management. FAA has worked to develop three longer term planning documents. It has published its Flight Plan for 2005 through 2009, a multiyear strategic effort that sets a 5-year course for FAA in the areas of safety, capacity, international leadership, and organizational excellence. Second, it has developed a rolling 10-year effort, called the Operational Evolution Plan (OEP), through which FAA plans to increase the capacity of the NAS by one- third. vision and manage not only its finances but also its future. Over time, he said, he plans to expand the OEP to include a strategy and the JPDO’s long-term vision. The OEP will then be “not just a set of projects,” but a project plan with a vision and a strategy that goes out 20 years. But given the current budget constraints, he conceded, the path to that goal is not clear. In March 2004, FAA created The ATO is trying to better align FAA’s priorities and stakeholders’ interests by developing a strategy map. Called the Strategic Management Process, this effort borrows heavily from a private-sector model. According to FAA, the strategy map will enable owners and customers to clearly understand both the services that the ATO offers and the needs of its customers. The ATO wants to be a sustainable, stable, viable organization that can make rational decisions that transcend changes in political leadership, FAA says. The Strategic Management Process will ensure linkage between FAA’s operating and capital budgets. Future budgetary conversations will revolve around the desired level of service, instead of focusing on a product. To become a “performance-based organization” and identify customer groups and their service needs, the ATO created “value-based” performance metrics. The ATO defined its performance in terms of customers’ needs and connected efforts to satisfy those. The Strategic Management process will ensure link between FAA's operating andCapital budgets. The ATO reorganized air traffic services and the research and acquisition organization along functional lines of business. The organization reduced layers of management from 11 to 7 to help address the hierarchical nature of the organization. The ATO conducted an organizationwide activity value analysis to determine the full range of activities that ATO headquarters is engaged in and the value customers place on those activities, and the potential for conducting any of those activities more.efficiently. For example, the ATO established collaborative teams of technical experts and ATC system. The ATO wants to know how much every unit of output costs so that it can allocate and compare costs and measure productivity. Each organizational unit and facility is developing applicable metrics for performance so that the ATO can compare costs, identify factors that affect costs, and use this information to improve performance. For example, each en route facility is determining its hourly cost to control flights. The ATO could then compare and analyze these costs to identify positive and negative factors affecting performance and improve efficiency and productivity. interest that exists because FAA is both the regulator and the operator of air traffic services. Another panelist noted that when his country restructured its air traffic organization, it immediately eliminated the same structural conflict of interest. According to the first panelist, other countries that have reorganized their air traffic organizations have also instituted arms’ length regulation if they did not have it. The FAA is responsible for air traffic control and safety, but does not have the authority to regulate air traffic service providers. instituted arms’ length regulation if they did not have it already. “We remain one of the few places that somehow thinks that self-regulation is a good idea, in spite of sort of overwhelming evidence in lots of arenas that it's not a very good idea," the ATO’s COO said. The ATO is developing a business plan that the FAA is developing to guide and monitor its operations. The FAA is addressing some of the structural changes that panelists proposed to improve the ATOs success over time. FAA and ATO are less closely joined than they were previously. This step is a positive move toward providing “arm’s length’ safety oversight. It does not go as far as placing the two organizations in separate federal agencies. At our request, the panelists concluded the panel with their parting thoughts on the day's discussion, including any advice they had for FAA or for Congress. Overall, they were united in their desire for the ATO to be more independent. Disproportionate, he said, because it establishes the same safety standards for aircraft of all sizes. “We can’t keep treating airplanes that need 100 cubic miles of airspace the same from a cost and benefit point of view,” he said. He maintained that the role of regulatory management on the evolution of the ATC system has been underestimated and called for significant investment in understanding risk management. The other panelist who expressed concerns about the government’s regulatory. FAA created the Air Traffic Safety Oversight Service (AOV) in March 2004. The AOV is responsible for ensuring the safety of changes to air traffic standards and procedures. The establishment of the AOV responds directly to a recommendation by the 1997 National Civil Aviation Review Commission that safety oversight of FAA’s traffic function be provided by a separate part of the agency. Although both organizations remain within FAA, under FAA, the goal is not clear how they will work together in the future. speaker, FAA does not have “the engineering technical capability to deal with an extremely complex, highly nonlinear adaptive system,” he said. According to another panelist, FAA doesn't apply rigorous systems engineering expertise early in nonadvocate technical reviews of project proposals. As a result, a number of FAA’s programs had fundamental system engineering technical issues, the panelist said, including complex ones such as the Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS) and the Next-Generation Air-to-Ground Communications System (NEXCOM) Next-Generation Air-to-Ground Communications System (NEXCOM)—had fundamental system engineering technical issues that were not identified early in the program. The risks were not mitigated, and the programs experienced significant cost growth and schedule increases. “The system engineering organization in FAA is nothing more than a process organization,” another panelist said. As this panelist put it, FAA lacks a rudder, and needs to find a way to get back on its feet. of Public and Environmental Affairs, Indiana University Anthony J. Broderick Independent Consultant Former FAA Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification Steven R. Bussolari Assistant Division Head, Tactical Systems Division Manager, Air Traffic Control System Group, Lincoln Laboratory. John W. Crichton President and CEO, NAV Canada George L. Donahue Director, The Center for Air Transportation Systems Research, George Mason University. Xavier Fron Head, Performance Review Commission, EUROCONTROL Richard Golaszweski Executive Vice President, Gellman Research Associates (GRA), Inc. Golaszweski Executive Vice President, Gellman Research Associates (GRA), Inc. Ian Hall Director of Operations, National Air Traffic Services, United Kingdom Thomas Imrich Chief Pilot, Research, Boeing Commercial Aircraft Satish C. Mohleji Principal Engineer, Center for Advanced Aviation System Development, The MITRE Corp. Robert W. Poole, Jr. Director of Transportation Studies, Reason Foundation Michael Powderly President, Airspace Solutions John A. Sorensen Chief Executive Officer, Seagull Technology, Inc. his “owners”—who include the FAA Administrator and the DOT Secretary. FAA does not get “the kind of constructive advice that you might hope for.” Europe’s Performance Review Commission provides such constructive advice for EUROCONTROL, the European air traffic management organization. The commission serves as a panel of independent advisers and costs about $2.5 million a year. It is not expected to provide constructive criticism of FAA, a panelist said. The subcommittee is purely advisory, making the subcommittee purely advisory.