CRS analysis of SIPP data for April 2013 indicates that among an estimated 73.0 million children under age 18, an estimated 8.5 million (11.6%) lived in families in which one or more family members received Social Security. Most, but not all, of these 3.2 million children from the SIPP are probably child beneficiaries. An additional 1.9 million (22%) live in families where a parent or guardian reported receiving Social Security benefits, though not directly on behalf of a child. About 8.5 million children under age 18 were identified on the SIPP in April 2013 as living in families in which Social Security benefits were reported. In some cases it is uncertain whether all or only some children under 21 in the family are direct beneficiaries. Some adults may include the child's portion of their Social Security benefit as their own, without explicitly indicating that they received Social Security on behalf of a child. To some extent, this method will overstate the number of children under 18 who received social Security. It is not possible to precisely identify the Social Security beneficiary status of children on the SIPP. The SIPP collects information on Social Security receipt and the reasons for receipt for persons age 15 and over. In some cases the benefits received by these parents or guardians may contain an allowance for beneficiary children that is not separately identified. In such cases, the two groups mentioned above are combined for purposes of analysis as "child beneficiaries" and "children of parents or guardian" of Social Security benefits on the program. Social Security was received by someone other than a child or the children's parent(s) or guardian(s). In such cases Social Security benefits may have been received by an extended family member (e.g., grandparent, aunt or uncle, cousin, niece or nephew) For this latter group, children may incidently be affected by Social Security, but not directly as a matter of policy aimed at them. For the former group, Social Security's effect on child poverty is more directly related to Social Security policy.  differences become more apparent between children living in families in which Social Security is received on behalf of children and/or parents/guardians. Also, the after-the-fact comparison of poverty status by family Social Security receipt doesn't take into account the effect that Social Security itself has in reducing poverty. In families that do not receive Social Security, the former group has a much higher pre-transfer poverty rate (54.2%) than does the latter group ( Figure 5 ) (38.4%). don't receive Social Security (23.2%). Figure 6 shows the relative share of estimated aggregate dollars going to children's families. Of these benefits, an estimated 44.1% (about $2.671 billion, or about $32.050 billion on an annualized basis) went to families who were poor based on their total cash income, excluding any Social Security benefits they received. Over two-fifths of Social Security dollars paid to families with children goes to children who would otherwise be counted as poor. poverty status," based on a measure of family income that excludes the amount families received from Social Security. When Social Security is added back into these families' incomes, child poverty is cut by nearly half. Among children in families that receive Social Security, 34.4% have family income below 125% of the poverty line, compared to 29.8% of children that don't receive benefits. In families where Social Security benefits are received on behalf of children or by parents or guardians, Social Security reduces poverty rate from 54.2% to 27.2%. Social Security lifted nearly 2.0 million children (1.952 million) above the poverty line in April 2013. Social Security benefits received by families with children have the effect of reducing the incidence of poverty. The effect of Social Security on the poverty status of all 73.0million children in the U.S., overall, is much more modest than the effect on 8.5 million children that are in families that received Social Security. In all, 19.082 million children were estimated as being poor in April 2014, or 26.2% of all children. Social Security by living with other family members who receive benefits. Children may qualify for Social Security benefits by being a child of a retired or disabled worker receiving Social Security or a survivor of a deceased worker who met the program's insured status requirements. In December 2012, 3.3 million Social Security beneficiaries (5.7% of all beneficiaries) were children under the age of 18. The average monthly benefit among child beneficiaries in December 2012 was $525. Average monthly benefits of children of disabled workers were lowest, about $323. of the parent's primary insurance amount (PIA) before adjustments. A maximum family benefit applies, varying from 150% to 188% of the PIA of the retired, disabled, or deceased parent. The family maximum cannot be exceeded regardless of the number of recipients entitled to benefits under the deceased or retired worker's earnings record. Child benefits generally apply to all biological children of a worker (assuming that paternity/maternity has been established) and to the deceased worker's widow or husband. Stepchildren may be eligible in some cases, as may some legally adopted grandchildren, with their benefits being determined on the basis of their grandparents' earnings record. Children may receive benefits until they reach age 18, and if in high school, through age 19. Disabled children can receive benefits indefinitely as long as the disability was incurred before age 22. In addition to receiving Social Security benefits in their own right, children may economically benefit from Social Security by living with other family members who receive Social Security. December 2012 amounted to about $1.712 billion, or about $20.5 billion on an annualized basis, based on SSA administrative data. In FY2013, combined federal and state TANF expenditures, in the form of cash aid to families, amounted to an estimated $8.7 billion, of which approximately $4.3 billion (49%) was from federal funds. The estimates presented in this report are based on survey data and are subject to respondent misreporting. Children may be eligible for Social Security benefits when a parent who is a covered worker dies, becomes disabled, or retires. This report examines the effects of Social Security on child poverty. The estimates presented in this report are based on a CRS analysis of U.S. Census Bureau Survey of Income and Program Participation numbers of individuals receiving Social Security benefit. The most recent data sources used are the U.N.'s World Bank and the European Union’s Eurostat. The U.K. government”s Office for National Statistics estimates the number of children living in poverty at the end of the year. Children may be eligible for Social Security benefits when a parent who is a covered worker dies, becomes disabled, or retires. For children of disabled or retired workers, the child's benefit is generally equal to 50% of the parent's primary insurance amount (PIA) before adjustments. Unlike welfare programs, Social Security is a work-related entitlement, in which benefits are determined on the basis of workers' employment and earnings history, without respect to current income. of U.S. Census Bureau Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) data in April 2013. based on survey data and are subject to respondent misreporting. The SIPP data do not provide the comprehensive detail to precisely identify child beneficiaries. The pre-transfer poverty estimates should not be confused with the full effects on poverty of eliminating the Social Security program, as some individuals would alter their behavior in absence of the program. It should also be noted that estimates of the pre- transfer poverty status of children (i.e., poverty status excluding Social Security from total income) provide one measure of the relative importance of Social Security in combating poverty. SIPP is designed to interview a representative sample of families every four months over a 64-month period. The SIPP collects detailed information on family composition, labor force participation, income, and program participation among families and their members. The analysis presented in this report relies on SIPP data for April 2013, the latest month in common from data released for the full SIPP sample. The most recent SIPPData are from the 2008 panel, and the most recent data are from September 2008 through December 2013.