does the U.S. Department of Education’s (Education) data reporting and other information-sharing support and encourage high quality TPPs? We used a variety of methods to examine all three objectives. We reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations; federal internal controls standards; and leading practices for program management. We also conducted a web-based survey of the state entities responsible for overseeing TPPs in all 50 states and the District of Columbia (see below for more information about this survey) Title II of the Higher Education Act requires states and institutions of higher education that conduct TPPs to annually report specific information. States and most colleges or universities that offer TPPs submit the required data using reporting templates developed by Education. Education contracts with a private research organization (Westat) to provide states and colleges and universities with technical assistance in collecting the required information. The agency also compiles and disseminates the information to the public in annual reports, webpages and data spreadsheets. For the statutory reporting requirements, see 20 U.S.C. §§ 1022d-1022f. We conducted our work from March 2014 to July 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit. We analyzed data collected to fulfill Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements and Education’s related reports and technical assistance guidance (see below for more information about this analysis) Case study interviews were conducted to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable based for our audit objectives.case study interviews). reporting requirements that they report are not contributing to their oversight activities. Most of the TPPs and K-12 districts and several other stakeholders questioned the usefulness of some Title II data to themselves and other stakeholders. Officials from several TPPs also expressed confusion about the programs. The TPP officials said they have not seen any indication that other stakeholders, such as state and federal regulators or prospective teaching candidates, were using the Title IIData to inform decisions. None of the officials in the six K- 12 school districts we spoke with said they use the Title 2 data when comparing TPP performance or recruiting new teachers. stakeholders. State oversight entities are important potential users of the Title II data, but they reported mixed views about whether the data were useful for their oversight. In our survey, states most frequently reported spending between 21-100 staff hours completing the annual Title II state- level reports. After devoting this time to the task, 5 states said the title II data were “very useful,” 19 said they were ‘moderately useful’ and 5 said they weren’t useful. less than half the states told us that they use the goals and assurances section of the Title II reports. Education officials said they have to continue to collect the current data, due to statutory requirements. According to Education officials, the agency can require states to submit new Title II data elements. But they do not have authority to remove existing data elements that are required by statute, they said. The data provides a robust picture of the demographics of teaching candidates in each state, as well as the number of individuals who complete a program. verify whether states use the process they describe in their Title II reports to identify low-performing programs. According to Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government, an agency’s management should provide reasonable assurance of compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Education also agreed with our other three recommendations, stating that the agency would: examine statutorily- defined Title II reporting requirements and make recommendations to Congress to make changes to those requirements. While it finalizes its regulations, Education also plans to work closely with select states to help ensure they comply with Title II requirements related to identifying low- performing TPPs. The current Title II data requirements may be of limited use in helping to improve the quality of TPPs. Education has not taken steps to evaluate whether any of them should be eliminated. Each state collects Title II information from colleges and universities that offer TPPs in the state and submits information about TPPs and some information about state oversight processes to Education annually. For example, they report the number and demographics of teaching candidates enrolled in and completing TPPs, and the demographics of those who complete them. and demographics of teaching candidates enrolled in and completing TPPs. As described below, states, TPPs, and other stakeholders often reported to us that, while they may use some data elements, others are not useful. This difference between the Title II information states and colleges and universities are required to report about TPPs and the information they ultimately use to make decisions is contrary to leading practices for data-driven management, we say. We conclude that measures should be selected based on their relevance and ability to inform decisions by key stakeholders. Few states reported using the data to inform state funding decisions or to provide information to school districts that are hiring teachers from TPPs. 25 states said the data were “neither useful nor not useful,” “slightly useful” or “not useful.” Less than half the states told us that they use the Title II data to help with state agency discussions about proposed TPP requirements. Nearly every state reported some cases where certain requirements may not be helpful. For example, less than half of the states said they use them to inform the approval process. Education permits states to report some Title II data in different ways to account for their differing approaches to overseeing TPPs and the differing structures of the TPPs themselves. This affects the consistency and clarity of the data that Education ultimately disseminates. States may use different definitions of alternative route TPPs when reporting information such as the number received excellent technical assistance. States and TPPs also noted remaining challenges, such as how to interpret the Title II requirements within the context of each state or TPP’s specific circumstances. Education administers several competitive grant programs that provide funding for TPP reforms. Education published a notice of proposed rulemaking, which among other things, proposed to modify the The proposed rule was available for Title II reporting requirements through February 2, 2015. Several states and TPPs with whom we spoke praised Education’s efforts to facilitate the Title II submission process, noting particularly that they have received excellent technical assistance when they have questions about the Title 2 reporting system. The largest of these competitive grants is focused specifically on comparisons across TPPs or obtain a national picture regarding TPP completers. II data in published spreadsheets and on its website does not include clarifications about potentially inconsistent data elements. Education officials told us they did not include such explanatory material in these other formats because they considered the explanations in the previous annual report to be sufficient. However, these officials also noted that the agency may consider adding such material in the future. By not providing the explanatory material, the data may be potentially misleading and make it difficult for users to compare across states or programs. In addition, it may be difficult to compare the data across states and programs. Title II reporting requirements and make recommendations to Congress to remove or revise requirements, as warranted. identify potential limitations in the Title II data and disclose such limitations in its reports, websites, and data tables. enhance information-sharing about TPP quality within Education and relevant state agencies. We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of the Department of Education, and other interested parties. In addition, the report is available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. In our survey, 27 states reported taking steps to modify the process for identifying low-performing TPPs. California reported modifying its process for approving TPPs to assess alignment with new K-12 standards. No states reported identifying a TPP as low- performing during the 2013-2014 academic year. States also used modified licensing tests designed to assess individual teaching candidates’ preparation for the new K/12 standards, according to officials from the companies that develop the tests. The Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium standards are commonly used standards for TPP quality and were designed to align with the Common Core State Standards. our five case study states offered TPPs information about the standards using various approaches. Most states reported that they modified their oversight activities to verify that TPPs were aligning with new K-12 standards. 34 states reported deliberately modifying their TPP approval process to assess such alignment. Three states reported inviting TPPs to K- 12 conferences that discussed the new standards. Officials in one of those states said that this approach allowed them to foster communication and coordination amongK-12 districts and TPPs.. K-12 standards, according to officials from the companies that develop the tests. All 14 TPPs we interviewed made changes that ranged from large-scale reforms to more modest modifications. The changes ranged from increasing subject-matter knowledge, modifying coursework and adding more questions that measure teaching candidates’ ability to teach non-fiction texts. For example, one state added questions that address how to help hypothetical K- 12 students understand complex subject- matter information. The tests are used by 43 states. States are also responsible for adopting academic content standards for K-12 students. To address concerns about inadequately prepared students, all states are now using or developing academic standards that are explicitly tied to college and career preparation. In 2010, the Council of Chief State School Officers and the National Governors Association spearheaded the effort to help states develop common college- and career-ready standards. As of the beginning of the 2014-15 academic year, 44 states and the District of Columbia were using the Common Core Standards. basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. To identify how states oversee TPPs, modified their practices in response to new K-12 standards. We surveyed state oversight entities from all 50 states and the District of Columbia, achieving a 100 percent response rate. The survey used self-administered, electronic questionnaires that were posted on the Internet. We sent the survey to the official responsible for submitting each state’s Higher Education Act Title II data and Department of Education information about TPPs. to evaluate TPP performance) and to reflect different types of college- and career-ready K-12 standards. As part of these case studies, we reviewed state documents and interviewed officials from the state oversight agency. In total, we interviewed 14 TPPs. We ensured that this non-generalizable sample of TPPs varied in a number of ways including whether they were located within or separate from colleges and universities. We also ensured that the TPPs represented a range of sizes and urban, suburban and rural areas. Officials from five TPPs said the new K-12 standards led them to start or expand courses on teaching techniques that are subject-matter specific. Officials from half of the TPPs acknowledged the difficulty of training new teachers in real classroom settings. Several TPPs we spoke with said that they planned to make further modifications to their programs as states continue to implement the new standards. For example, one TPP that made a number of modifications to its program recently surveyed faculty and administrators to evaluate its efforts and identify ongoing needs. Officials from 11 of 14 TPPs described changing coursework or coursework requirements to ensure that teaching candidates had sufficient subject-matter knowledge to teach to the new K-12 standards. Officials from a few TPPs stated that some academic departments were more receptive to modifying their curriculum than others, due to department priorities or other factors. For example, one TPP began offering courses that were co-taught by subject-area and TPP faculty. The three TPPs that did not make such changes were graduate-level programs or otherwise required teaching candidates to obtain a bachelor’s degree. 22 states reported using fewer sources of information for alternative route TPPs compared to traditional TPPs. States more commonly reported using information about the effectiveness of graduates teaching in public schools within their state versus information about those teaching in private schools or in other states. Some alternative routeTPPs may not include a student teaching requirement, so information about student teachers’ performance would not be relevant for making approval decisions. One of the top teacher- producing states defines some TPPs as traditional TPP’s that most states would consider alternative route. Some states reported not having a process for identifying low-performing TPPs, as required under the Higher Education Act. States are required to conduct an assessment to identify low- performing TPPs in the state and provide Education with an annual list of such programs and any programs at risk of being placed on the list. One state explained that the requirements for alternative route and traditional TPPs are different because the requirements are set by state regulations. Some alternative TPPs may be approved through other mechanisms, according to one state. Two states did not describe a process to identify low-performing programs in their most recent Title II reports. Education officials also said that Education does not verify that states are in fact implementing the procedures they describe in their reports. If states are failing to comply with the federal requirement to conduct an assessment, struggling TPPs may not receive the technical assistance they need. Potential teaching candidates or hiring school districts will have difficulty identifying strugglingTPPs. This may impact the quality of training provided to new teachers and result in their being inadequately prepared to educate children. possible that all TPPs are meeting states’ performance criteria and do not merit a low-performance designation, states are still required to conduct an assessment. Officials from two other states told us that they are developing or planning to develop a new process for identifying low- performing TPPs, but do not have a process in the interim. Education does not verify whether states use the process they describe in their report. Education officials told us they are expected to use the previous process until the new one is implemented. being inadequately prepared to educate children. The majority of states (43) reported to us that they had a process for identifying low-performing TPPs. The most common criteria they used to identify low- performing TPPs were failure to meet the state’s TPP or teaching standards and denial or conditional approval during the state approval or renewal process. As states shifted to new K-12 standards, most reported taking steps to help TPPs prepare prospective teachers to teach lessons aligned with the new standards. at risk of being placed on the list. States have flexibility in the criteria they use to identify low-performing TPPs, but are required to describe those criteria to Education as part of their annual Title II reports. Education Act requires that states provide them with technical assistance. Of the 6 states that identified low- performing TPPs in 2013 or 2014, all reported in our survey that they provided technical support and informed the TPPs of their status. Most also publicized this status and increased their monitoring of theTPPs. in our survey told us they believed their other oversight procedures are sufficient to ensure quality. For example, officials in 2 of the 7 states that reported they do not have a process to identify low-performing programs. While it is possible that all TPPs are meeting states’ performance criteria, it is not necessary to ensure that all are performing sufficiently, the report says. The report also says that the report does not suggest that the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has done enough to ensure the quality of its programs. competitive grants. Education does not have mechanisms in place to promote regular, sustained information-sharing among these offices. Education formerly convened a teacher quality workgroup on a regular basis that included staff in other offices and programs. Education officials in one office that administers competitive grants related to TPP quality described discussing grant results internally, but did not systematically discuss TPP quality with staff in another office or program. The agency and its Title II contractor occasionally create custom Title II data runs for Education program offices, but there is no systematic effort to share Title IIData within the agency. a teacher quality workgroup on a regular basis that included opportunities to share information across the agency regarding issues related to TPP quality. Education officials noted that such workgroups, particularly when operating out of high-level offices in the agency, have been very helpful for systematically sharing information across offices. The teacherquality workgroup has been inactive since the office in which it was housed reorganized in the fall of 2014. This represents a missed opportunity to use relevant information to bolster the effectiveness of several Education programs. to bolster the effectiveness of several Education programs, such as Race to the Top and Supporting Effective Educator Development. Federal internal controls standards emphasize that effective information-sharing efforts are those that flow broadly across an agency in a form that is helpful for those who need it to carry out their responsibilities. Without such mechanisms to promote information- sharing, programs and offices within Education may not have access to clear and useful information about TPP quality. Furthermore, Education’s efforts to support or enhance TPP quality reach a limited number of states. Education has made few efforts to share expertise about TPP quality among its offices. Education’s approach is not consistent with federal internal control standards. Without such an approach, Education may be missing opportunities to support state efforts to enhance TPP quality. For example, states may be unaware of information about good practices for TPP quality that could assist them in their oversight. The recent shift to college- and career- ready K-12 standards further highlights the importance of such programs. TPPs serve a vital role in preparing new teachers and K- 12 students for future success. In September 2014, Education selected 24 partnerships, including TPPs and partnering school districts, to receive a combined $35 million in Teacher Quality Partnership grant funds. The grants are intended to improve teacher preparation primarily for science, technology, engineering, and math teachers. The Transition to Teaching grant program also provides grants to recruit and retain teachers in high-need schools and encourage the development and expansion of alternative route TPPs. Aside from these two grant programs, applicants for grants from the Race to the Top Fund, applicants for grants from the Race to the Top Fund, Investing in Innovation Fund, and Supporting Effective Educator Development program may also choose to develop proposals related to teacher preparation programs and activities. All states reported that they review traditional TPPs before approving them to prepare new teachers and may renew approval on a periodic basis. For example, investing in Innovation grants funded 25 projects related to TPPs out of the 143 projects the program has funded during fiscal years 2010-2014. To do this, nearly all states reported they review TPP program design and data about the program. quality reach a limited number of states. Education is missing opportunities to support states that could use relevant research. Gaps in the agency’s efforts to disseminate information result from information-sharing gaps, the authors say. The authors say the federal government needs to do more to help states improve their teacher preparation programs and prepare teachers for the classroom. They say the U.S. education system needs to focus on the quality of teachers rather than just the quantity of teachers in schools. The report is the result of a two-year, $1.5 million grant from the National Education Association. effort on collecting information that is unlikely to improve TPP quality. If Title II reports do not include important limitations on how the data should be used, policymakers and practitioners could draw incorrect conclusions based on the data. Without increasing information-sharing within the Department and with states, Education may miss opportunities to disseminate information. We provided a draft of the report to the Department of Education for review and comment. Education agreed with our four recommendations and anticipates that its final regulations will guide the final regulations. The objectives of this study were to answer the following questions: (1) How do states oversee teacher preparation programs (TPP) What are states and select TPPs doing to prepare new teachers for new K-12 standards? To what extent does the U.S. Department of Education’s (Education) data reporting and data collection play a role in this study? If you have any questions about this report, please contact me at (617) 788-0534 or EmreyArrasM@gao.gov. how states oversee teacher preparation; the steps that states and TPPs have taken in response to new K-12 standards; and, state and TPP views about Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements. We conducted case studies of five states: Arizona, California, Maine, Tennessee and Virginia. We selected this non-generalizable sample of states because they represent a variety of sizes and approaches to overseeing TPPs. We reviewed select state Title II reports; Education’s reporting templates for the state reports and institutional and program reports. study states and 7 of the 14 TPPs we spoke to said that collecting this type of data is difficult. For example, state oversight offices or TPPs would need to obtain key information about TPP graduates from local districts. Officials in one of our case study states noted that it was especially challenging to obtain data on teachers who work in another state or in private schools. As shown in figure 2 above, states noted it was difficult to obtain information about teachers who worked in other states or who were private. we conducted interviews with a wide range of stakeholders including Education officials and contractors. We also conducted case studies in 5 states. In each of these states we interviewed officials from state oversight entities, officials from two or three TPPs, and officials in at least one K-12 school district. Finally, we analyzed data collected to fulfill data collection to fulfill the goals of the study. The study was published in the Journal of Education Policy and Practice, a peer-reviewed journal published by the Association of American Publishers. As of the 2014-2015 academic year, at least 10 additional states reported that they planned to begin using graduate effectiveness information or expand their current use of such information. Officials in Tennessee told us that they currently review some effectiveness data in their approval process. Officials from 3 of our 5 case study states and 7 of the 14 TPPs we spoke said they reported challenges collecting information on graduates’ effectiveness. The impetus behind adding this new data is to better align the state’s TPP quality standards with recommended requirements presented by CAEP. “Pre-service assessments” could include evaluations of candidates’ performance as student teachers. More than half of states reported that they also review certain information about graduate effectiveness when assessing TPPs for approval or renewal. States that incorporate this information reported doing so. The wording of the original survey question has been modified for brevity and to remove technical terminology. See the related e-supplement, GAO-15-599SP, for the original language and for information about the teaching candidate data that states used as part of their approval process. or renewal. States that incorporate this information reported doing so in several ways. Most commonly, 30 states reported using surveys that assessed principals’ and other district personnel’s satisfaction with recent traditional TPP graduates. Fifteen states reported assessing traditional TPPs based on other outcomes data such as the test scores (i.e., K-12 student assessment results) of public school students taught by recent TPP graduates (see fig. 2). For example, one of our case study states uses such data to help TPPs identify potential problem areas in the training they provide to teaching candidates. enrolled and these definitions may range from when a teaching candidate first takes a course to after they have completed other requirements such as a certain sequence of courses. One large online TPP defines most of its teaching candidates as enrolled in the state where the TPP is headquartered, even though they live throughout the country and most likely plan to teach in other states. The Title II report lists that state as one of the nation’s top teacher-producing states, while state officials told us that in fact the state faces teacher shortages. TPPs prepare teaching candidates to employ effective teaching techniques and gain real-world experience in the classroom. TPPs take many forms and may be operated by a variety of organizations. State oversight responsibilities related to TPPs may be held by one or more state agencies. States have discretion in how they conduct oversight of TPP quality. The structure of TPPs can vary widely, from “traditional” TPPs such as four-year undergraduate programs with student teaching requirements, to “alternative route’ TPPs. reported that they review TPP program design and data about candidates before approving them to prepare new teachers. More than half also use one or more types of information to assess graduates’ effectiveness as teachers. States also reported that they typically for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP)—for at least some traditional TPPs. These results are based on our survey of all 50 states and the District of Columbia. In some instances, the wording of the original survey question has been modified. of subject matter knowledge. States may use teams made up of peers from other TPPs, state staff, national accreditation organization staff, or a combination. 43 states reported that they consider information collected by an external TPP accreditation. organization for at least some of their programs. 41 states said they typically reviewed program design for traditional TPPs by reviewing syllabi or other course material, and interviewing TPP faculty or staff. For more information, visit the National Education Association’s Teacher Preparation Council website. who complete a program. Education officials told us they have not conducted a study to inform Congress or the agency about whether any current reporting requirements are not useful. Education has an incomplete picture of the usefulness of various data fields, the authors say. States and colleges and universities will continue submitting data a process for assessing whether any teacher preparation programs are low-performing, they say. The authors say Education should identify potential limitations in the Title II data and consistently disclose these limitations in reports, websites, and data tables. responsible for submitting each state’s Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements. We reviewed state responses and followed up by e-mail or telephone with select states for additional clarification and obtained corrected information for our final survey analysis. We also published survey responses in an e-publication supplemental to this report, “Teacher Preparation Programs: Survey of State Entities that Oversee Teacher Preparation programs” (GAO-15-599SP, July, 2015). The quality of survey data can be affected by nonsampling error. Nonsampling error includes variations in how respondents interpret questions, respondents’ willingness to offer accurate responses, and data collection and processing errors. In developing the Web survey, we pretested draft versions of the instrument with state officials in four states and consulted with officials from the Department of Education to check the clarity of the questions and the flow and layout of the survey. We included steps in developing the survey, and collecting, editing, and analyzing survey data, to minimize such nonsampling errors. key contributions to this report were: Deborah Bland, Kate Blumenreich, Joanna Chan, Sarah Cornetto, Holly Dye, Kirsten Lauber, Ashley McCall, Sheila McCoy, Jennifer McDonald, John Mingus, Mimi Nguyen, and Tom James. For more on this story, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. For the latest on CNN iReport, visit the site here. For other stories, visit CNN.co/soulsmart.