806,000 in fiscal year 2006, an increase of about 39 percent. VA acknowledges that regional office decision accuracy needs further improvement. VA also continues to face questions about its ability to ensure that veterans receive consistent decisions across regional offices. We have identified the need for VA to improve its decision-making process for rating-related compensation claims. VA reports that it has improved the accuracy of decisions on rating related compensation claims from 80 percent in 2002 to 88 percent in 2006. However, this figure remains well short of its strategic goal of 98 percent. across regional offices. VA’s Inspector General has studied one indicator of possible inconsistency, the wide variations in average payments per veteran from state to state. We have identified the need for VA to systematically address this issue to achieve acceptable levels of variation. In May 2005, the Inspector General reported that compensation payments are affected by many factors and that some disabilities are inherently more susceptible to variations in rating determinations. Further, we reported in May 2005 that the Board of Veterans’ Appeals had taken actions to strengthen its system for reviewing the quality of its decisions. evaluate the claim. Such evidence includes veterans’ military service records, medical examinations, and treatment records from VA medical facilities and private medical service providers. If the veteran is eligible for disability compensation, the rating specialist assigns a percentage rating based on degree of disability. A veteran who disagrees with the regional office's decision can appeal to VA’s Board of Veterans’ Appeals and then to U.S. federal courts.If the Board finds that a case needs additional work, it can be appealed. VA attributes some of the increase in the number of claims pending and the average days pending to a September 2003 court decision that required over 62,000 claims to be deferred. VA notes that legislation and VA regulations have expanded benefit entitlement and added to the volume of claims. Despite these efforts, VA may be limited in its ability to make and sustain significant claims processing performance improvements, according to the report. The report also notes that VA has developed plans to monitor consistency in disability evaluations on an ongoing basis. has identified additional initiatives to help improve productivity. VA plans to pilot paperless Benefits Delivery at Discharge, where service members’ disability claim applications, service medical records, and other evidence would be captured electronically prior to discharge. VA expects that this new process will reduce the time needed to obtain the evidence needed to decide claims. To resolve appeals faster, VA has been working to reduce the number of appeals sent back by the Board of Veterans’ Appeals for further work such as obtaining additional evidence and correcting procedural errors. service-connected disabilities for many Vietnam veterans and former prisoners of war. VA expects additional claims receipts based on the enactment of legislation allowing certain military retirees to receive both military retirement pay and VA disability compensation. In addition, rating-related claims continue to increase, from about 579,000 in fiscal year 2000 to about 806,000  in fiscal year 2006. While VA projects relatively flat claim receipts in fiscal years 2007 and 2008, it cautions that ongoing hostilities in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the Global War on Terrorism in general, may increase the workload beyond current current. VA has also noted that claims have increased in part because older veterans are filing disability claims for the first time. According to VA, the complexity of claims is also increasing. For example, some veterans are citing more disabilities in their claims than in the past. Because each disability needs to be evaluated separately, these claims can take longer to complete. VA notes that they are receiving more disability claims, such as those related to mental health issues including post-traumatic stress disorder, which are generally harder to deal with. VA pays monthly disability compensation benefits to veterans with service-connected disabilities. VA also pays compensation to some spouses, children, and parents of deceased veterans and service members. VA’s pension program pays monthly benefits based on financial need to certain wartime veterans or their survivors. When a veteran submits a claim to any of the Veterans Benefits Administration's 57 regional offices, a veterans service representative is responsible for obtaining the relevant evidence to evaluate the claim. Such evidence includes veterans’ military service records. The Veterans’ Claims Adjudication Commission noted that most disability compensation claims are repeat claims. Most repeat claims were from veterans with less severe disabilities. About 65 percent of veterans who began receiving disability compensation in fiscal year 2003 had disabilities rated 30 percent or less. The commission questioned whether concentrating claims processing resources on these claims, rather than on claims by more severely disabled veterans, was consistent with program intent. Would identify any legislative actions needed to initiate and fund such changes. The lump sum option could have a number of benefits for VA as well as veterans. a lump sum option could be more useful to some veterans as they make the transition from military to civilian life. In addition to program design, VA’s regional office claims processing structure may be disadvantageous to efficient operations. VBA and others who have studied claims processing have suggested that consolidating claims processing into fewer regional offices could help improve claims processing efficiency, save overhead costs, and improve decisional accuracy and consistency. We noted in December 2005 that VA had made changes to its claims processing system. consistency. VA consolidated some of its pension income and eligibility verifications at three regional offices. VA has not changed its basic field structure for processing compensation and pension claims at 57 regional offices, which experience large performance variations and questions about decision consistency. Unless more comprehensive and strategic changes are made to its field structure, VA will continue to face problems with its claims processing system, the report says. The report was published by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMLS) on December 31, 2005. VA made progress in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 reducing the size and age of its pending claims inventory, but has lost ground since then. This is due in part to increased filing of claims, including those filed by veterans of the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts. Questions remain about consistency of VA’s decisions across regional offices and at the Board of Veterans’ Appeals. The average time to resolve an appeal rose from 529 days in fiscal year 2004 to 657 days in Fiscal Year 2006. Meanwhile, the time required to resolve appeals remains too long. VA has recently taken several steps to improve service delivery, but their potential to lead to significant improvements may be limited by several factors. These steps include requesting funding for additional staff, initiatives to reduce appeal remands, and initiatives to assess and monitor decision consistency. limitations on potential improvements include increases in claims volume and complexity, and challenges in acquiring needed evidence in a timely manner. In its fiscal year 2008 budget justification, VA still lacked a systematic method for ensuring the consistency of decision making within VA as a whole. Fiscal year 2008 request would fund 8,320 full-time equivalent employees working on compensation and pension. That would represent an increase of about 6 percent over fiscal year 2006. According to VA, with a workforce that is sufficiently large and correctly balanced, it can successfully meet the veterans’ needs while ensuring good stewardship of taxpayer funds.a timely manner. In addition, the budget justification cites near-term initiatives to increase the number of claims completed, and to improve timeliness. cites near-term initiatives to increase the number of claims completed, such as using retired VA employees to provide training. VA expects a temporary decline in productivity as new staff are trained and become more experienced, but expects productivity to increase in the longer term. VA’s budget justification provides information on actual and planned productivity, in terms of claims decided per full-time equivalent employee. Also, VA has identified additional initiatives to help improve productivity. For example, the use of overtime is being increased. VA has established joint training and information sharing between field staff and the Board. VA reports that it has reduced the percentage of decisions remanded from about 57 percent in fiscal year 2004 to about 32 percent in Fiscal Year 2006. Also, VA says it has improved the productivity of the Board’s judges from an average of 604 appeals decided in fiscal 2013 to 698 in fiscal 2006. The Board attributes this improvement to training and mentoring programs and expects productivity to improve to more.errors. 2006, we recommended that VBA assess whether it could systematically utilize an electronic library of historical military records. VBA agreed to determine the feasibility of regional offices using an alternative resource prior to sending some requests to the JSRRC. We also reported that while VBA quality reviewers found few decision errors due to failure to obtain military service records, VBA does not know the extent to which the information that is provided to regional offices is reliable and accurate. Regional offices rely on a VBA unit at the National Personnel Records. rely on a VBA unit at the National Personnel Records Center to do thorough and reliable searches and analyses of records. Incomplete and inaccurate reports could affect decisional accuracy. VA is taking actions to address its claims processing challenges, but there are opportunities for more fundamental reform that could dramatically improve decision making and processing. These include reexamining program design, as well as the structure and division of labor. For more information, visit the VA's website or go to www.va.gov. Claims processing timeliness and decisional accuracy can be hampered if VA cannot obtain the evidence it needs in a timely manner. For example, to obtain information needed to fully develop some post- traumatic stress disorder claims, VBA must obtain records from the U.S. Army and Joint Services Records Research Center. This can significantly increase the time it takes to decide a claim. In December 2006, we recommended that VBA assess whether it could systematically track and evaluate claims for post-traumatic stress disorder. Committee: VA Can Improve Its Procedures for Obtaining Military Service Records. Committee: More Transparency Needed to improve Oversight of VBA’s Compensation and Pension Staffing Levels. For further information, please contact Daniel Bertoni at (202) 512-7215 or Bertonid@gao.gov. High Risk Series: An Update. Washington, D.C.: January 31, 2007. Veterans’ Disability Benefits: Claims Processing Challenges and Opportunities for Improvements. VA Benefits: Other Programs May Provide Lessons for Improving Individual Unemployability Assessments. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. After more than a decade of research, we have determined that federal disability programs are in urgent need of attention and transformation. VA and SSA’s disability programs remain mired in concepts from the past. These programs are poorly positioned to provide meaningful and timely support for Americans with disabilities. In August 2002, we recommended that VA use its.design, as well as the structure and division of labor among field offices. In January 2003, we placed modernizing federal disability Programs on our high-risk list. If the Board finds that a case needs additional work such as obtaining additional evidence or contains procedural errors, it is sent back to the Veterans Benefits Administration. In November 2003, the Congress established the Veterans’ Disability Benefits Commission to study the appropriateness of VA disability benefits, including disability criteria and benefit levels. The commission is scheduled to report to the Congress by October 1, 2007. We have recommended that the VA undertake a comprehensive review of its field structure for processing disability compensation and pension claims. of replacing average impairment in earnings capacity, whether lump sum payments should be made for certain disabilities or level of severity of disability. How VA’s claims processing operation compares to other disability programs, including the location and number of processing centers. These issues and others have been raised by previous studies of VBA's disability claims process. The commission is scheduled to report to the Congress by October 1, 2007. For further information, please contact Daniel at daniel.smith@va.gov. In August 2002, we recommended VA use its annual performance plan to delineate strategies for and progress in periodically updating labor market data used in its disability determination process. We also recommended that VA study and report to the Congress on the effects that a comprehensive consideration of medical treatment and assistive technologies would have on its disability programs’ eligibility criteria and benefits package. This study would include estimates of the effects on the size, cost, and management of VA’s disability programs and other relevant VA programs. to study the appropriateness of VA disability benefits, including disability criteria and benefit levels. The commission held its first public hearing in May 2005 and in October 2005, established 31 research questions for study. These questions address such issues as how well disability benefits meet the congressional intent of replacing average impairment in earnings capacity, whether lump sum benefits are appropriate, and the appropriate standard or standards for determining whether a disability or death of a veteran should be compensated. The panel is to examine and provide recommendations on benefits. training and mentoring programs and expects productivity to improve to 752 decisions in fiscal year 2008. VA has contracted for a study of the major influences on compensation payments, to develop baseline data for monitoring and managing decision variances. VA is in the process of testing templates for compensation and pension medical examinations for specific types of disabilities to ensure that medical evidence from these examinations will enable consistent evaluations of disabilities. VA formed a workgroup to study variances in the rates of benefit grants and denials, and in assigned disability evaluations.