Almost a third of DHS’s major investments received funding without having validated mission needs and requirements. Without validated requirements, life-cycle cost estimates, and regular portfolio reviews, DHS cannot ensure that its investment decisions are appropriate and will ultimately address capability gaps. 15 of the 57 DHS major investments we reviewed were designated by the Office of Management and Budget as poorly planned and by DHS as poorly performing. Among other things, we recommended that DHS reinstate the Joint Requirements Council or establish another departmental joint requirements oversight board. In fiscal year 2015 alone, DHS planned to spend approximately $7.2 billion on these acquisition programs. DHS and its underlying components are acquiring systems to help secure the border, increase marine safety, screen travelers, enhance cyber security, improve disaster response, and execute a wide variety of other operations. Each of DHS’s major acquisition programs generally costs $300 million or more and spans multiple years. The department expects it will ultimately invest more than $180 billion in them. To help, visit www.dhs.gov. gain insight into the magnitude of the cost growth for 16 of 77 programs we reviewed, but we found that their aggregate cost estimates had increased by 166 percent. Nearly all of the DHS program managers we surveyed in 2012 reported their programs had experienced significant challenges. Sixty-eight of the 71 respondents reported they experienced funding instability, faced workforce shortfalls, or their planned capabilities changed after initiation. The department is to be commended for the efforts its leadership has taken to address the acquisition management shortcomings we have identified. of the 11 initiatives the department had under way to achieve the actions and outcomes, but did not identify sufficient resources for the 4 remaining initiatives. In September 2012 we also found that DHS had not consistently met the policy’s requirements. In 2012, most major programs lacked reliable cost estimates, realistic schedules, and agreed-upon baseline objectives. In our 2015 report, we concluded that DHS needs to continue to of the policy. However, in September 2012, DHS had only verified that 4 of 66 programs documented all of the critical knowledge the policy requires. Costs) of 10 percent or greater, including five programs that faced gaps of 30 percent or more. Inconsistencies in how components were implementing the department’s acquisition management policy. Funding plans for Coast Guard programs continued to be incomplete, in that they did not account for all of the operations and maintenance funding the Coast Guard planned to allocate to its major acquisition programs. These gaps in information reduce the value of the funding plans presented to Congress and obscure the affordability of Coast Guard acquisition Programs. and constrain IT acquisitions and obtained a clean opinion on its financial statements for 2 consecutive years, fiscal years 2013 and 2014. DHS did not have modernized financial management systems, which affected its ability to have ready access to reliable information for informed decision making. addressing these and other management challenges will be a significant undertaking that will likely require several years, but will be critical for the department to mitigate the risks that management management poses to the agency's missions. The department has taken actions to address these challenges but they persist, as discussed in more detail below. each management function (acquisition, IT, financial, and human capital) as well as management integration. One of the outcomes focusing on acquisition management is validating required acquisition documents in accordance with a department-approved, knowledge-based acquisition process. Another outcome focusing on financial management include sustaining clean audit opinions for at least 2 consecutive years on department-wide financial statements and internal controls. We found in our 2015 report that DHS had made important progress across all of its management functions and significant progress in the area ofmanagement integration. DHS has identified a 30-percent gap between the 5-year funding needed for its major acquisitions and the actual resources expected to be available. To address these issues, we have, among other things, recommended that DHS assess program-specific affordability tradeoffs at all acquisition review meetings. DHS concurred with these recommendations and is taking actions to implement them. To ensure that recent efforts are sustained, the department must continue to implement its sound acquisition policy consistently and effectively across all components, the report says. In November 2008, we found that billions invested in major acquisition programs continued to lack appropriate oversight. Of DHS’s 48 major programs requiring milestone and annual reviews, 45 were not assessed in accordance with this policy. At least 14 of these programs had reported cost growth, schedule slips, or performance shortfalls. We found that poor implementation was largely the result of DHS's failure to ensure that the department's major acquisition decision-making bodies effectively carried out their oversight responsibilities and had the resources to do so. We found that DHS remained a collection of disparate organizations, many of which were performing functions with insufficient oversight. We concluded that unless DHS’s top leaders addressed these challenges, the department was at risk of continuing to exist with a fragmented acquisition organization that provided stopgap. The department is to be commended for the efforts its has taken to improve oversight of its major acquisition programs and to implement its 2008 acquisition policy more consistently. Many of DHS's recent actions correspond to the high risk outcomes, as shown in the table 4. $300 million or more and spans multiple years. DHS has established an acquisition management policy that we found in September 2012 to be generally sound. However, we also have found that DHS has lacked discipline in managing its programs according to this policy. These challenges can contribute to poor acquisition outcomes, such as cost increases or the risk of end users receiving technologies that do not meet the department’s requirements. In September 2012 we found that these documents reflect many key program management practices that could help mitigate program risks. We have made 64 recommendations to DHS on acquisition management issues; 42 of which have been implemented. DHS has fully addressed one outcome, mostly addressed two outcomes, partially addressed one outcomes, and initiated efforts to address the final outcome. Outcome 1: Validate required acquisition documents in a timely manner (mostly addressed); Outcome 2: Validates required acquisition Documents in a Timely manner (mainly addressed) Outcome 3: Validated required acquisitionDocuments in a time-sensitive manner (partially addressed) As of March 2016, DHS has partially addressed 9 and initiated 4 of the actions and outcomes. DHS has fully addressed 1 of the 5 acquisition management outcomes, mostly addressed 2 outcomes, partially addressed 1 outcome, and initiated actions to address the remaining outcome. The department has taken a number of steps to improve the maturity of its system acquisition management practices. It has also mostly addressed an additional 7 actions and. outcomes, meaning that a small amount of work remains to fully address. them. The agency has also taken steps to modernize the department’s financial management systems. it can implement and sustain its corrective actions; closely track and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective action; and make midcourse adjustments as needed. We will continue to monitor DHS’s efforts in this high-risk area to determine if the actions and outcomes are achieved and sustained over the long term. Each year, DHS invests billions of dollars in its major acquisition programs. The agency has not yet addressed the 20 actions and outcome it has not fully addressed and demonstrate that systems, personnel, and policies are in place to ensure that results can be sustained. DHS has taken a number of actions to fully address establishing effective component-level acquisition capability. DHS has also continued to make progress addressing the outcome on validating required acquisition documents in a timely manner. We will continue to assess DHS’s progress on this outcome. In March 2005, we reported that a lack of clear accountability was hampering DHS”s efforts to integrate the acquisition functions of its numerous organizations into an effective whole. In addition, DHS has conducted acquisition Documents in a. timely manner (mostly addressed) DHS has conducted staffing analysis reports that quantify gaps in acquisition personnel by position. DHS must develop and implement a plan for filling key vacant positions identified through the reports. DHS should continue to improve its acquisition program management by effectively using the Joint Requirements Council, which it reinstated in June 2014. DHS has fully addressed 3 of 3 of IT management’s issues. It is working to address the remaining two issues, including IT management and IT modernization, by the end of the year. The agency is also working to identify and eliminate any unintended redundancies. components. We continue to track DHS’s progress through ongoing reviews of the Joint Requirements Council, non-major program acquisitions, and our annual assessment of major acquisition programs, in addition to our high risk updates. We would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time. For further information about this testimony, please contact Rebecca Gambler at (202) 512-8777 or gamblerr@gao.gov or Michele Mackin at ( 202)-512-4841 or mackinm@gaO.gov. Homeland Security: Oversight of Neglected Human Resources Information Technology Investment Is Needed. Immigration Benefits System: Better Informed Decision Making Needed on Transformation Program. Homeland Security Acquisitions: Major Program Assessments Reveal Actions Needed to Improve Accountability. Department of Homeland Security: Progress Made; Significant Work Remains in Addressing High-Risk Areas. DHS Training: Improved Documentation, Resource Tracking, and Performance Measurement Could Strengthen Efforts. The report is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection. our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this statement. Individuals making key contributions to this statement include Larry Crosland, Jennifer Kamara, James Kernen, Emily Kuhn, Elizabeth Luke, Valerie Freeman, David Lysy, Taylor Matheson, Shannin O’Neill, Lindsay Taylor, Nathan Tranquilli, Katherine Trimble, and Shaunyce Wallace. Key contributors for the previous work that this testimony is based on are listed in each product. reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. DHS’s efforts to strengthen and integrate its management functions have resulted in progress addressing our criteria for removal from the high-risk list. We found in our 2015 report and have observed over the last year that the Secretary and Deputy Secretary have increased their leadership commitment. DHS subsequently met an additional criterion—establishing a framework for monitoring progress—and therefore as of March 2016, has met three criteria and partially met the remaining two criteria, as shown in table 1. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security has been removed from the list of countries that pose a threat to national security. 2015 report, we concluded that DHS needs to continue to identify resources for the remaining initiatives; work to mitigate shortfalls and prioritize initiatives, as needed. In its January 2016 strategy update, DHS stated that the department had addressed capacity shortcomings it previously identified and self-assesses the capacity criterion as fully met. We are analyzing DHS’s capacity to resolve risks as part of our ongoing assessment of the department's progress in addressing the Strengthening DHS Management Functions high-risk area and will report on our findings in our 2017 high- risk update. processes through strengthened departmental structures and increased capability. Action its Integrated Strategy for High Risk Management and show measurable, sustainable progress in implementing its key management initiatives and corrective actions and achieving outcomes. It will be important for DHS to maintain its current level of top leadership support and sustained commitment to ensure continued progress in executing its corrective actions through completion; continue to implement its plan for addressing this high-risk area and periodically report its progress to us and Congress. identify and work to mitigate any resource gaps and prioritize initiatives as needed. progress in successfully executing its corrective actions through completion. Action plan (met). We found that DHS has established a plan for addressing this high-risk area. Key to addressing the department’s management challenges is DHS demonstrating the ability to achieve sustained progress across the 30 actions and outcomes we identified and DHS agreed were needed to address the high- risk area. Achieving sustained progress requires leadership commitment, effective corrective action planning, adequate capacity (that is, the people and other resources), and monitoring the effectiveness of supporting initiatives. over the last year that the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security, the Under Secretary for Management at DHS, and other senior officials have continued to demonstrate exemplary commitment. They have taken actions to institutionalize this commitment to help ensure the long-term success of the department’s efforts. For example, in April 2014, the Secretary of DHS issued a memorandum entitled Strengthening Departmental Unity of Effort, committing to, among other things, improving DHS's planning, programming, budgeting, and execution processes. estimated completion dates for implementing each of them. Management integration. DHS has sustained its progress in fully addressing 3 of 4 outcomes we identified and they agreed are key to the department’s management integration efforts. These priorities include strengthening resource allocation and reporting ability and developing and deploying secure technology solutions. However, given that these management integration initiatives are in the early stages of implementation, it is too early to assess their impact. We concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe that in the coming years, DHS needs to continue implementing its Integrated Strategy for High Risk Management and show measurable results. DHS issued its initial Integrated Strategy for High Risk Management in January 2011. The integrated strategy includes key management initiatives and related corrective actions plans for addressing DHS’s management challenges and the actions and outcomes we identified. In our 2015 report we found that DHS established a framework for monitoring its progress in implementing the integrated strategy it identified for addressing the 30actions and outcomes. However, we found DHS could strengthen its financial management monitoring efforts and financial systems modernization efforts in its 2017 high-risk update. In the June 2012 update, DHS included, for the first time, performance measures to track its progress. and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective actions and make midcourse adjustments, as needed. Demonstrated progress (partially met) DHS had made important progress in several areas to fully address 9 actions and outcomes, 5 of which it had sustained as fully implemented for at least 2 years. For instance, DHS fully met 1 outcome for the first time by obtaining a clean opinion on its financial statements for 2 consecutive years. DHS fully addressed another outcome as a result of actions it has taken to improve the maturity of its system. integration outcome—to implement actions and outcomes in each management area to develop consistent or consolidated processes and systems within and across its management functional areas. According to DHS’s January 2016 update, DHS reported that in August 2015 the Under Secretary for Management identified four integrated priority areas to bring focus to strengthening integration among the department's management functions. For example, the April 2014 Strengthening Departmental Unity of Effort memorandum highlighted a number of initiatives designed to allow the department to operate in a more integrated fashion. that DHS could strengthen its financial management monitoring efforts. DHS had not yet entered into a contract for independent verification and validation services in connection with its efforts to establish this program. Effective implementation of these modernization projects is important because, until they are complete, the department’s current systems will not effectively support financial management operations. As we concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe, moving forward, DHS will need to closely track and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective measures. We currently assess DHS to have met the framework to monitor progress criterion. Information security remains a major management challenge for the department. DHS has fully addressed 2 financial management outcomes, partially addressed 3, and initiated 3. Most notably, DHS received a clean audit opinion on its financial statements for 3 consecutive years, fiscal years 2013, 2014, and 2015, fully addressing 2 outcomes. However, the remaining material weaknesses reported by DHS auditors continue to hamper DHS’s ability to improve its financial management. The department has made progress in remediating findings from the previous year. its human resource environment, which with respect to learning management, included limitations resulting from nine disparate learning management systems that did not exchange information. DHS established the Performance and Learning Management System (PALMS) program to provide a system that will consolidate DHS’s nine existinglearning management systems into one system. However, in our February 2016 report we found that selected PALMS capabilities had been deployed to headquarters and two components, but full implementation at four components was not planned. We further found that DHS did not fully implement effective acquisition management practices. DHS has made progress on its human capital strategic plan. However, the agency has a long way to go to improve employee morale. DHS ranked last among 37 large federal agencies in all four dimensions of the survey’s survey's survey's data. It has actions under way to identify current and future human capital needs, an outcome it mostly addressed since our 2015 report due to progress implementing its Workforce Planning Model. It also has work to do to improve the morale of federal employees. large federal agencies in all four dimensions of the survey’s index for human capital accountability and assessment. DHS has developed plans for addressing its employee satisfaction problems. DHS needs to continue to improve its root-cause analysis efforts related to these plans, the authors say. The agency has also developed and implemented mechanisms to assess training programs but could take additional actions, they say. For example, in September the agency implemented a new training program for its employees that included more on-the-job training. programs but could take additional actions. In February 2016, we reported that DHS had initiated the Human Resources Information Technology (HRIT) investment in 2003 to address issues presented by its human resource environment. With respect to learning management, we found that the five DHS components in our review all had documented processes to evaluate their training programs. However, to fully achieve this outcome, DHS also needs to, among other things, issue department-wide policies on training and development and strengthen its learning management capabilities. on IT human capital management. In October 2014, DHS identified that it had resources needed to implement 7 of the 11 initiatives the department had under way to implement. The agency is working to modernize the U.S. Coast Guard’s financial management system and implementing an IT humanCapital strategic plan. We concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe that DHS's strategy and approach to continuously refining actionable steps to implementing the outcomes, if implemented effectively and sustained, should provide a path for DHS to be removed from our high risk list. DHS has fully addressed 3 of the 6 IT management outcomes, mostly addressed another 2, and partially addressed the remaining 1. The department has also made progress in implementing its IT Strategic Human Capital Plan for fiscal years 2010 through 2012. However, in January 2015 DHS shifted its IT.capability goals to focus more on human resources rather than IT. The agency has also finalized a directive to establish its tiered governance and portfolio management structure for overseeing and managing its IT investments, and annually reviews each of its portfolios and the associated investments. reported by DHS auditors continue to hamper DHS’s ability to establish effective internal control over financial reporting and comply with financial management system requirements. DHS continues to make progress on three multi-year projects to modernize selected components’ financial management systems. According to its January 2016 strategy update, DHS has made the most progress on its U.S. Coast Guard modernization project; whereas additional planning and discovery efforts need to be completed on its projects tomodernize Federal Emergency Management Agency and Immigration and Customs Enforcement systems. will be in a position to implement modernized solutions for these components and their customers. Without sound controls and systems, DHS faces long-term challenges in sustaining a clean audit opinion on its financial statements. DHS has fully addressed 1 human capital management outcome, mostly addressed 3, and partially addressed the remaining 3. For example, the Secretary of Homeland Security signed a bill to improve the ability of the federal government to monitor and respond to terrorist threats. The bill was passed by the Senate Homeland Security Committee and signed into law by the President. through 2012. In January 2015 DHS shifted its IT paradigm from acquiring assets to acquiring services, and acting as a service broker. According to DHS officials in May 2015, this paradigm change will require a major transition in the skill sets of DHS’s IT workforce. As such, this effort will need to be closely managed in order to succeed. Additionally, we found that DHS continues to take steps to improve the quality of its IT services and IT support to the Department of Homeland Security and the general public.