The department has not yet fully defined its strategy for completing waves 4 and 5. Each wave focuses on assessing and strengthening internal controls and business systems related to the stage of auditability addressed in the wave. Wave 1 focuses on the appropriations receipt and distribution process. Wave 2 focuses on supporting the budget-related data used for management decision making and reporting, including the Statement of Budgetary Resources. Wave 3 focuses on ensuring that all assets (including military equipment, general equipment, real property, inventory, and operating materials and supplies) exist. accountable property systems of record exist; all of the reporting entities’ assets are recorded in those systems ofrecord; reporting entities have the right (ownership) to report these assets; and the assets are consistently categorized, summarized, and reported. Wave 4—Full Audit Except for Legacy Asset Valuation includes the valuation assertion over new asset acquisitions. It involves the budgetary transactions covered by the Statement of Budgetary Resources effort in Wave 2. Wave 5—Full Financial Statement Audit focuses on assessing and strengthening, as necessary, internal controls, processes, and business systems involved in supporting valuations reported for legacy assets. Key contributors to this testimony include J. Christopher Martin, Senior-Level Technologist. The first three waves focus on achieving the DOD Comptroller’s interim budgetary and asset accountability priorities, while the remaining two waves are intended to complete actions needed to achieve full financial accountability. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Asif A. Khan, (202) 512-9869 or khana@gao.gov. That you or other members of the Subcommittee may have at this time. not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. to address 70 auditor Notices of Findings and Recommendations that included 139 recommendations. The plan did not identify resources, roles and responsibilities, or include performance indicators to measure performance against action plan objectives. The Marine Corps reported that actions on 88 of the 139 recommendations, including weaknesses related to accounting and financial reporting and information technology systems were fully implemented; however, the completeness and effectiveness of most Marine Corps’ actions have not yet been tested. An effective remediation plan would help ensure that audit recommendations are fully addressed to deal with short-term and long-term goals. corrective actions based on manually intensive efforts to produce reliable financial reporting at year-end. Such efforts may not result in sustained improvements over the long term. We found that the Marine Corps’ SBR Remediation Plan focused on individual initiatives to address 70 auditor Notices of Findings and Recommendations that needed to be addressed. We previously reported that using principles of risk management helps policymakers make informed decisions about best ways to prioritize investments, so that the investments target the areas of greatest need. The Marine Corps did not have effective controls in place to support estimated obligations, referred to as “bulk obligations,” to record a payment liability. The Marine Corps estimates obligations in a bulk amount to record payment liabilities where it does not have a mechanism to identify authorizing documentation as a basis for recording the obligations. The auditors found ineffective controls over three major information technology systems used by the Marine Corps. The audit also found problems with the reliability of reported financial information. The investigation is ongoing. ineffective controls over three major information technology systems used by the Marine Corps. The Marine Corps did not develop an overall corrective action or remediation plan that includes key elements of a risk-based plan. Instead, its approach focuses on short-term corrective actions based on manually intensive efforts to produce reliable data. System interface controls are critical for ensuring the completeness and accuracy of data transferred between systems. The report also noted that the Marine Corp did not developed an overall Corrective Action Plan. that we reviewed, neither individual officials nor the executive committees took sufficient action to ensure that the FIPs were accurate or complied with the FIAR Guidance. As a result, the Navy concluded that its Civilian Pay was ready for audit, as did the Air Force with respect to its Military Equipment, even though they did not have sufficient support to assert audit readiness. On the other hand, both the DOD Inspector General and the DOD Comptroller carried out their responsibilities for reviewing. In their reviews, both organizations identified issues with the Fips that were similar to those we had identified. the components—will be key to bringing about effective implementation, through the components’ FIPs. weaknesses in the Navy and Air Force FIAR Plan implementation efforts indicate that the monitoring and oversight of such efforts have not been effective. We found that component officials as well as the oversight committees at both the component and DOD levels did not effectively carry out their monitoring responsibilities for the Navy Civilian Pay and Air Air Force Military Equipment Fips. For the two FIP’s that we reviewed, neither individual officials nor the executive committees were effective in monitoring. focus efforts of the department and components, in order to achieve certain short- and long- term results. DOD revised its FIAR strategy and methodology to focus on the DOD Comptroller’s two priorities. The first priority is to strengthen processes, controls, and systems that produce DOD's budgetary information and Statements of Budgetary Resources. The second priority isto improve the accuracy and reliability of management information pertaining to the department's mission-critical assets, including military equipment, real property, and general equipment. deemed effective on a go-forward basis. Given the lack of documentation to support the values of the department’s legacy assets, federal accounting standards allow for the use of alternative methods to provide reasonable estimates for the cost of these assets. In the context of this phased approach, the dual focus on budgetary and asset information offers the potential to obtain preliminary assessments regarding the effectiveness of current processes and controls. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Some DOD components are beginning to reap the benefits of strengthened controls and processes gained through ongoing efforts to improve their financial management operations and reporting capabilities. Lessons learned from the Marine Corps’ Statement of Budgetary Resources audit effort can provide a roadmap to help other components better stage their audit readiness efforts. In August 2009, DOD’s Comptroller sought to further focus efforts of the department and components, in order to achieve the goal of becoming audit ready. The goal is to make DOD components audit ready by the end of 2015. DOD needs to provide accountability over the existence and completeness of its assets. Problems with asset accountability can further complicate critical functions, such as planning for the current troop withdrawals. In May 2010, DOD introduced a new phased approach that divides progress toward achieving financial statement auditability into five waves (or phases) of concerted improvement activities (see appendix I). According to DOD, the components’ implementation of the methodology described in the 2010 FIAR Plan will be reviewed in the coming months and years. The DOD Comptroller said it is critical that the department continues to look at how effectively it applies lessons learned. DOD has introduced incentives such as including FIAR goals in Senior Executive Service Performance Plans. The challenge now is to evaluate and validate these incentives. The Comptroller also said that effective oversight holds individuals accountable for carrying out their responsibilities. The Department of Defense Comptroller is the head of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, which is responsible for the FIPs. The FIP is a joint program between the Defense Department and the Department of Energy. reported that the FIAR Plan did not have clear results-oriented metrics. To its credit, DOD has taken action to begin defining FIAR metrics. We have not yet had an opportunity to assess implementation of these metrics. Ensuring effective monitoring and oversight of progress—especially by the leadership in the components—will be key to bringing about effective implementation, according to the authors of the report. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) at the request of the Defense Department. The lack of effective internal controls, in part, contributed to the DOD Inspector General issuing a disclaimer of opinion on the Marine Corps’ fiscal year 2010 Statement of Budgetary Resources (SBR) Because of the department’s complexity and magnitude, developing and implementing a comprehensive plan will not be an easy task. But it is a task that is critical to resolving the long-standing weaknesses and will require consistent management oversight and monitoring for it to be successful. The effectiveness of these three integrated efforts at establishing a baseline remains to be seen. The FIAR Plan did not establish a baseline of the department’s state of internal control and financial management weaknesses. Such a baseline could be used to assess and plan for the necessary improvements and remediation. DOD currently has efforts underway to address known internal control weaknesses through three integrated programs: (1) Internal Controls over Financial Reporting (ICOFR), (2) Internal controls over financial reporting (ICFPR), and (3) Internal control over financial Reporting (ICR) and financial reporting. The FIAR Guidance details the implementation of the methodology with an emphasis on internal controls and supporting documentation. The guidance directs the components to identify responsible organizations and personnel and resource requirements for improvement work. In developing their plans, components use a standard template that comprises data fields aligned to the methodology. The consistent application of a standard methodology for assessing the components’ current financial management capabilities can help establish valid baselines against which to measure, sustain, and report progress. Improving the department’s financial management operations and thereby providing DOD with a more efficient financial management program is a key goal. and management decision making and potentially exceeding authorized spending limits. Lack of effective internal controls hinders management’s ability to have reasonable assurance that their allocated resources are used effectively, properly, and in compliance with budget and appropriations law. DOD has initiated several broad-based reform efforts to address its long-standing financial management weaknesses. Until DOD analyzes personnel needs and gaps in the financial management area, it will not be in a position to develop an effective financial management recruitment, retention, and investment strategy. The financial transformation needed at DOD, and its removal from GAO’s high-risk list, is a long-term effort. Improving financial management will need to be a cross-functional endeavor; requiring committed and sustained leadership. The DOD Comptroller has expressed commitment to the FIAR goals, and established a focused approach that is intended to help DOD achieve successes in the near term. The FIAR Plan is in its sixth year and continues to evolve based on lessons learned, corrective actions, and policy changes. implement a strategic approach for addressing the department’s financial management weaknesses and for achieving auditability. In May 2009, we identified several concerns with the adequacy of the FIAR Plan as a strategic and management tool. Overall, improvement efforts have not resulted in the fundamental transformation of operations necessary to resolve the department's long-standing financial management deficiencies. However, DOD has made significant improvements to the FIar Plan that, if implemented effectively, could result in significant improvement in DOD's financial management. necessary to align financial improvement and audit readiness efforts across the department. In May 2009, we reported that the FIAR Plan did not have clear results-oriented with other DOD initiatives. To monitor progress and hold individuals accountable for progress, DOD managers and oversight bodies need reliable, valid, meaningful metrics to measure performance and the results of corrective actions. GAO will continue to monitor the progress of and provide feedback on the status of DOD’s financial management improvement efforts. I would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the Subcommittee may have. The backlog of unresolved GFEBS trouble tickets has continued to increase from about 250 in September 2010 to approximately 400 in May 2011. Trouble tickets represent user questions and issues with transactions or system performance that have not been resolved. According to Army officials, this increase in tickets was not unexpected since the number of users and transactions being processed by the system has increased. The Army and DFAS are taking steps to address issues raised by DFAS. Approximately two-thirds of invoice and receipt data must be manually entered. two-thirds of invoice and receipt data must be manually entered into GFEBS from the invoicing and receiving system (i.e., Wide Area Work Flow). DFAS personnel stated that manual data entry will eventually become infeasible due to increased quantities of data. Army officials acknowledged that there is a problem with the Wide Area work flow and GFEbs interface and that they are working with DOD to resolve the problem. The problem reduced the effectiveness of GFE BS, and that this problem is being resolved. used by approximately 35,000 users. DEAMS is expected to be fully deployed during fiscal year 2016. It is currently operational at Scott Air Force Base and DFAS, and is being used by about 1,100 individuals. GFEBS lacks the ability to run ad hoc queries or search for data in the system to resolve problems or answer questions. The Army has recognized this limitation and is currently developing a system enhancement that they expect will better support the users’ needs, the report says. The Army and Air Force have stated that they have.experiencing difficulty with some of the DEAMS system interfaces. The interface problem with the Standard Procurement System has become so severe that the interface has been turned off, and the data must be manually entered into DEAMS. DFAS officials stated that DEAMS does not provide the capability— which existed in the legacy systems—to produce ad hoc reports that can be used to perform the data analysis need to perform daily operations. They also noted that when some reports are produced, the accuracy of those reports is questionable. standardized financial management and accounting practices for the Army’s general fund, except for funds related to the Army Corps of Engineers. GFEBS is currently operational at 154 locations, including DFAS, and is being used by approximately 35,000 users. DEAMS is intended to provide the Air Force with the entire spectrum of financial management capabilities and is expected to maintain control and accountability for approximately $160 billion. The Army estimates that G FEBS will be used to control and account for about $140 billion in annual spending. The Army and Air Force have stated that they have plans to address these issues. The Army has plans to validate the audit readiness of GFEBS in a series of independent auditor examinations over the next several fiscal years. For DEAMS, the DOD Milestone Decision Authority has directed that the system is not to be deployed beyond Scott Air Force Base until the known system weaknesses have been corrected and the system has been independently tested to ensure that it is operating as intended. In closing, I am encouraged by the recent efforts and commitment DOD’s leaders have shown.  implementation of an integrated, audit-ready systems environment through the deployment of ERP systems underlies all of DOD’s financial improvement efforts. According to DOD, the successful implementation of the ERPs is not only critical for addressing long-standing weaknesses in financial management, but equally important for helping to resolve weaknesses in other high-risk areas such as business transformation, business system modernization, and supply chain management. To the degree that these business systems do not provide the intended capabilities, DOD's goal of departmentwide audit readiness could be jeopardized. years we have reported that the department has not effectively employed acquisition management controls to help ensure the ERPs deliver the promised capabilities on time and within budget. As we reported in October 2010, DOD has identified 10 ERPs as essential to its efforts to transform its business operations. We are currently reviewing the status of two of these ERPs—the Army’s General Fund Enterprise Business System (GFEBS) and the Air Force’S Defense Enterprise Accounting and Management System (DEAMS) Since 1995, we have designated DOD’s business systems modernization program as high risk. Congress included provisions in the Ronald W. Reagan National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2005. The department has invested billions of dollars and will invest billions more to implement ERPs. The challenge now is to evaluate and validate these and other incentives to determine their effectiveness and whether the right mix of incentives has been established, the report says. The report concludes that until DOD fully implements these longstanding institutional modernization management controls its business system modernization will likely remain a high-risk program. to its corporate enterprise architecture, the architecture has yet to be federated. Each of the military departments has made progress in managing its respective architecture program, but there are still limitations in the scope and completeness. For example, while each department has established or is in the process of establishing an executive committee with responsibility and accountability for the enterprise architecture. None has fully developed an enterprise architecture methodology or a well-defined business enterprise, the report says. The report concludes that the military has made significant progress in its architecture program. DOD requests billions of dollars each year to maintain its weapon systems. DOD has limited ability to identify, aggregate, and use financial management information for managing and controlling operating and support costs. Without timely, reliable, and useful financial information on cost, DOD management lacks information needed to accurately report on acquisition costs, allocate resources to programs, or evaluate program performance.to exist and remediation and improvement efforts would require the support of other business areas beyond the financial community before they could be fully addressed. Long-standing and pervasive weaknesses in DOD’s financial management and related business processes and systems have left the department vulnerable to fraud, waste, and abuse. The complexity and long-term nature of continue to impair management. DOD invests billions of dollars to acquire weapon systems, but it lacks the financial management processes and capabilities it needs to track and report on the cost of weapon systems in a reliable manner. We reported on this issue over 20 years ago, but the problems continue to persist. In July 2010, we reported that although DOD and the military departments have efforts underway to begin addressing these financial management weaknesses. costs, allocate resources to programs, or evaluate program performance. We found that an obligation of $200 million in excess of available funds in the Army’s military personnel account violated the Antideficiency Act. The overobligation likely stemmed, in part, from lack of communication between Army Budget and program managers. The lack of adequate process and system controls to maintain effective funds control impacted the Army's ability to prevent, identify, correct, and report potential violations of the act. and report potential violations of the Antideficiency Act. Without adequate financial management processes, systems, and controls, DOD components are at risk of reporting inaccurate, inconsistent, and unreliable data for financial reporting and management decision making. The proper classification and recording of costs are basic financial management functions that are also key in analyzing areas for potential future savings. We found that DOD’s TRICARE Management Activity (TMA) had misclassified $102.7 million of the nearly $112 million in DCOE advisory and assistance contract obligations. Undersecretaries as CMOs and to develop business transformation plans. DOD financial managers are responsible for the functions of budgeting, financing, accounting for transactions and events, and reporting of financial and budgetary information. DOD’s finance activities generally involve paying the salaries of its employees, paying retirees and annuitants, reimbursing its employees for travel- related expenses, paying contractors and vendors for goods and services, and collecting debts owed to DOD. DOD relies on a complex network of organizations and personnel to execute these functions. Before fiscal year 1991, the military services and defense agencies independently managed their finance and accounting operations. According to DOD, these decentralized operations were highly inefficient and failed to produce reliable information. On November 26, 1990, DOD created the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) DFAS records transactions in the accounting records, prepares thousands of reports used by managers throughout DOD and by the Congress, and prepares DOD-wide and service-specific financial statements. The military services play a vital role in that they authorize the expenditure of funds and are the source of most of the financial information.  DFAS processed approximately 198 million payment-related transactions and disbursed over $578 billion in fiscal year 2010. DOD financial management was designated as a high-risk area by GAO in 1995. Pervasive deficiencies in financial management processes, systems, and controls, and the resulting lack of data reliability, continue to impair management’s ability to assess the resources needed, GAO said in a 1995 report. The DOD budget request for fiscal year 2012 is $4.2 billion. It is critical that the current initiatives being led by the DOD DCMO and the DOD Comptroller be continued and provided with sufficient resources and ongoing monitoring in the future. Financial management will need to be a cross-functional endeavor; requiring improvements in some of DOD’s other business operations such as those in the high-risk areas of contract management, supply chain management, support infrastructure management, and weapon systems acquisition. Within every administration, there are changes at the senior leadership; therefore, it is paramount that theCurrent initiative be institutionalized throughout the department. and DOD has a long way and many long-standing challenges to overcome, says GAO. Some of the most difficult challenges ahead lie in the effective implementation of the department’s strategy by the Army, Navy, Air Force, and DLA, it says. GAO will continue to monitor the department and its military components. The department is heading in the right direction and making progress, says the GAO, but there is more work to be done to ensure the department's financial management is fully auditable. The department is facing near and long-term internal fiscal pressures. For more than a decade, DOD has dominated GAO’s list of federal programs and operations at high risk of being vulnerable to fraud, waste, abuse. All of the DOD programs on the High-Risk List relate to business operations, including systems and processes related to management of contracts, finances, the supply chain, and other areas of the agency's operations. The department is trying to balance competing demands to support ongoing operations, rebuild readiness following extended military operations, and manage increasing personnel and health care costs. The plan was to include assessments of (1) existing critical skills and competencies in DOD’s civilian workforce. In developi the plan, the department identified financial management as one of its enterprisewide mission-critical occupations. DOD was to submit a plan of action for dev eloping and reshaping the civilian employee workforce to address any identified gaps, as well as specific recruiting and retention goals and strategies on how to train, compensate, and motivate civilian employees. Although some aspects of the legislative requirements were addressed, DOD still has significant work to do. Effective financial management in DOD will require a knowledgeable and skilled workforce. The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006 directed DOD to develop a strategic plan to shape and improve the department’s civilian workforce. Hiring and retaining such a skilled workforce is a challenge DOD must meet to succeed in its transformation to efficient, effective, and accountable business operations.be successful. The plan was to, among other things; include assessments of the department's civilian workforce and how it can improve its performance. GAO has reported the need for a chief management officer (CMO) position and a comprehensive, enterprisewide business transformation plan. In May 2007, DOD designated the Deputy Secretary of Defense as the CMO. The National Defense Authorization Acts for fiscal years 2008 and 2009 contained provisions that codified the C MO and Deputy Chief Management Officer (DCMO) positions. DOD also required DOD to develop a strategic management plan, and required the Secretaries of the military departments to designate their Undersecretaries as CMOs and to develop business transformation plans.