regarding such issues as capacity and location of refineries, crude oil production, and consumption of petroleum products. To assess the reliability of EIA data, we took several steps including reviewing documentation, interviewing EIA staff, and consulting with stakeholders. To provide information about the future of the domestic petroleum refining industry and major factors that could affect it, we also reviewed forecasts from EIA, the International Energy Agency (IEA), and IHS. We selected these forecasts because they made projections through 2020, contained information broadly relevant to our report, and covered multiple scenarios. we reviewed all 27 scenarios in EIA’s 2013 forecast. We identified some differences in the metrics reported in the four forecasts. We did not make direct comparisons in these instances. We conducted this performance audit from November 2012 to March 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate information to make a judgment on the impact of climate change. We found no evidence that climate change is a major threat to the U.S. economy. Retail prices for regular gasoline averaged $3.63 per gallon in 2012, the highest annual average price when adjusted for inflation since 1976. Retail prices have declined in 2013, but are still near historic highs. According to EIA data, increases in crude oil costs have been the largest component of the recent increases in gasoline prices. The refining component of prices—including labor, materials, energy, and other costs of the refining—is the largest contributor to price increases. In 2012, refineries received the majority of their crude oil by pipeline (over 50 percent) and by tanker vessel (37 percent) The outlook of the U.S. refining industry depends on future domestic consumption of petroleum products, which is uncertain. Economic growth tends to increase consumption, and EIA’s forecast scenario with higher economic projected to exceed global consumption. IEA projects refining capacity may grow even faster, resulting in excess capacity of nearly 15.5 million barrels per day by 2020, in contrast to an estimated 4.8 million barrels by 2020. The difference is equivalent to about eight average-size U.s. refineries. from 2005 through 2012, and forecasts we reviewed project consumption of three major petroleum products—gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel—will be stable to slightly increasing through 2020. IHS projects an increase in the consumption of both gasoline and diesel, with more robust growth projected for diesel. All EIA scenarios projecting gasoline consumption to decline or remain stable. EIA’s projections suggest higher refinery production than in scenarios with lower domestic consumption. The size of the domestic market for petroleum products may affect future U.S. refinery production. Consumption of gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel peaked in 2007 and declined by over 8 percent through 2012. EIA estimated that petroleum product consumption increased in the first 11 months of 2013. Economic activity and crude oil and petroleum prices can affect consumption of petroleum products. Shifts in consumer behavior and demographic trends may reduce consumption of these products, the authors say. The study was based on data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration and the International Institute for Energy Economics and Sustainability. Most of the system of crude oil pipelines in the United States was constructed in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. According to DOE officials, this infrastructure was designed primarily to move crude oil from the South to the North. Emerging crude oil production centers in Western Canada, Texas, and North Dakota have strained the existing pipeline infrastructure. Though pipeline capacity has increased—investments increased pipeline capacity to deliver crude oil to a key Cushing, Oklahoma hub by $1.5 billion. Some refineries may not have been able to take full advantage of crude oil production increases or had to rely on other more expensive crude oil transportation options such as truck, rail, or barge. Two of the refineries we visited recently installed facilities to enable them to receive crude oil from North Dakota or Canada by rail. According to EIA data, while refinery receipts of crudeOil by these refineries increased by about 815,000 barrels per day from 2010 through 2013, crude oil deliveries to the Cushing, Oklahoma hub have been inadequate. EIA data, while refinery receipts of crude oil by these methods of transportation is a small percentage of total receipts, they have increased 57 percent from 2011 to 2012. Infrastructure constraints have, according to EIA, contributed to discounted prices for some domestic crude oils. Increasingly, the crude oil being produced in the United States and Canada has different characteristics from the crude oils that some domestic refineries are configured to use. Production of new domestic crude oil has tended to be light and sweet, whereas a portion of new Canadian production has been heavy and sour. U.S. crude oil production has increased significantly in recent years. Much of the increase has been from shale and other formations, such as the Bakken in North Dakota and the Eagle Ford in Texas. The rapid growth has lowered the cost of crude oil for some domestic refiners that have the access and ability to process these crude oils. For example, West Texas Intermediate crude oil was $17.60 per barrel less expensive in 2012 than Brent, an international benchmark crude oil from the European North Sea. U.S. and Canadian crude oil production has increased in recent years. This has led to lower crude oil costs for some refiners, according to several stakeholders. According to EIA data, U.S., production of crude oil reached its highest level in 1970 and generally declined through 2008. During this time, the United States increasingly relied on imported crude oil to meet growing domestic energy needs. However, recent improvements in technologies have allowed companies that develop petroleum resources to extract oil from shale formations that were previously unknown. Sea that was historically about the same price as West Texas Intermediate. Those refineries able to take advantage of these lower priced crude oils have benefited because crude oil costs are the largest cost for refiners. Some of the growth in production has been in areas with limited transportation linkages to refining centers. The development of domestic and Canadian crude oil production has created some challenges for U.S. crude oil transportation infrastructure. Most refineries may not have been able totake advantage ofThese crude oils to the same extent for two key reasons.  horizontal drilling techniques and hydraulic fracturing have increased U.S. crude oil and natural gas production. As shown in figure 7, monthly domestic crude oil production has increased by over 55 percent through September 2013 compared with average production in the past five years. hydraulic fracturing is a process that injects a combination of water, sand, and chemical additives under high pressure to create and maintain fractures in underground rock formations that allow oil andnatural gas to flow. It is used to extract oil from shale formations that were previously considered to be inaccessible because traditional techniques did not yield sufficient amounts. The upstream segment consists of the exploration for and production of crude oil. The midstream segment includes pipelines and other infrastructure used to transport crude oil and refined products. The downstream segment includes the refining and marketing of petroleum products such as gasoline and heating oil. Biorefineries produce renewable fuels that are blended with petroleum products at wholesale terminals before being distributed to consumers. To varying degrees, refiners may primarily operate refineries, or may be integrated, participating in various other related industry segments, such as renewable fuels. One barrel of crude oil can be processed into varying amounts of gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, and other petroleum products. Through the addition of specialized equipment, refineries can be optimized to produce greater proportions of specific types of products. The U.S. petroleum refining industry consists of firms of varying sizes that, in addition to operating refineries, may also have operations in other related industry segments: (1) the transportation sector; (2) the home heating sector; and (3) the liquefied petroleum gases industry. There were 143 petroleum refineries in the United States as of January 2013, with a capacity to process 17.8 million barrels of crude oil per day. Most refining capacity (almost 90 percent) is located in the Gulf Coast, West Coast, and Midwest regions. These refineries employed over 70,000 people in 2013. Refineries process crude oil into products primarily through a distillation process that separates crudeOil into products. The U.S. petroleum refining industry is one of the largest industries in the world. EIA data indicate that as domestic consumption has declined, refiners have looked to foreign markets to sell products. Since 1949, the United States had been a net importer of petroleum products. Even the lowest projection for petroleum product exports in 2020 is above 2010 levels. The extent to which domestic refiners are able to export their products will depend on the competitiveness of U.S. refiners compared with foreign refiners, the authors say. The authors say the industry’s future competitiveness is uncertain and that foreign markets present both challenges and opportunities. The United States recently exported more petroleum products than other leading exporters. Exports of petroleum products represented 7 percent of refinery production in 2007. Major markets for U.S. exports include Central and South America, Mexico, and Europe. EIA scenarios project export levels from 2.6 to 3.4 million barrels per day by 2020, a relatively wide range.. Even the lowest projection for petroleum product. exports will remain strong, according to most of the EIA and IHS forecasts. This report provides information on the domestic petroleum refining industry and its market and regulatory environment. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. Based on our research and information from stakeholders, we identified five key regulations that were recently strengthened or proposed. The Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Renewable Fuels Standard was identified as one of the key regulations to be addressed. We also asked agency officials and other stakeholders we contacted to recommend studies. We conducted searches of various databases, such as ProQuest and PolicyFile, for studies since published 2009. Stakeholders and information we reviewed suggest that various factors may affect the U.S. refining industry’s future competitiveness. IEA data indicate that competition from foreign refiners may increase as global refining capacity is projected to exceed global consumption. New Middle Eastern refineries are intended to be export facilities. Costs associated with environmental regulations could collectively impose additional costs on the domestic refining industry. In addition, regulatory uncertainty can affect refiners’ competitiveness if it inhibits the industry from making investments that are attractive to foreign buyers. by 2020, in contrast to an estimated 4.8 million barrels per day of excess capacity in 2012. A large share of the new capacity is expected in China, India, and the Middle East. Two refiners indicated concern that capacity additions in some of those regions may present competition for U.S. refiners. Several other stakeholders were optimistic about domestic refiners’ ability to compete in the future. According to IEA,capacity additions in China and India are intended to boost the global economy. The domestic petroleum refining industry has been and is expected to continue to be affected by several profound changes. Some of these changes, such as the growth in crude oil production in the United States and Canada, are reshaping the industry and creating new business opportunities. To take advantage of some of these opportunities, refiners and other market participants will need to invest—to upgrade refineries to be able to process different crude oils or to build pipelines or rail connections to move more crude oil from production to refining centers. the refineries we visited are not generalizable to all refineries. The stakeholder views we summarize were not necessarily supported by all types of stakeholders. Stakeholders and information we reviewed identified a number of changes that have affected the industry. We report on those that were most often cited. We summarized historical data from the Energy Information Administration (EIA) regarding such issues as capacity and location of refineries, crude, and other issues. We identify differing views where appropriate, and we report on the most common. competitiveness if it inhibits the industry from making investments that would otherwise lower costs. Not all of the key regulations we reviewed would be expected to affect the industry’s competitiveness. CAFE and GHG vehicle standards do not impose requirements on refiners. RFS and Tier 3 standards could impose requirements with potential associated costs on some refiners, but they would not apply to exported fuels. Potential for increased exports to nations with stringent fuel standards. In general, U.S. refineries are among the most competitive in the world. stringent fuel standards. U.S. refineries are among the most sophisticated in the world. IEA has pointed out that refiners in many parts of the world face challenges producing fuels that meet high product quality and environmental performance standards. In this regard, actions refiners may take to reduce gasoline sulfur to comply with proposed Tier 3 standards could enable them to export to markets—such as Japan and much of the rest of the Asia-Pacific region. The IEA says some U.K. refiners could benefit from any trend toward higher quality and more stringent environmental performance Standards. U.S. and Canadian crude portion of new Canadian production has been heavy and sour crude oils. Some refineries can use these crude oils, but some have invested in new equipment in order to do so. CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards and the RFS have likely recently contributed to declining consumption of petroleum fuels, and compliance with the R FS has increased costs for some refiners. Overall, Overall, after decades of generally increasing domestic consumption of. petroleum products, consumption has declined since 2005, resulting in a smaller domestic market for refiners, according to several stakeholders we contacted. The U.S. market is important for domestic refineries because they have historically primarily sold their products domestically. On average, the United States exported almost 1 million barrels per day of domestic petroleum products from 2000 through 2005. The refining industry has shifted sales to export markets amid a declining domestic market. Two recently strengthened key environmental regulations have likely affected the refining industry by reducing the consumption of petroleum fuels, and compliance with the RFS. The RFS is responsible for administering the EPA's CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards. economic activity and crude oil and petroleum prices. Recession of 2007 to 2009 reduced economic activity and demand for gasoline. Historically high gasoline prices have discouraged the use of gasoline. Stakeholders and information cited the effect of more stringent fuel economy standards and the RFS, which are discussed in the next section. Several stakeholders told us that this broad shift from growing to falling consumption of petroleum products has affected the domestic refining industry because it has resulted in a smaller domestic market. The U.S. market is important for domestic refineries. Current regulations do not require existing facilities to take any steps to control GHG emissions unless they undertake a major modification. Examples of major modifications at a refinery include a significant expansion of crude oil processing units. The LCFS would change the mix of fuels and vehicles in California to reduce emissions throughout the fuel ‘life cycle’ The goal of the LCFS is to reduce the level of carbon in transportation fuels by reducing the overall carbon intensity (CI) score for each fuel. The CI score is used to reflect each fuel’s life cycleGHG emissions. LCFS refiners can meet the CI reduction targets using a variety of low carbon fuel technologies. Low carbon technologies include renewable fuels from waste and cellulosic materials, natural gas, electricity used in plug-in vehicles, and hydrogen used in fuel cell vehicles. The original LCFS statewide reduction targets for gasoline, diesel, and their substitutes started at 0.25 percent of 2010 values in 2011 and increased to 0.50 percent in 2012. The CI reduction target for gasoline and diesel is based on the annual carbon intensity target for a given year. at 0.25 percent of 2010 values in 2011 and increased to 10 percent by 2020. In 2013 a state Court of Appeal found that CARB must correct certain aspects of the procedures by which the LCFS was originally adopted. CARB officials subsequently announced a regulatory package would be proposed in 2014. The 2013 standards—a 1 percent decrease in carbon intensity from 2010 values—will remain in effect through 2014. To comply with LCFS, refiners can produce their own low carbon fuels or buy such fuels from other producers to blend into their products.  LCFS is the subject of several ongoing lawsuits, which resulted in a 4-month delay in some regulatory activities. A study conducted by a consultant on behalf of industry says the legal challenge is creating uncertainty that discourages new investments by industry. EPA officials also explained that, in some cases, delays can occur when the refinery applicant has not provided EPA with the proper information to proceed with processing the permit. The Clean Air Act requires that EPA approve or deny such permits within 12 months of receiving a complete application. California refiners have thus far been able to comply with LCFS requirements by blending lower carbon intensive renewable fuels. Stakeholders and a refining industry trade association told us that California refiners could face higher costs or compliance challenges unless CARB adjusts future low carbon fuel requirements. CARB has estimated that the cost of LCFS on gasoline and gasoline- substitute fuels is likely to range between an increase of and a decrease of $1.5 billion per year. The decisions CARB makes with respect to the LCFS may affect California refiner’s ability to stay in business and compete with refiners in other states and countries. of crude oil by 2.2 million barrels per day by 2025, equivalent to almost 15 percent of crude oil used by refineries in 2012. Under the RFS statute, unless waived by EPA, renewable fuels blending is required to double by 2022. EPA estimated that the LCFS could cost the refining industry an average of $0.70 per gallon by 2020. The study also projected that 5 to 7 of 14 California refineries could cease production by 2020, and theLCFS could raise other compliance challenges. CARB estimated that the 2020 targets would reduce GHG emissions associated with the transportation sector in California by 10 percent in 2020. Refiners can also generate credits—which can be banked and traded—if their use of low carbon fuels results in greater-than-required carbon intensity reductions. Stakeholders identified three major changes that have likely recently affected the domestic petroleum refining industry. First, crude oil production in the U.S. and Canada has increased, which has lowered carbon emissions. According to several stakeholders, RFS compliance has been most difficult for refiners with less of a retail presence, known as merchant refiners. EPA officials told us that the RFS program affects all refiners equally because obligations are the same regardless of whether refiners blend renewable fuels themselves or purchase RINs. For example, an ExxonMobil official said that RIN costs did not have a significant impact on the company’s financial performance during the second quarter of 2013 because ExxonMobil meets the majority of its obligation by blending its renewable fuels itself. To demonstrate compliance with the RFS, refiners and importers must provide sufficient RINs for the volume of gasoline and diesel they produce for use in the contiguous United States and Hawaii. For example, to comply with the 2013 total renewable fuels standard, a refiner selling 100 million gallons of gasoline would have to provide 9.74 million total Rins to EPA. Refiners and other obligated parties with more RINS than needed to meet the year’s blending standard can hold them for use the following year. we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. To demonstrate compliance with the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) annual blending requirements under the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS), refiners use renewable identification numbers (RIN), which we refer to in this report as credits. A RIN is a unique 38-character code that renewable fuel producers and importers assign to each gallon of renewable fuel produced. RINs reflect the cost of renewable fuels compared with the petroleum fuels they displace. Prices for corn-based ethanol increased to over $1.40 per gallon in July 2013. Several stakeholders told us this increase in RIN prices was primarily due to RFS requirements exceeding the capability of the transportation fuel infrastructure to distribute and the fleet of vehicles to use renewable fuels, referred to as the “blend wall” EPA officials told us that high corn prices, which made ethanol more expensive relative to gasoline, also contributed to higher Rin prices during this period. to blend or use renewable fuels by purchasing credits. These credits can be freely traded, and prices for credits are established based on the market. In 2013, prices for these credits increased to over $1.40 per gallon in July before declining to about $0.20 per gallon as of mid- November 2013. Several stakeholders told us this increase in credit prices was primarily due to RFS requirements exceeding the capability of the transportation fuel infrastructure to distribute and the fleet of vehicles to use renewable fuel. 2013 to EPA’s statements expressing its desire to address the blend wall. While the RFS applies to all refiners in the same way, effects of rising or falling RIN prices may vary depending on each refiners’ situation. RFS may increase costs for some refiners depending on the percentages of renewable fuels required by EPA and on other factors. The blend wall may remain a concern into the future because statutory renewable fuel blending requirements continue to increase while the consumption of petroleum products is expected to increase only slightly. Blending more than 10 percent ethanol with gasoline (called E10) is affected by constraints such as the limited availability of vehicles that can use higher ethanol blends. EIA: Higher ethanol blends are less widely available than E10 and must be priced at a discount to encourage greater consumption. EPA officials recently said the blend wall would be reached in 2014 when about 13.2 billion gallons of E10 could be consumed. Blending additional renewable fuels can be difficult and costly once the blending wall is reached. EPA is authorized to waive the RFS levels established in the act if the Administrator determines that implementing the requirement would severely harm the economy or environment. The major source of renewable fuels has traditionally been ethanol produced from corn. As we reported in 2009, the increased cultivation of corn for ethanol, its conversion into renewable fuels could affect water supplies, water quality, air quality, soil quality, and biodiversity. Under the R FS’ under the act, the EPA can waive the requirement if there is an inadequate domestic supply, or in certain other situations. quality, air quality, soil quality, and biodiversity. Under the RFS’ statutory provisions, the increasing amounts of renewable fuels are to primarily come from renewable fuels other than corn ethanol. The RFS could reduce GHG emissions by 138 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions, the EPA says. According to EPA, achieving the R FS’s statutory blending levels in 2022 could result in total benefits of between $13 and $26 billion, the agency says. The benefits include those related to fuel costs, energy security, health, and GHG effects. not subject to RFS requirements, or increase exports to nations where the RFS does not apply. The RFS has contributed to the declining domestic consumption of petroleum-based transportation fuels. As a result, refiners and other industry participants have blended increasing amounts of renewable fuels. According to EIA, increased ethanol use since 2007 displaced over 4 billion gallons of gasoline, or about 3 percent of gasoline consumption in 2012. As discussed previously, decreases in consumption affect refiners by decreasing the size of the domestic market. Congress established the RFS in light of concerns such as climate change and the nation’s dependence on imported crude oil. The potential for RFS to reduce petroleum-based fuel consumption will depend on the percentages finalized by EPA. The Administrator of EPA is authorized to waive RFS levels established in on actions by regulators and market and other developments. For example, as discussed above, EPA has proposed to reduce renewable fuel requirements for 2014 due to an inadequate supply. The proposal could be affected by legal challenges, as well as market infrastructure. RFS annual standards are issued on time. We provided drafts of this report to DOE, DOT, and EPA for review and comment. The three agencies provided technical comments on early or final drafts, which we incorporated as appropriate. EPA also provided a letter in which it generally agreed with our findings and recommendations and clarified three topics discussed in the report. Based on our work, refiners that purchase credits for compliance. differed from EPA's views on the effects of compliance with the RFS, we found.  compliance has recently increased costs for some refiners, according to information we reviewed. Required blending of renewable fuels has contributed to declining domestic consumption of petroleum-based transportation fuels. EPA’s delays in issuing annual RFS standards may have contributed to investment uncertainty for some Refiners. RFS has had three main effects on the domestic petroleum refining industry or individual refiners. In addition, EPA has been late in issuing Annual RFS Standards, and several factors contribute to the delays. The RFS regulations require U.S. transportation fuels to include renewable fuels. The outlook of the U.S. refining industry will also depend on the extent to which some key regulations—RFS, Tier 3, stationary source GHG requirements, and LCFS—increase costs for refiners. Increasing costs may be absorbed by refiners themselves (i.e., by reducing their profits), be passed on to consumers through higher product prices, or both. The requirements on domestic refiners from the key regulations we reviewed generally are expected to have a greater effect in the future. nonprobability sample of 32 stakeholders. Stakeholders included representatives from refining companies, environmental organizations, consultants, and officials from federal and state agencies. We also visited several refineries of selected refining companies. Because we used a nonprobable sample, the views of these stakeholders are not generalizable to all potential stakeholders, but they provide illustrative examples of the range of views. For example, to select refiners, we considered the size and location of their refineries, and whether they were vertically integrated or merchant refiners. proposed: (1) the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Renewable Fuels Standard regulations, (2) the Department of Transportation's Corporate Average Fuel Economy, and (3) the state of California's Low Carbon Fuel Standard. We reviewed agency regulatory impact assessments and industry and other studies on the effect of these regulations on industry. Other regulations may also affect the industry. We also summarized the results of semistructured interviews with a nonprobability sample of 32 stakeholders. EPA officials say delays in issuing RFS standards have largely been due to the length of the regulatory development process. Interagency review process is to ensure that regulations are consistent with the President’s priorities, among other things, and that decisions made by one agency do not conflict with the policies or actions taken or planned by another. Under the public review process, EPA must publish a proposed standard in the Federal Register, provide the public with the opportunity to review and comment on the proposal, and address comments received before finalizing the regulation. the regulation. According to EPA officials, the interagency and public review processes can be time consuming. The RFS standards involve complex and controversial issues and balance competing agricultural, energy, and environmental policy interests. In 2009, we recommended that EPA and other agencies track their performance for developing significant regulations against targeted milestones to identify opportunities for improvement. We found that monitoring actual versus estimated performance could help agency managers identify steps in the process that account for substantial time and provide information necessary to evaluate whether time was well spent. management reports to EPA managers and executives. EPA stated at the time that this process helps management identify regulations that are off-track so that corrective steps can be taken to expedite their completion. EPA has not conducted a systematic review of its experience issuing RFS regulations to identify the underlying causes of repeated delays. EPA officials told us that they develop RFS Regulations using the same procedures used for developing all EPA regulations. The agency has not met its statutory deadlines under the RFS in the five annual standards since 2009. EPA tracks 14 milestones as it develops proposed rules and additional milestones in developing final regulations. For example, EPA tracks when its senior management approves of a document describing the scope of the regulation and the analytical work necessary to develop it. In comments to our 2009 report, EPA stated that it used an internal tracking system along with additional information to develop regulatory management reports to EPA managers and executives. EPA stated at the end of the 2009 report that it uses an agency-wide Action Development Process to develop proposed rules. EPA proposed the 2014 standards on November 29, 2013, and EPA officials told us that they plan to finalize the standards in Spring 2014. The RFS compliance period is set by statute to be a full calendar year, and delays do not change this compliance period. As a result, when the RFS standards are issued late, the industry has less time to plan or contractual constraints, among various other factors, that could result in different outcomes in the short run. EPA stated that it adjusted the 2013 deadline to provide additional time to demonstrate compliance. EPA has not issued annual RFS standards on time since 2009. Uncertainty can affect the market climate within which these investment decisions will be made. EPA may waive the statutory volumes in whole or in part according to statutory criteria, which EPA has identified as potentially factoring in the blend wall, market developments, and other issues. However, EPA has missed the annual deadline for issuing annual standards under the RFS in most years. Most recently, EPA issued 2013 standards in August 2013—over 8 months late. EPA delays in issuing RFS standards are important because delays do not change refiners’ compliance periods accordingly. Uncertainty among refiners, renewable fuel producers, and other market participants about how EPA will address the blend wall could harm investment. EPA has some systems in place to monitor and evaluate progress in developing regulations, which could provide useful information for understanding delays in RFS. But EPA has not identified the underlying causes of delays, and it has not developed a plan to address delays. participants about how EPA will address the blend wall, which can be exacerbated by the prospect of litigation. To improve EPA’s ability to meet the annual statutory deadline for issuing annual RFS standards, we recommend that the Administrator of the EPA take the following two actions: Assess past experience to identify the underlying causes of delays. Develop and implement a plan to address the causes of delay and help ensure RFS annual standards are issued on time. We provided drafts of the two actions. Since 2011, construction of any new refineries and certain refineries that are modified have generally been subject to the use of the “best available control technology’ for GHG emissions. The best available controlTechnology is determined for each facility based on an analysis of available technologies considering cost and other factors. According to EPA, in most cases, the best availablecontrol technology selected for GHGs are energy efficiency improvements. For example, for refineries, this could involve the installation of heat recovery units, which capture and use otherwise wasted heat in the refinery process. received major source GHG permits since the GHG permitting program was implemented in 2011. A refining company representative expressed concerns to us about the lengthy permitting process to authorize GHG emission increases. An EPA official said that, in most cases, best available control technologies selected to comply with GHG requirements for refining facilities involve energy efficiency improvement measures that could help refiners reduce fuel consumption and save money. Further, EPA officials also explained that,  in addition to GHG emissions, refiners can also use other energy efficiency measures to reduce their fuel consumption. well as costs for vehicle manufacturers to improve the emissions performance of vehicles. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA is authorized to take certain steps to address emissions from stationary sources, including refineries. EPA recently issued rules concerning how GHGs are to be included in certain existing permitting processes. Since 2011, construction on the Keystone XL pipeline in Texas has been delayed by two months. The pipeline is expected to be completed in time for the start of the 2016 presidential campaign. The project is expected in time to meet the president's goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent by 2016. underlying causes of repeated delays and has not identified changes in its approach that may help to avoid these delays in the future. Without such analyses and a plan to address the underlying causes of the delays, EPA risks repeating them. The other key regulations that we reviewed have had minimal effects to date because these regulations either have not yet been implemented (Tier 3 standards) or, with respect to the other two, have not affected industry operations or costs in a major way, according to stakeholders and information we reviewed. way, according to stakeholders and information we reviewed. Tier 3 standards were proposed on May 21, 2013, and EPA announced final standards on March 3, 2014. Stationary source GHG requirements have been burdensome to refiners, but several other stakeholders said they have not had a major effect. EPA officials told us they were aware of only three refineries that have received majorSource GHG permits since the GHG permitting program began in 2010. The EPA says it has no immediate plans to change its GHG standards. with the agency for comment. EPA stated that the final Tier 3 program is very similar to what it proposed, though EPA made some changes based on public input and updated its analyses. EPA provided technical comments to incorporate information from the final rule which we incorporated into the report, as appropriate. We were not able to obtain stakeholder and other views on the finalTier 3 rule for this report. See appendix IV for EPA’s letter. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30. future delays would contribute to investment uncertainty and higher costs for refiners. EPA officials said that they did not believe delays have affected market participants. The extent to which the RFS increases costs in the future could also be affected by the outcome of any relevant litigation and of legislative proposals to change the Rfs or how EPA implements it. According to EPA, to meet the Tier 3 fuel sulfur standards, refiners would need to install or install or upgrade to meet Tier 3 sulfur standards. The RFS is expected to be implemented by the end of 2015. and places no requirement on existing refineries unless they undertake a major modification. EPA entered a settlement in which the agency agreed to develop national performance standards for GHG emissions from new and modified refineries. Although EPA has no current schedule to issue these standards, EPA committed in its settlement to issue them. A stakeholder told us that until EPA clarifies its approach for NSPS, many refiners will not comply with the new standards. The standards could impose more strict controls involving higher costs at refineries, he said. The EPA projected that 67 out of 108 refineries would modify or purchase some equipment. The capital costs of installing this equipment and operating costs to run it would total $804 million in 2017. An industry study of the Tier 3 proposal estimated that the regulation would increase costs by up to $0.09 per gallon for the highest-cost refinery, and several refinery representatives told CNN that this figure is likely too high. The regulation would also require refiners to install or upgrade hydrotreating capacity or other steps to reduce the sulfur content in fuels. the current caps, but far more difficult if the caps were lowered. Stationary source GHG requirements could become more stringent in the future. One study estimated that industry could incur additional capital expenses to achieve lower sulfur caps, ranging from $2 billion to over $6 billion dollars depending on the sulfur cap level in the final standards. The current permitting framework is a case-by-case determination that takes into account costs, among other factors, and places no requirement on existing refineries unless they undertake it. The extent to which the refining industry will be affected by Tier 3 standards would have been greater if EPA decreased the per-gallon maximum allowable sulfur levels in gasoline. In the final standards, EPA maintained the current 80 ppm cap, but had sought comment on whether it should decrease the cap to as low as 20 ppm. A stakeholder told us that Tier 3 would be manageable if EPA kept the current caps, but far more difficult if the caps were lowered. The final standards were released on Wednesday. during model years 2011-2025. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA is authorized to establish certain standards for new motor vehicles and fuels to address air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. According to EPA, more than 149 million Americans experience unhealthy levels of air pollution. Cars and light trucks are significant contributors to air pollution, and EPA estimated that the Tier 3 standards will reduce pollution from cars and trucks by about 20 percent. The standards will also reduce the sulfur content of gasoline. estimated that the Tier 3 standards will reduce pollution from such sources. The standards set more stringent tailpipe emission standards for new vehicles. By 2030, annual emission reductions would generate annual benefits of between $6.7 and $19 billion and prevent up to 2,000 premature deaths annually. EPA estimated that the vehicle and fuel standards would cost approximately $1.5 billion in 2030, including costs for refiners to install and operate equipment to remove sulfur from gasoline, and costs for vehicle manufacturers to improve the emissions. CAFE standards are administered by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) CAFE standards require that vehicle manufacturers meet fleet-wide average fuel economy standards for vehicles. NHTSA and EPA put the national program into place by issuing coordinated regulations covering vehicle model years 2012 to 2025.by 138 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions, equal to taking about 27 million vehicles off the road. Although the CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards are distinct, their targets were aligned for compliance purposes. The RFS has recently increased costs for some refiners, as well as other challenges. CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards will require more efficient vehicles in the future, which may reduce future consumption of fuels. EPA estimated that the model year 2012-2025 standards are projected to reduce U.S. consumption of crude oil by 2.2 million barrels per day by 2025. The other three key environmental regulations have had minimal effects to date because they have either not yet been implemented or have generally not affected the industry. CAFE standards contributed to a reduction in transportation fuel consumption of 2.8 million barrels per day in 2002. EPA estimated in 2010 that vehicles were expected to save 1.3 billion gallons of gasoline in 2013 compared with model year 2011 standards. This is equivalent to about 1 percent of EIA’s projection of gasoline consumption in 2013. A stakeholder told us that the CAFE and GHG vehicle emissions standards have likely had a relatively large impact on petroleum demand declines in the past few years. EPA estimated that the 2011-2025 standards may save consumers and businesses $1.7 trillion. The standards may reduce oil consumption by 12 billion barrels, and reduce GHG emissions by 6 billion metric tons over the lifetime of the vehicles sold. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA has the authority to set the standards for vehicles sold during model years 2011- 2025. For more information on the standards, visit EPA.gov/fueleconomy or go to www.epa.gov. so, namely the cost for the renewable fuel compared to the petroleum fuel it displaces. In addition to the individual named above, Christine Kehr (Assistant Director), Elizabeth Beardsley, Catherine Bombico, Keya Chateauneuf, Nirmal Chaudhary, Quindi Franco, Cindy Gilbert, Katharine Kairys, Michael Kendix, Armetha Liles, and Alison O’Neill made key contributions to this report. GAO-12-732. Oil and Gas: Information on Shale Resources, Development, and Environmental and Public Health Risks. 2009. Federal Rulemaking: Improvements Needed to Monitoring and Evaluation of Rules Development as well as to the Transparency of OMB Regulatory Reviews. 2007. Vehicle Fuel Economy: Reforming Fuel Economy Standards Could Help Reduce Oil Consumption by Cars and Light. 2008. Energy Markets: Increasing Globalization of Petroleum Products Markets, Tightening Refining Demand and Supply Balance, and Other Trends Have Implications for U.S. Energy Supply, Prices, and Price Volatility. 2009. Energy markets: Refinery Outages Can Impact Petroleum Product Prices, but No Federal Requirements to Report Outages Exist. Standards Could Help Reduce Oil Consumption by Cars and Light Trucks, and Other Options Could Complement These Standards. GAO-07-921. Washington, D.C.: August 2, 2007. Motor Fuels: Understanding the Factors That Influence the Retail Price of Gasoline. GAE-05-525SP. Washington,. D.c.: May 2, 2005. MotorFuels: understanding the factors that influence the retail price of Gas gasoline. GAo-05/525SP: Understanding The Factors That influence the Retail price of gas. this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees and to the Secretaries of Energy and Transportation and the Administrator of the EPA. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao,gov.