government’s nearly 7,000 investments were spending all of their funds on O&M activities. This is a little more than three times the amount spent on DME activities. Over the past 7 fiscal years, O&m spending has increased, while the amount invested in developing new systems has decreased by about $7.3 billion since fiscal year 2010. In fiscal year 2017, agencies plan to spend 77 percent of their IT funds onO&M, according to the IT Dashboard. 15 of the 26 agencies have increased their spending on O&M from fiscal year 2010 to fiscal year 2015. The spending changes per agency range from an approximately $4 billion increase (HHS) to a decrease of $600 million (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) The percentage of total IT spending onO&M ranges from a 20 percent increase (Department of Education) to 16 percent decrease (Office of Personnel Management) Appendix II provides detailed information on agency spending on operations and maintenance. development activities and began O&M activities. Rising costs to maintain legacy IT infrastructure, such as those that use older programming languages. OMB officials: Agencies tend to categorize investments as O &M because they attract less oversight, require reduced reduced costs. In situations where agencies are not sure whether to report costs as O&m or DME, agencies default to reporting as O andM.. In several situations, OMB: In several cases, in areas where agencies aren't sure if they should report as DME or O&C, they default to O &C. spending on DME include the size and mission of the bureau. Several bureaus have recently completed major DME work that is now in the O&M phase. One bureau had no actual IT systems in its budget, as its IT has been absorbed by headquarters. OMB staff in the Office of E-Government and Information Technology have recognized the upward trend of O&m spending and identified several contributing factors, they say. The agency's DME spending is now at an all-time high, the OMB says. but now that the major parts of the agency are established, the funding has shifted to O&M. DHS officials stated that they anticipate future increases in DME funding as prioritized IT modernization efforts are approved and funded. An official in Department of State’s (State) Bureau of Information Resource Management stated that the increase is largely due to increased costs of maintaining the infrastructure, including meeting security requirements. VA officials said updates to its technology are the primary reason for the increase in spending. HHS’s Office of the CIO stated that the increased spending on O&M was largely due to grants to states and local entities for new programs, such as the Affordable Care Act. Conversely, several agencies have decreased spending onO&M. For example, as we have previously reported, the Department of Energy (Energy) reduced spending by approximately $300 million, which it attributed to the reclassification of high performance computers from the IT portfolio to facilities. Similarly, the Dept. of Commerce (Commerce) reduced Spending by about $100 million. Federal agencies reported spending $55 billion—69 percent of total IT spending—on non-provisioned O&M in fiscal year 2015. OMB has not identified an associated goal with its non- provisioned IT measure that is part of PortfolioStat process. An OMB official within the Office of E-Government and Information Technology stated that the aim is for the amount of spending on DME and provisioning IT services to rise, thus reducing the percent of to evaluate proposals for modernization. Federal agencies reported spending the majority of their fiscal year 2015 IT funds on operating and maintaining a large number of legacy investments. 26 federal agencies spent about $61 billion on O&M, more than three-quarters of the total amount spent. 5,233 of the government’s nearly 7,000 investments were spending all of their funds in 2015. Three of the agencies agreed with our recommendations; two partially agreed; and two agencies had no comments. All of the OMB factors were considered. To assess the extent to which federal agencies have invested in operating and maintaining existing IT, we reviewed data reported to OMB as part of the budget process. We also compared OMB’s associated performance measure on driving value in federal IT investments to federal best practices. To assess the of Veterans Affairs, and Social Security Administration, we focused on the 12 agencies with the highest planned IT spending for fiscal year 2015, given that these agencies make up over 90 percent of reported federal IT spending. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Table 8 provides the reported spending by agency on operations and maintenance (O&M) and the percentage of IT spending on O&M for fiscal years 2010 and 2015. Table 9 lists the 51 federal bureaus which reported spending less than 10 percent of their IT funds on development, modernization, and enhancement for fiscal year 2015. 5 of the 26 agencies that report to the IT Dashboard reported spending less than 10 percent on DME activities in fiscal year 2015. 34 percent of bureaus (i.e., 51 of the 151) spent less than ten percent on the DME. According to agency officials, reasons for low DME spending include the size and mission of the agency. The agency’s maintenance costs are reducing its flexibility and the agency or bureau is unable to innovate, the report says. on IT investments. OMB directs agencies to break down IT investment costs into two categories: (1) O&M and (2) development, modernization, and enhancement (DME) DME costs refers to those projects and activities that lead to new IT assets/systems, or change or modify existing IT assets to substantively improve capability or performance. Beginning in 2014, OMB directed agencies to further break down their O &M and D ME costs to identify provisioned IT service costs. The O&M phase is often the longest phase of an investment and can consume more than 80 percent of the total lifecycle costs. OMB and agencies will be limited in their ability to evaluate progress that has been made and whether or not they are achieving their goals to increase the amount spent on development activities and provisioned IT services. To help them do so, OMB requires that CIOs submit information on how to measure non- provisioned services to the OMB for evaluation. 8.5 percent of federal agencies’ planned spending for fiscal year 2016 has gone toward provisioned IT services. The vast majority of spending going toward IT that is non-provisioned. Examples of provisionedIT service could include cloud services or shared services from another federal agency or a private service provider. Figure 1 shows the breakdown in planned Spending for Fiscal Year 2016. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2016/01/30/technology/top-10-federal-agencies-spending-fiscal-year-2016.  legacy federal IT investments are becoming obsolete. Several aging investments are using unsupported components, many of which did not have specific plans for modernization or replacement. This is contrary to OMB’s draft initiative, which calls for agencies to analyze and review O&M investments. Until this policy is finalized and implemented, the federal government runs the risk of continuing to maintain investments that have outlived their effectiveness and are consuming resources (DME) activities or provisioned O &M services. The government's oversight of such investments will be impaired and its spending could be wasteful. of federal IT. To select systems or investments to profile, we identified agencies’ existing investments in O&M that were rated as medium or high risk. We then interviewed agency officials to confirm and obtain additional information on the systems. From the resulting list of systems and investments, we created a list of the agency-identified oldest systems. We also used the list of agency- identified oldest systems or Investments to identify the oldest investments in the federal IT system. The list of oldest systems and Investments was then used to select the agencies to profile. CIOs from 12 selected agencies reported that 23 of their 187 major IT O&M investments were moderate to high risk as of August 2015. Of the 23 investments, agencies had plans to replace or modernize 19 investments. Most investments did not have specific plans with time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. agencies did not consistently perform required analysis on at-risk investments. Until agencies fully implement cloud and shared services, OMB and agencies will be constrained in their ability to evaluate progress. those were general or tentative in that the agencies did not provide specificity on time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. OMB directs agencies to monitor O&M investments through operational analyses, which should be performed annually. In instances where investments experience problems, agencies can perform a TechStat, a face-to-face meeting to terminate or turn around IT investments that are failing or not producing results. Although not required, agencies had performed TechStats on only five of the at-risk investments. Agencies provided several reasons for not conducting TechStats. Several of the investments’ risk levels were reduced to low or moderately-low risk in the months since the IT Dashboard had been publicly updated. It should be noted that recent legislation requires agencies to perform a review of each major IT investment that receives a high-risk rating for 4 consecutive quarters. In addition, operational analyses were not conducted for four at-risk investments. These investments were: Commerce’s Enterprise Cyber Security Monitoring and Operations, DHS’S Integrated Fixed Towers, Treasury’'s Departmental Offices IT Infrastructure Mainframes and Servers Services and Support. had performed an internal “health assessment” on its Integrated Fixed Towers investment, understood the issues it was facing, and decided that a TechStat was not necessary. An official from HHS’s Office of the CIO stated that, at the time it was evaluated, its Trusted Internet Connection Investment did not meet its internal TechStat criteria of having cost variance over 10 percent. The program was required to work on a corrective action plan and has since been upgraded from high to moderate. Over the past several years, we have made over 20 recommendations to help improve the accuracy and reliability of the information on the IT Dashboard. Most agencies agreed with our recommendations or had no comment. In January 2010, the Federal CIO began leading TechStat sessions to terminate or turn around IT investments that are failing or are not producing results. These meetings involve OMB and agency leadership and are intended to increase accountability and accountability for agency IT investments. The CIO’s best judgement of the level of risk facing the investment.(low risk and green) based on the CIO's best judgement. and agency leadership and are intended to increase accountability and improve performance. OMB also empowered agency CIOs to begin to hold their own TechStat sessions within their respective agencies by June 2012. In June 2013, we reported that OMB and selected agencies held multiple TechStats, but additional OMB oversight was needed to ensure that these meetings were having the appropriate impact on underperforming projects and that resulting cost savings were valid. As of October 28, 2015, OMB had only held one TechStat. bodies, and the general public to hold the government agencies accountable for results and progress. Among other things, agencies are to submit ratings from their Chief Information Officers (CIO), which, according to OMB’s instructions, should reflect the level of risk facing an investment. To do so, each agency CIO is to assess his or her IT investments against a set of six pre-established evaluation factors identified by OMB and then assign a rating of 1 (high risk and red) to 5 (low risk and green) OMB guidance called for agencies to develop an operational analysis policy and perform such analyses annually. DHS plans to perform the analysis on the investment in August 2017. Performing the analysis once the investment is operational will enable DHS to determine whether it is meeting the needs of the agency and delivering the expected value. Until agencies ensure that their O&M investments are fully reviewed, the report recommends that agencies develop operational analysis policies, annually perform operational analyses on all investments, and ensure only become operational in October 2015. Of the top 10 investments with the largest spending in O&M, only the DHS investment underwent an operational analysis. The remaining agencies did not assess their investments, which accounted for $7.4 billion. Agency officials cited several reasons for not doing so, including relying on budget submission and related management reviews that measure performance. OMB has noted that these are not a substitute for an Operational Analysis of Spending (OMB) of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) DHS officials attributed this to the department still being in the process of implementing its new operational analysis policy. OMB has developed guidance that calls for agencies to develop an operational analysis policy for examining the ongoing performance of existing legacy IT investments. OMB issued guidance in August 2012 directing agencies to report operational analysis results along with their fiscal year 2014 budget submission documentation (e.g., exhibit 300) to OMB. The strategy calls for migrating to a shared environment, as described in the strategy, include software licenses, e-mail systems, and human resource systems. We have previously reported on legacy IT and the need for the government to improve its oversight of such investments. provisioned IT services to rise, thus reducing the percent of spending on non- provisioned IT. This official also stated that OMB has not identified a specific goal for the measure because it would be ever changing. While goals for performance measures may change over time, it is still important for OMB to set a target by which agencies can measure their progress in meeting this measure. Without links to outcomes and goals, organizations are not able to effectively measure progress toward those goals, the official said. OMB’s 25-Point IT Reform Plan included a “Cloud First’ policy that required each agency CIO to implement cloud-based solutions whenever a secure, reliable, and cost-effective cloud option exists. In February 2011, OMB issued the Federal Cloud Computing Strategy, which provided definitions of cloud computing services. In April 2016, we reported, among other things, that we had identified 10 key practices that if included in cloud service agreements can help agencies ensure services are performed effectively, efficiently and securely. investments as O&M because they attract less oversight, require reduced documentation, and have a lower risk of losing funding. OMB encourages agencies to adopt provisioned IT services, such as cloud computing and shared services, to make IT more efficient and agile, and enable innovation. It provides an approach for agencies to implement cloud-based solutions whenever a secure, reliable, and cost-effective cloud option exists and to use shared services for IT service delivery in order to increase return on investment, eliminate waste and duplication. of legacy systems. OMB has implemented a series of initiatives to improve the oversight of underperforming investments and more effectively manage IT. These efforts include the following: IT Dashboard. The recently-enacted statutory requirements promoting IT acquisition reform, as well as implementing our previous recommendations. In the last 6 years, we have made approximately 800 recommendations to OMB and multiple agencies to improve effective and efficient investment in IT. As of October 2015, about 32 percent of these recommendations had been implemented. OMB include all 10 key practices in future guidance. PortfolioStat initiative requires agencies to conduct an annual, agency-wide IT portfolio review. In 2013 and 2015 we reported that agencies had the potential to save at least $3.8 billion through this initiative. However, we noted that weaknesses existed in agencies’ implementation of the initiative; therefore, we made more than 60 recommendations to OMB and OMB made all 10 recommendations to agencies in a letter to the agency on Monday. In May 2012, OMB released its Federal IT Shared Services Strategy. The strategy requires agencies to use shared services for IT service delivery. OMB partially agreed with our recommendations, and responses from 21 of the agencies varied, with some agreeing and others not. We made more than 60 recommendations to OMB and agencies to help agencies migrate to a shared IT system. The recommendations were based on a review of OMB's strategy and the responses of 21 agencies from May 2012 to May 2013. For more information, visit OMB’s website. We selected one system or investment per agency using the following factors: investment type (major or non-major), system or Investment age, and risk level as of November 2015. We also reviewed agency documentation and interviewed agency officials on those profiled systems or investments. To assess the reliability of the OMB budget data and IT Dashboard data, we reviewed related related documents and interviewed related officials. We sought to have a mix of systems and investments that included both major and non- major investment types; a range of ages; and aRange of risk ratings. OMB budget data and IT Dashboard data, we reviewed related documentation. We corroborated with each agency that the data downloaded were accurate and reflected the data it had reported to OMB. We determined that the budget and ITDashboard data were reliable for our purposes of reporting IT O&M spending and related information. We conducted this performance audit from April 2015 to May 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit, and we conducted the audit. GAO review included the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and the 26 agencies that report to OMB’s IT Dashboard. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix XIV. Our objectives were to assess the extent to which federal agencies have invested in operating and maintaining existing information technology (IT) and assess the age and obsolescence of federal IT. For all three objectives, to identify ways in which agencies.effectively manage IT. incomplete information on IT investments, OMB increases the risk of not fulfilling its oversight responsibilities. We recommended that Energy and Commerce appropriately categorize their IT investments. Both agencies disagreed. A policy analyst within OMB’s Office of E-Government and Information Technology expressed concern when agencies, or their bureaus, spend a low percentage of their IT funds on DME. The analyst further stated that this could indicate that the agency's maintenance costs are reducing its flexibility and ability to innovate. OMB uses several data collection mechanisms to oversee federal IT spending. Agencies are required to provide information on each major investment’s cost, schedule, and performance. The purpose of the IT portfolio summary is to identify all IT investments and their associated costs within a federal organization. This information is designed, in part, to help OMB better understand what agencies are spending on IT investments. OMB directs agencies to break down IT spending into major and minor projects, as well as smaller projects. Congress has enacted several laws to assist agencies and the federal government in managing IT investments. The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996 requires OMB to establish processes to analyze, track, and evaluate the risks and results of major capital investments in information systems. Most recently, in December 2014, Congress enacted IT acquisition reform legislation (commonly referred to as the Federal Information Technology Act of 2014) The bill requires agencies to report to Congress on the net program performance benefits achieved as a result of these investments. Department of Commerce (Commerce) reduced spending by approximately $110 million. Commerce attributed it to the reclassification of satellite ground systems from its IT portfolio. We disagreed with these reclassifications, and reported that they run contrary to the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996. Further, we reported that by gathering incomplete information on IT investments, OMB increases the risk of mismanaging IT investments. The report was published in the online edition of the magazine, ‘The Next Web’. Energy partially concurred with our recommendation to address obsolete IT investments. Since OMB’s draft guidance has not yet been issued, Energy could not concur with this part of the recommendation, but plans to review and consider implementation of such guidance. HHS said it is working to identify and plan to modernize or replace IT systems. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. The report is available in full in appendix VII and VIII, and in its entirety in appendix IX. identify and plan to modernize or replace legacy systems as needed and consistent with OMB’s draft guidance. Eight agencies (USDA, Commerce, HHS, DHS, State, Transportation, VA, and SSA) and OMB agreed with our recommendations, Defense and Energy partially agreed, and Justice and the Treasury stated they had no comment on the recommendations. In comments provided via e-mail on our report, the other 12 agencies agreed with the recommendations, but not all of them. State agreed with the recommendation and noted that it is currently awaiting final modernization guidance from OMB. Upon publication of OMB’s guidance, it plans to work with OMB to develop detailed plans for modernization. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In comments provided, State stated that it had no comment on the recommendation but plans to follow OMB's guidance once it is formally issued. The comments are reprinted in appendix XI of the report. In comments provided via e-mail on May 12, 2016, an official from OMB’s Office of E-Government and Technology stated that it concurred with our recommendations. The agency also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In written comments, Commerce concurring with both of its recommendations. Regarding the recommendation that the department ensure that required analyses are performed on investments in the O&M, Commerce agreed with our recommendation. We have incorporated these comments into the report.in more detail below. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In written comments, DHS stated that it concurred with its recommendation and that the department plans to establish a framework for identifying and replacing or modernizing legacy systems after receipt of the finalized guidance. DHS’s comments are reprinted in appendix X. In comments provided via e-mail on May 11, 2016, an official from Justice's audit liaison group, speaking on behalf of the department, said it had no comment. have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In written comments, VA concurred with our recommendation and stated that it launched a new office in April 2016 that will provide lifecycle management oversight for portfolios of systems. In comments provided via e-mail on May 6, 2016, an official from Transportation’s Office of the Secretary stated that the department concurring with the draft findings and recommendations and had no additional comments on the report. On May 12, 2015, a Treasury official said the department had no comment on the draft report. the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Energy, Health and Human Services, Homeland Security, State, the Treasury, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs; the U.S. Attorney General of the Department of Justice; the Commissioner of the Social Security Administration; the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and other interested parties. This report will also be available at no charge on our website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions on matters discussed in this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9286. OMB has created draft guidance that will require agencies to identify and prioritize legacy information systems that are in need of replacement. Agencies are, in part, maintaining obsolete investments because they are not required to identify, evaluate, and prioritize their O&M investments to determine whether they should be kept as-is, modernized, replaced, or retired. To monitor whether existing investments are meeting the needs of their agencies, OMB staff recommend that the Director of OMB identify and publish a specific goal associated with its non-provisioned spending measure. that the agencies did not provide specificity on time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. Further, there were no plans to replace or modernize 1 investment. The profiles of these systems and investments are summarized in table 7 and can be found in appendix V. We have previously provided guidance that organizations should periodically identify, evaluate, and prioritize their investments, including those that are in O&M; at, near, or exceeding their planned life cycles; and/or are based on technology that is now obsolete. that required analyses are performed on investments in the O&M phase, the department concurred and stated that it will reiterate and expand the department’s existing policies requiring such analyses. The department also concurred with the recommendation to identify and plan to modernize or replace legacy systems and stated it is already appropriately replacing and modernizing systems as needed within budget constraints. The Department of Commerce provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In written comments, Defense partially concurring with our recommendation to address obsolete IT investments in need. The draft guidance includes time frames for the efforts regarding developing criteria, identifying and prioritizing systems, and planning for modernization. OMB did not commit to a firm time frame for when the policy would be issued. The department has modernized, upgraded, or retired hundreds of systems in the last several years through an investment review process. Defense’s plan to be consistent with OMB’S guidance to the extent practicable is consistent with the intent of our recommendation, the department said. cost overruns and schedule slippages while contributing little to mission-related outcomes. The federal government has spent billions of dollars on failed and poorly performing IT investments. In February 2015, we introduced a new government-wide high-risk area, Improving the Management of IT Acquisitions and Operations. This area highlights several critical IT initiatives underway, including reviews of troubled projects, an emphasis on incremental development, a key transparency website, data center consolidation, and the O&M of legacy systems. In April 2016, the IT Modernization Act was introduced into the U.S. House of Representatives. If enacted, it would establish a revolving fund of $3 billion that could be used to retire, replace, or upgrade legacy IT systems to transition to new, more secure, efficient, modern IT systems. It also would establish processes to evaluate proposals for modernization submitted by agencies and monitor.issued. The federal government runs the risk of continuing to maintain investments that have outlived their effectiveness and are consuming resources. agencies ensure that their O&M investments are fully reviewed. The government’s oversight of old and vulnerable investments will be impaired and the associated spending could be wasteful. Several agencies, such as the Department of Justice (Justice), DHS, HHS, Treasury, USDA, and VA, reported using Common Business Oriented Language (COBOL)—a programming language developed in the late 1950s and early 1960s. It is widely known that agencies need to move to COBOL.  legacy systems may become increasingly more expensive as agencies have to deal with the previously mentioned issues. Agencies may pay a premium to hire staff or contractors with the knowledge to maintain outdated systems. One agency (SSA) reported re-hiring retired employees to maintain its COBOL systems. Selected agencies reported that they continue to maintain old investments in O&M. For example, Treasury reported systems that were about 56 years old. Table 6 shows the 10 oldest investments and/or systems, as reported by selected agencies. that will provide lifecycle management oversight for portfolios of systems. In written comments, SSA stated that it agreed with our recommendation and that it has already initiated numerous activities to modernize or replace legacy systems. SSA’s comments are reprinted in appendix XIII. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees; the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Energy, Health and Human, and the Department of Justice. The report is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-government-secretaries-top-stories. It is widely known that agencies need to move to more modern, maintainable languages. In addition, some legacy systems may use parts that are obsolete and more difficult to find. For instance, Defense is still using 8-inch floppy disks in a legacy system that coordinates the operational functions of the United States’ nuclear forces. For example, the Gartner Group, a leading IT research and advisory company, has reported that organizations using COBOL should consider replacing the language and in 2010 noted that there should be a shift in focus to using more modern languages for new products. whether existing investments are meeting the needs of their agencies. The Secretaries of Commerce and the Treasury direct the respective agency CIO to ensure that required analyses are performed on investments in the operations and maintenance phase. The Secretary of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Energy, Health and Human Services, Homeland Security, State, the Treasury, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs; the Attorney General; and the Commissioner of Social Security should identify and plan to modernize or replace legacy systems as well as obsolete IT investments. agency chief information officer (CIO) We reviewed agency documentation such as TechStat documentation and operational analyses that had been performed on the investments, as available. In addition, we interviewed agency officials to determine plans for replacing or modernizing the investments. We also requested that agencies provide a list of their three oldest systems. In some cases, agencies reported that they do not track their oldest systems, and that they have no plans to replace or modernize any of the oldest systems that are still in use. Departmental Offices IT Infrastructure Mainframes and Servers Services and Support, and Treasury’s IT Infrastructure End User Systems and Support. National Weather Service (the responsible bureau) reviews the status of the previous month's activities for the development, integration, modification, and procurement to report issues to management. The Integrated Fixed Towers Program Manager stated that since the investment had only become operational in October 2015, an operational analysis was not required for the project. The Department of Commerce does not include all of the key elements of an operationalAnalysis. In some cases, agencies reported that they do not track the ages of individual systems. In those cases, we requested that the agencies provide their three oldest IT investments. Agencies noted that these systems and investments may have components that are newer than their operational age. We selected one system or investment per agency using a combination of factors including investment type (major or non-major), system and investment. We then interviewed agency officials to confirm percent of their IT funds on development, modernization, and enhancement in fiscal year 2015. plans to modernize or replace each of these investments and systems. The plans for five of those were general or tentative in that the agencies did not provide specific time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. Separately, we profiled one system or investment from each of the 12 selected agencies. The selected systems and investments range from 11 to approximately 56 years old, and serve a variety of purposes. For a full list of the agencies’ reported oldest systems, see appendix IV. example, Treasury’s Individual Master File was first initiated about 56 years ago. Of the 12 investments or systems, agencies had plans to replace or modernize 11 of these. However, the plans for 3 of those were general or tentative in that the agencies did not provide specificity on time frames, the report said. The report also looked at the impact of changes on the federal government’S ability to track and respond to hazardous materials incidents in the U.S. and abroad. The DVIS interface software, PowerBuilder, is no longer supported by the vendor. According to State officials, the main challenges in maintaining DVIS’s aging technology are related to information security and infrastructure concerns. In 2013, State initiated an effort to replace numerous legacy systems, including DVIS. As a part of this effort, State plans to replace DVIS with ConsularOne at an unknown time. The project is expected to cost about $2.4 million over its life-cycle. State plans to replace DVIS’s functionality with a project called ConsularOne. The replacement effort is to begin in October 2018 and they plan to retire DVIS when appropriate. In the meantime, the department plans to upgrade the unsupported software to a new version, which is also not supported. Department of Transportation—Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration Number of users: 250 federal users, 547,000 active hazardous materials facilities, 10,000 pipeline operators, and several million potential facilities. Investment anticipated end date: 2018 Fiscal year. Diversity Visa Information System (DVIS) is an electronic case management system used by approximately 30 federal employees and contractor staff working at the Department of State’s (State) Kentucky Consular Center. DVIS is used to track and validate application information submitted by foreign nationals under the Diversity Visa immigration program. System start date: early 1990s Age: Approximately 26 years System anticipated end date: 2020. Fiscal year 2016 funding: about $164,000. Total funding for DVIS: $1.2 billion. and use a relational database and both COBOL and Java programming languages. The bureau has plans for updating the user interface and integrating the data through September 2016. According to agency officials, there are no plans to replace Sentry, as the system is the main system used by the bureau. Department of Defense—Air Force Number of users: 175 users across command functions for intercontinental ballistic missiles, bombers, tankers, munitions sites, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance platforms. Fiscal year 2016 funding: $5.6 million Total estimated life-cycle costs: $135 million through The Strategic Automated Command and Control System is the Department of Defense’s (Defense) dedicated high-speed data transmission, processing, and display system. The system coordinates the operational functions of the United States’ nuclear forces, such as intercontinental ballistic missiles, nuclear bombers, and tanker support aircrafts, among others. Defense is initiating a $60 million full system replacement which is scheduled to be completed in fiscal year 2020. For those in the nuclear command area, the system is also used by the U.S. Air Force. Bureau of Prisons Sentry is a real-time information system comprised of various modules that are to enable the agency to maintain proper custody. The system has a life-cycle cost of $571.5 million. Plans for retirement or modernization: Plans to update the user interface and integrate system data through September 2016. There are no plans for continuous modernization of the Sentry system, which has been in place since 1981. The agency has a budget of $40.4 million for fiscal year 2016. The Department of Transportation’s (DOT) Hazardous Materials Information System maintains and provides access to comprehensive information on hazardous materials incidents. The system consists of five modules that register carriers. Developing a new system to replace legacy modules, and plan to retire the legacy modules by the end of fiscal year 2018. In fiscal year 2016, the DOT spent $6.7 million to develop the system and $38.0 million to fund its development and operations. In Fiscal year 2015, the department spent $8.3 million on the system's development and maintenance. The new system’s modules are intended to be integrated, automated, and improve efficiency, effectiveness, and data quality. While DOT does not have dates for when individual legacy modules will be retired, officials stated that they plan to have all the legacy modules retired by the end of fiscal year 2018. Further, the unsupported application is planned to be eliminated. The new system is expected to be fully operational by 2019. It is intended to replace the current system, which has been in use since the 1960s. is currently planning to complete parts of this phase well into 2020. As a result, the agency will continue to maintain two separate systems until the replacement is complete. Fiscal year 2016 funding: $6.7 million. Total estimated life-cycle costs (through fiscal year 2017): $99.6 million. Operations and maintenance costs: $79.0 million. Plans for retirement or modernization: The agency has general plans to continuously update the system. The agency plans to continue updating the system until the end of the next decade. to continuously update the system, but they too are contingent on receiving funding. The agency plans to retire the system in fiscal year 2017 and replace it with a new system. The system is used by thousands of users across the federal, state, and local levels, in addition to those in the international and academic communities. It has a life-cycle cost of $282.8 million and is expected to be replaced by a new, state-of-the-art system by the end of 2017. U.S. Department of Homeland Security will continue to maintain and use the system. There is no projected end of life date, and they plan to continue to use it. The last allowed the retirement of 16 associated legacy applications in 2011 and retired two mainframe systems. The system is used by 14,000 Coast Guard users and also services the Transportation Security Administration and the National Transportation Safety Board. It is estimated to cost $543.2 million over its life-cycle. It was built in 1998 and has been in use since. Services general public, 1,300+ field offices with 50,000 to 60,000 employees. System start date: 1985 Age: 31 years Investment anticipated end date: None Fiscal year 2016 funding: $9.6 million Total estimated life-cycle costs (through fiscal year 2017): $519.8 million Development costs: $235.7 million Operations and maintenance costs: £284.1 million Plans for retirement or modernization: Agency has ongoing modernization efforts. The Social Security Administration’s (SSA) Title II investment includes the Title II system which determines retirement benefits eligibility and amounts. IMF was written in an outdated assembly language code and operates on a 2010 IBM z196/2817-m32 mainframe. This has resulted in difficulty delivering technical capabilities addressing identify theft and refund fraud, among other things. IRS plans to address these issues by replacing IMF with the Customer Account Data Engine 2 (CADE 2) IMF will be re-engineered by applying modern programming languages, establishing CADE 2 as the authoritative data source, and implementing functionality to address the IRS financial material weakness. The Internal Revenue Service’s (IRS), Individual Master File (IMF) is the authoritative data source for individual taxpayer accounts. Within IMF, accounts are updated, taxes are assessed, and refunds are generated as required during each tax filing period. IMF was written in an outdated assembly. Will be replaced by Customer Account Data Engine 2 at an unknown date. 2016 funding: $13.6 million Total estimated life-cycle costs: $135.4 million Development Costs: $38.8 million Operations and maintenance costs:  $96.6million When Sentry was first deployed over 30 years ago, it was comprised of approximately 700 program routines written in COBOL. It became increasingly more difficult and expensive to maintain complex, highly-customized systems written in older programming languages. Sentry is used to process inmates at all phases of incarceration, including release, transfer, and sentence computation. It provides information regarding security and custody levels, inmate program and work assignments, and other pertinent information about the inmate population. The bureau migrated the older database, merged the legacy data into the newer database platform, and modified theCOBOL programs to ensure compatibility with the new software and database. In 2013, the agency upgraded its hardware and software to Power7 IBM servers and Unix operating systems. NWSTG still lacks full backup capability for 26 percent of its functions. In fiscal year 2013, a major rearchitecture and redesign effort began which, according to Department of Commerce officials, will result in a new system in 2014. The new system will affect a wide range of economic and emergency management decisions, officials say. The system will also be used to support future data volume collection and dissemination. Began which, according to Department of Commerce officials, will result in an entirely new dissemination architecture. Will replace the NWSTG with an integrated system that is more capable, more reliable, and have 100 percent backup capability. The PAID system automates time and attendance for employees, timekeepers, payroll, and supervisors in the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) The PAIDs software has three major modules: Time and Attendance, Employee, and Payroll. According to officials, a detailed project plan to rearchitecture NWstG is now being carried out and is scheduled to replace theNWSTG in early fiscal year 2017. year 2017 and replace it with a new system. The National Weather Service Telecommunication Gateway (NWSTG) system is operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. It is the nation’s hub for the collection and distribution of weather data and products and provides national and global real-time exchange services. Thousands of customers worldwide use data distributed by the NWSTG and these data affect a wide range of economic and emergency management decisions. For more information, visit the Weather Service's website. that coordinates the operational functions of the United States’ nuclear forces. Further, in some cases, the vendors no longer provide support for hardware or software, creating security vulnerabilities and additional costs. For example, each of the 12 selected agencies reported using unsupported operating systems and components in their fiscal year 2014 reports. Commerce, Defense, DOT, HHS, and VA reported using 1980s and 1990s Microsoft operating systems that stopped being supported by the vendor more than a decade ago. Lastly, legacy systems may become increasingly more expensive as The system is made up of technologies and equipment that are at the end of their useful lives. For those in the nuclear command area, the system’s primary function is to send and receive emergency action messages to nuclear forces. Replacement parts for the system are difficult to find because it is written in assembly language code. It also uses 8-inch floppy disks, which are a 1970s-era storage device; and assembly programming code typically used in mainframes.among others. The system is still running on an IBM Series/1 Computer, which is a 70s computing system. Replacement parts for the system are difficult to find because they are now obsolete. As of March 2016, Defense is initiating a $60 million full system replacement which is scheduled to be completed in fiscal year 2020. There is a plan underway to replace the floppy disks with secure digital cards. This effort is underway and is expected to be complete in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2017. Social Security Administration Number of users: Services general public, 1,300+ field offices with 50,000 to 60,000. The system runs on a Solaris 10 operating system, last updated in February 2016. It uses commercial off-the-shelf systems for case management and reporting. The system is to provide the capability to report on appeals data and enable more accurate and expedient responses to Congressional questions. The agency has general plans to continuously update the system. It is to facilitate maintenance and transfer of case specific data with regard to Medicare appeals through multiple levels of the appeal process. It was designed to provide more accurate, expedient and timely responses to congressional questions. The system has faced challenges due to the rapid growth in appeals processed each year, expanded use of settlements, and the increased interest in appeals data. This has resulted in an increased need for infrastructure changes, such as more storage, licenses, and processing capacity. Agency officials stated that they do not have any plans to address these gaps and that doing so is contingent on funding. They also noted general plans to continuously update the system, but they too are contingent on funds. The system is still supported by the vendors. The system consists of five modules that register carriers and shippers, document incidents involving hazardous materials and issue special permits. Officials from Pipeline and Hazardous Material Safety’s Office of the Chief Information Officer stated that software applications and processes used by the system have become outdated and costly to maintain. For example, the system uses Microsoft.NET and Classic Active Server Pages. Officials stated that costs have increased due to maintaining the personnel with the knowledge to use these older applications. In particular, the costly applications include those for scanning, officials said. The system uses Kofax Indicius software to perform optical character recognition on scanned hazardous materials incident reports. The software was no longer supported by the vendor, as of December 2014. DOT is in the process of updating the functions performed by the system. The new system’s modules are intended to be fully integrated and fully available by the end of the year. The system is not available to the public at this time, but DOT is working on a software update that will make the system available for the public. SSA does not have plans to retire the Title II system. Rather, the agency plans to continue to eliminate and replace Title II’s older and more costly subsystems. SSA officials stated that most of the employees who developed these systems are ready to retire and the agency will lose their collective knowledge. Officials further stated that training new employees to maintain the older systems takes a lot of time.the volume of data needed. In addition, SSA currently is planning to retire four Title II subsystems, including a claims control system, and one that processes changes in earnings transactions. SSA has rehired retirees to work on the legacy systems. SSA has other efforts to modernize or consolidate Title II systems, such as its database management systems.and one that processes changes in earnings transactions. In addition to the contact name above, individuals making contributions to this report included Gary Mountjoy, Kevin Walsh, Scott Borre, Rebecca Eyler, Bradley Roach, Tina Torabi, and Jessica Waselkow. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. SSA officials: Title II investment accomplished its goal to improve service delivery by eliminating antiquated Title II programs. Title II is comprised of 162 subsystems and some are still written in COBOL. These systems were also built in a compartmentalized structure by SSA, rather than contractors, because the agency determined that there were not commercial programs that could satisfy the agency’s business needs and the volume of data needed. SSA officials stated that most of the smaller IT improvement initiatives and projects. The Core Accounting System (CAS) Suite is the primary financial management system for the U.S. Coast Guard. CAS is a set of several applications that assist the agencies in several areas, including accounts receivable, accounts payable, purchasing, asset management, procurement, and document imaging and processing. According to the investment’s operational analysis document, CAS is expected to be retired or modernization in fiscal year 2018. The agency plans to transition to federal shared services in fiscalyear 2018. The agencies agreed to a staggered transition of these services, with DNDO transitioning in fiscal year 2016, TSA in 2017, and USCG in 2018. Until the migration is complete and CAS can be decommissioned, USCG plans to resolve emergent issues and maintain applications. In the meantime, due to the costs associated with implementing a full fix and the impending transition to shared services,. USCG has accepted the security risks and will continue to use CAS until the transition is complete. The transition will take place in fiscal years 2016-17 and 2017-18. CAS uses a version of Oracle Federal Financials software that was first available in 2004. The extended vendor support for the software ended in November 2013. The agency plans to pursue using other shared services to provide its financial management services and, therefore, began the Financial Management Service Improvement Initiative to migrate the services.and processing. It relies on Windows 2003 servers and any changes would require recoding of many functions within the CAS suite. It also relies on Microsoft Office 365 and Microsoft Office 2010 software. The U.S Forest Service’s Resource Ordering and Status System (ROSS) is used to mobilize and deploy a multitude of resources to fight wildland fires. The system supports the basic needs of the first responders and support personnel at an incident location by processing orders and replenishing supplies. According to the Forest Service, the technology used by ROSS is on the verge of technical obsolescence. One of the applications ROSS uses is no longer supported by the vendor, creating vulnerability issues. supported by the vendor, creating vulnerability issues. In order to use the system, users must download client software onto their local computers, as opposed to accessing the system through the web. In September 2015, the U.S. Forest Service issued a request for information for services to develop ROSS’s replacement. Agency officials estimated that this effort will cost $14 million through fiscal year 2019 and the solution will go live in 2018. Bureau of Justice—Bureau of Prisons Number of users: 38,000. PAID software has three major modules: Time and Attendance, Employee Master Record Downloads, and Education Tracking. System start date: 1963 Age: 53 years System anticipated end date: 2017 Fiscal year 2016 funding: $6.7 million Total estimated life-cycle costs: n/a, not tracked by system. Plans for retirement or modernization: The system will mostly be replaced by the Human Resources Information System Shared Service Center, which will consolidate several IT services to provide a single IT service. PAID is a 50-year old COBOL-based system at the end of its life span. The system runs on IBM mainframes and uses an IBM database. Officials stated the system is not user friendly and requires extensive training in order to use the system successfully. VA officials stated that PAID is intended to be mostly replaced by Human Resources Information System Shared Service Center in 2017.Service Center, which will consolidate several IT services to provide core human resources- related functions. The cost of maintaining the personnel to manage theSystem is high. Human Resources Information System Shared Service Center in 2017 is to consolidate human resources IT functions and services. However, the target solution is experiencing cost overruns of $14.8 million and VA officials stated that they will not be able to replace all of PAID’s functions. The agency is currently working on a transition plan and will determine whether VA should find another solution for the missing functionality or continue to keep PAID running indefinitely. The U.S. Department of Agriculture”s (USDA) U.s. Forest Service’S Resource Ordering and Status System is being replaced by PAID. factors including investment type (major or non-major), system or investment age, and risk level as of November 2015. The Contractor Business Financial and Administrative Systems investment is intended to provide business and administrative systems for the Department of Energy’s (Energy) Savannah River Site. The site security contractor to manage human resources (including payroll, benefits, and retirement for 13,000 employees and pensioners) is also part of the investment. In particular, we sought to have a mix of systems and investments that included both major and non- major investment types, a range of ages, and aRange of risk ratings. The investment is a commercial off-the-shelf system that runs on Windows and Unix servers using Oracle’s PeopleSoft applications. According to an agency official in Savannah River Operations, the vendors still support all of the hardware and software used by this investment. The agency is not currently planning future modernization activity because the investment has gone through several updates in the past, with the last allowing the retirement of 13,000 employees and pensioners. The investment uses the PeopleSoft Supply Chain Management and PeopleSoft Financials modules.