The Corps provides funding to USGS to operate stream gauges that provide data for the Corps’ water planning and management activities. This data is also available for use by all federal and state agencies, as well as others interested in water information. Reclamation policy officials told us, in response to a SECURE Water Act requirement to consult with federal and. state agencies. The data is used to produce the climate change information upon which the Corps bases its adaptation planning. The Corps has a formal agreement to provide $18 million in fiscal year 2013 according to Corps officials. a SECURE Water Act requirement to consult with federal and applicable state agencies to develop a monitoring plan for acquiring and maintaining water resources information. Reclamation staff are currently identifying information needs and plans to work collaboratively with data collecting agencies, including NOAA, USGS, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture, to develop the plan. The Basin Study Program activities, including the WWCRAs and Basin Studies, are also contributing to the planning effort by providing valuable information about how the agency’s monitoring needs are changing as a result of climate change. change, and they will be included in future reports that are due to Congress every 5 years. Reclamation is partnering with nonfederal entities to conduct focused assessments, known as Basin Studies, to identify specific water resources vulnerabilities. As of September 2013, 3 Basin Studies have been completed, and an additional 14 studies have been funded and are under way in western states. All three of Reclamation’s completed Basin Studies projected climate change to result in warming and changes in precipitation. The agencies plan to continue such collaborative approaches going forward. it established to meet the requirements of the SECURE Water Act. Reclamation reported to Congress in 2011 its assessments of the potential effects of climate change on water supplies in the major river basins in the West. According to agency officials, Reclamation is now conducting WWCRAs that focus on future water demand and will combine this information with its water supply assessments. These combined assessments will be included in Reclamation’s next SECURES Water Act report that is due in 2016. These assessments will also be updated based on the latest climate science. Law requires Reclamation to analyze extent to which changes in water supply will impact several areas. Reclamation’s ability to deliver water to its customers, hydroelectric power generation, fish and wildlife habitat, and recreation. Law also requires it to assess specific risks to the water supply of each of its major river basins, including risks related to, among other things, changes in snow cover and changes in ice levels. The law also requires the agency to develop strategies to address potential water shortages and other impacts. To address projected imbalances in supply and demand, the studies are to identify adaptation strategies. As of September 2013, 3 Basin Studies have been completed, and an additional 14 studies have been funded and are under way. Some studies entirely cover the major Basin Study in 2012, while other studies cover subbasins or tributaries within the boundaries of the major river basins. Reclamation officials told us they next intend to initiate feasibility studies for adaptation strategies identified in completed Basin Studies by making funds available to nonfederal partners. address projected water supply and demand imbalances. The study noted that the purpose of identifying these strategies was not to select a single, best strategy. Each approach has positive and negative implications that should be considered in future planning efforts. Agency officials and study participants told us that Reclamation has formed workgroups to further refine the strategies and identify options that should then be evaluated through feasibility studies. In contrast, the Yakima River Basin Study identified a more specific set of strategies that could be used in the future. Policy officials, as well as basin stakeholders representing environmental and tribal interests, told us that the Basin Studies represent Reclamation’s first concerted efforts at holistic planning in the river basins. A state water manager told us a prior river basin planning effort had largely been unsuccessful due to the lack of involvement or opposition. Several stakeholders commended Reclamation for working to ensure that the views of a wide range of people were taken into account in the planning process. The basin studies are expected to be completed by the end of the year. working to ensure that the views of a wide range of stakeholders, including environmental and tribal interests, were considered in the Basin Studies. In addition to the individual named above, Elizabeth Erdmann, Assistant Director; Brad Dobbins; Richard Johnson; Mick Ray; Jeanette Soares; Lorelei St. James; and Sarah E. Veale made key contributions to this report. Nirmal Chaudhary, John Delicath, Cindy Gilbert, and Armetha Liles provided additional technical assistance. Most of Reclamation’s water infrastructure facilities are more than 50 years old. Federal funding over the past 20 years has consistently been inadequate to maintain the Corps’ infrastructure at acceptable levels of performance and efficiency, according to a 2011 Congressional Research Service report. With limited budgetary resources and aging infrastructure, Reclamation's maintenance and rehabilitation is a high priority, the report says. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is responsible for maintaining the nation's water resources infrastructure. The Corps has been in existence since the Civilian Conservation Corps was formed in 1864. report, with limited budgetary resources and aging infrastructure, Reclamation’s maintenance needs are likely to increase, as is competition for limited funding. Despite the ongoing challenges of operating and maintaining aging infrastructure under budgetary constraints, it is important that the Corps and Reclamation address the challenge of managing climate change risk in order to limit the fiscal exposure of the federal government. climate change poses a significant financial risk to theFederal government, including, but not limited to its role as the owner or operator of extensive infrastructure. operator of extensive infrastructure vulnerable to climate impacts. State and local authorities are responsible for planning and implementing many types of infrastructure projects. While implementing adaptive strategies to protect infrastructure may be costly, there is a growing recognition that the cost of inaction could be greater. As stated in a 2010 National Research Council report, increasing the nation’s infrastructure is a priority for the U.S. government. It will be difficult to manage given expected budget pressures, which will constrain not just ad hoc responses, but other federal programs. The Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) provides water to over 31 million people and irrigation water to one out of five western farmers on 10 million acres of farm land. Reclamation is also the second largest producer of hydropower in the United States. According to agency records, Reclamation has an estimated value of approximately $164 billion. The agency is organized into five regions to carry out its mission and operations, as shown in figure 1. The U.S. produces 60 percent of the nation's vegetables and one-quarter of its fresh fruit and nut crops. into five regions, as shown in figure 1. According to agency records as of 2011, Reclamation’s asset inventory includes 476 dams and dikes, creating 337 reservoirs with a total storage capacity of 245 million acre-feet of water. Reclamation also includes 53 hydroelectric power plants that it owns and operates. These plants provide an average of more than 40 megawatt hours of energy per year. In 2011, the agency estimated that the replacement value of its assets was approximately $90 billion. Division and district geographic boundaries are generally aligned with watershed boundaries. The Corps’ Civil Works Program is implemented through nine business areas that represent the diversity of the nation’s water resource management needs as follows: Navigation, Environment, Recreation, Flood and Coastal Storm Damage Reduction, Hydropower, Regulatory, Emergency Management, and Recreational and educational opportunities.as shown in figure 1. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is responsible for managing the nation's water resources for navigation, environment, flood and coastal storm damage reduction, and recreation. As of September 2012, the Corps' inventory includes 702 reservoirs and 75 hydropower facilities. The Corps has constructed and continues to operate, maintain, and rehabilitate a wide variety of water management infrastructure. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers provides leadership, strategic planning and performance measurement in four business areas: Water Supply, Recreation, Emergency Management and Executive Direction and Management. It also provides training, support and equipment for the military, law enforcement, fire and emergency services, among other things. facilities with 353 generating units that produce hydroelectric power for homes, businesses, and communities. In 2012, the National Research Council reported that the Corps’ infrastructure had an estimated value of approximately $164 billion. For flood reduction, the Corps inventory includes 14,501 miles of levee systems. For recreation, the inventory includes 54,879 miles of lakeshore and recreation areas that support 370 million annual visitors, 270,000 jobs, and $16 billion of economic activity. related to, among other things, changes in snow cover and the timing and quantity of runoff. Reclamation’s climate adaptation efforts fall within the larger effort by Interior to implement Executive Order 13514. In 2013, Interior adopted a policy directing the agency to integrate climate change adaptation strategies into its operations, policies, programs, and planning. See appendix I for more information on the Corps’ and Reclamation's efforts to adapt to the changing climate in the U.S. West. For over 230 years, the Corps has led the development and stewardship of much of the nation’s public water resources. The Corps’ Civil Works Program plans and manages water for transportation, recreation, energy, wildlife habitat, aquatic ecosystems, and water supply. It has constructed and continues to operate, maintain, and rehabilitate a wide variety of water management infrastructure, including reservoirs, hydropower facilities, commercial inland waterways, harbors, and levee systems. In June 2011, in response to the implementing instructions for Executive Order 13514,. the Corps established its adaptation policy statement for addressing the effects of climate change. in the Interagency Climate Change Adaptation Task Force (Task Force), which was already developing a strategy for adaptation to climate change. In October 2010, the Task Force delivered a progress report to the President through the Council on Environmental Quality containing overarching policy goals to advance climate adaptation. The Task Force recommended the development of a national action plan to strengthen climate change adaptation for freshwater resources. Based on the work of the Task force, the Council of Environmental Quality was formed in October 2010. The Council ofEnvironmental Quality was established in November 2010. adaptation is an element of the proposed responses to climate change that is gaining more attention. Policymakers are increasingly viewing adaptation as a risk-management strategy to protect vulnerable sectors and communities that might be affected. Climate change adaptation planning frameworks generally consist of four key elements that are reviewed and revised as needed as new information emerges. These four elements are the following: Establish a mandate to address climate change with clearly articulated adaptation goals, objectives, and measures of success toward meeting goals. Assess and understand the risks, vulnerabilities, and opportunities posed by climate change. In 2009, Congress passed the SECURE Water Act, requiring Reclamation to establish a climate change adaptation program. Since 2009, the Corps and Reclamation have taken steps to assess water resource and infrastructure vulnerabilities and develop guidance and strategies for adapting to climate change. Officials from both agencies told us that as they develop the necessary guidance, they plan to implement specific adaptation strategies and share costs with state and local partners. In a 2010 National Research Council report, increasing the nation’s ability to respond to a changing climate can be viewed as an insurance policy against climate change risks. The extent to which limited budgets and existing infrastructure maintenance backlogs will affect the implementation of adaptation strategies remains to be determined. Both agencies have already initiated cost-sharing and resource-leveraging measures. The Corps is conducting pilot studies nationwide to support the development of adaptation guidance and a portfolio of adaptation approaches. Reclamation is conducting Basin Studies—focused assessments within basins to develop strategies to mitigate climate change impacts on water supplies. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is conducting basin studies in the Great Lakes and Mississippi basins. the implementation of practical, nationally consistent, legally justifiable, and cost-effective adaptation strategies. Corps Civil Works officials told us that the pilots conducted to date have been largely focused on informing the development of policy and guidance. Reclamation officials said no structural or operational adaptation strategies have been implemented in response to the agency’s vulnerability assessments. The agency said its efforts to update guidance will be informed by the adaptation strategy feasibility studies as they are completed. The pilots are still in the early stages, officials said. As recommended by the Task Force in 2010, the Corps and Reclamation are taking a phased approach to climate adaptation. Both agencies have also begun integrating what they have learned into their policies and program guidance. The Corps is currently developing guidance for implementing coastal and inland adaptation strategies. Reclamation officials told us they began to incorporate climate change adaptation considerations into its policies and guidance in 2013. The agency’s goal is to create a policy and guidance framework that will support the implementation of practical, nationally consistent, legally justifiable, and cost-effective. Costs with state and local partners. Since 2009, the Corps has broadly assessed how climate change could affect its missions. A phased assessment of the vulnerability of coastal projects is under way. The Corps is conducting 15 pilot studies nationwide to test different approaches to adapting to climate change. Ultimately, the corps plans to combine the coastal and inland assessments into a unified methodology, officials say.. In addition, Corps Civil Works officials told us that they are developing syntheses of literature to provide up-to-date information about regional climate impacts. The Corps is developing and testing a methodology for nationwide, watershed-level vulnerability assessments of its inland missions, operations, programs, and projects. The agency officials expect to complete the first phase of screening assessments in 2013, with more refined assessments to be completed in 2014. The nationwide watershed- level vulnerability assessments will help them make initial screening-level determinations of where adaptation strategies are needed or not needed, and then to prioritize accordingly. The Corps also identified a number of adaptation priorities, including coastal project vulnerability assessments. U.S. Global Change Research Program: Changes in the climate in the United States have altered and will continue to alter the water cycle. Climate-related changes are expected to continue and increase in intensity in some areas of the nation. A 2011 federal interagency review of the potential impacts of climate change on water resources identified four interrelated areas of concern for water resource management. Both agencies are dealing with aging water management infrastructure with limited funding for maintenance and construction. It is uncertain how and to what extent changes in theClimate will affect particular water resources in the future is uncertain. resources identified four interrelated areas of concern for water resource managers. Assuring an adequate water supply for multiple needs, such as drinking water, agriculture, energy production, industrial uses, navigation, and recreation. protecting life, health, and property in the face of risks posed by protecting the quality of freshwater resources. protecting coastal and ocean resources as rising sea levels and changes in storm frequency, intensity, and duration impact coastal infrastructure. Adaptation—defined by the National Research Council as adjustments in natural or human resources.  Basin Studies are to develop long-term projections of water supply and demand that take into account specific climate change risks identified in the SECURE Water Act. The studies will analyze how well existing water and power infrastructure are meeting current demands. The completed Basin Studies also identified, with varying degrees of specificity, possible adaptation strategies to address the projected effects of climate change on water resources. The study concluded that without additional water management actions, a wide range of future imbalances in supply anddemand are plausible. climate change to result in warming and changes in precipitation that will alter the snow cover and runoff that supply water to the river basins. The changes may be difficult to predict with certainty for any particular location and time. For example, the Colorado River Basin study projected that snow cover will decrease in the basin as more precipitation falls as rain, rather than snow, and warmer temperatures cause earlier melting. The study concluded that without additional water management actions, a wide range of water resources will be affected. for water resource managers. For example, the Corps partnered with NOAA’s National Ocean Service to create an online sea level change calculator. According to Corps officials, this collaboration allowed the rapid integration of climate science into engineering guidance for coastal projects. Corps Civil Works officials also told us that collaboration with the Federal Emergency Management Agency contributed to the development of a post-Superstorm Sandy sea level rise tool to help affected communities, residents, and other stakeholders consider risks from future sealevel rise in planning for reconstruction. The Corps-hosted Federal Support Toolbox is now publicly available online. According to Corps Civil Works officials, the website is a “one stop shop” for technical resources to support water management. The website states that the toolbox is an evolving tool. The Corps and NOAA are coleading actions to implement the Task Force recommendation to develop a federal Internet portal to provide current, relevant, and high-quality information on water resources and climate change data applications and tools for assessing the vulnerability of water programs. Corps’ analysis included an assessment of whether the potential effects of climate change on the Corps’ business areas would likely be negative, positive, or a mix of both. Increasing air temperatures may have an effect on glaciers that could negatively impact Corps business areas such as navigation, flood and coastal storm damage reduction, ecosystem restoration, and emergency management. The effect of increasing air temperatures on river ice could have both positive and negative impacts on those same four business areas. As part of the high-level analysis, the Corps also identified a number of other potential impacts. The Corps launched a pilot study with the goals of determining whether tools and data are available for the Corps to provide reliable estimates of future flooding. This pilot study’s results supports the Corps’ effort to design an approximately $1.8 billion flood risk reduction project on the Red River of the North, where flooding has increased in magnitude and frequency since 1942. Corps officials told us that climate data indicated a trend of flooding consistent with climate change projections. In accordance with existing Corps risk analysis guidance, the pilot study leader convened an expert panel to review climate information. participation in other Corps pilots—into the guidance. Corps officials told us that the information developed by the Corps’ climate change adaptation pilots is also contributing to subsequent Corps studies. For example, the climate change and modeling data for a pilot study of sediment impacts to Cochiti Dam and Lake in New Mexico is contributing to ongoing studies in the Albuquerque District. One is the Santa Clara Pueblo Watershed Assessment, which is studying observed climate trends and projected climate changes to address likely future changes to watershed hydrology. The Corps is conducting 15 pilot studies nationwide to test different methods and frameworks for adapting to climate change. The 15 pilots are led by 13 different Corps districts and address project planning, engineering, operations, and maintenance for 6 different Corps business areas. As of September 2013, the Corps has completed 5 of these studies, and 10 others are ongoing. The Corps plans to initiate 1 additional pilot in 2013. According to the Corps’ September 2012 report on its climate change adaptation pilots, each study addresses a central question designed to help the Corps. Research’s COMET Program and the Western Water Assessment to produce training courses for federal and nonfederal resource management professionals. The agencies implemented an online course on incorporating climate change into water resource planning, which was a prerequisite for participating in the first two pilot residence courses. The courses address climate impacts on surface hydrology and on water demand for irrigated crops. According to the program's website, the online course was designed to provide students with water resourceplanning knowledge, while the residence courses were designed to teach students about climate impacts. and tools needed into categories and identified the users’ most pressing needs within each category. USGS and NOAA will jointly prepare the companion documents, incorporating perspectives from other federal and nonfederal representatives of the scientific community. The Corps and Reclamation are coordinating with the data collecting agencies and sharing some costs associated with their efforts. According to the documents, the CCAWWG agencies plan next to prepare two companion documents to identify a scientific strategy for meeting the research needs identified in the two initial documents. management agencies for a specific purpose can be used by the science agencies for alternative objectives. Outside of CCAWWG, as mentioned elsewhere in this report, the agencies have also followed key collaborative practices, such as the Corps leveraging resources to fund maintenance of the USGS’s stream- flow monitoring networks. Reclamation establishing joint strategies with state agencies and others to conduct Basin Studies. We provided a draft of this product for review and comment to the Departments of Defense and the Interior. The Department of Defense provided technical comments that were incorporated, as appropriate. USGS alone has deactivated or discontinued almost 1,700 surface-water stream gauges. Corps Civil Works officials told us that stream gauge data is extremely important, not only to the Corps’ ongoing operations, but also because science agencies use the data to produce the climate change.and sharing some costs associated with their efforts. According to the 2009 CCAWWG study, at the same time as the need for observational data to support climate adaptation is increasing, the observational networks crucial to increasing understanding are shrinking. Under Interior’s 2013 Climate Change Adaptation Policy, Reclamation is to integrate climate change adaptation strategies into its policies and practices. Reclamation has similarly included collaboration as a key element of its adaptation policy, plans, and performance metrics. The Corps and Reclamation have collaborated together and with others in accordance with best practices for collaboration among agencies. For example, in their key collaborative effort, CCAWWG, each agency’S role is well defined; the Corps provides water engineering and management expertise, and their partner agencies provide partner agencies. Reclamation is coleading two of Interior’s Landscape Conservation Cooperatives in the Colorado River Basin area. The Cooperatives will focus on developing and communicating science to inform climate adaptation strategies for ecological regions, or “landscapes.” The Corps is engaged in collaborative efforts with external partners to integrate climate science into planning tools for water resource managers. For example, the Corps partnered with NOAA’S Regional Integrated Sciences and Assessment program.climate science into water management tools. The CCAWWG study identified a number of challenges faced by the Corps and Reclamation. The agencies have Reclamation in adapting to climate change, and the agencies have taken a variety of actions to address these challenges. We found that the agencies are addressing these challenges, making collaboration a key element of their efforts, and doing so in a manner generally consistent with best practices for sustained collaboration. The CCA WWG agencies are collaborating to produce a series of documents identifying their common data and tool needs and a strategy for meeting them. The Corps and Reclamation are collaborating as coleaders in developing and implementing a training program as recommended by the Task Force’s National Action Plan: Priorities for Managing Freshwater Resources in a Changing Environment. The Toolbox is an evolving and comprehensive water resources data portal with direct links to valuable databases, innovative programs and initiatives, and state-of-the-art models and tools. These agencies—joined by NOAA, USGS, and the Environmental Protection Agency—are collaborating with the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research and the Western Water Assessment. Congress and the Executive Office of the President have directed federal agencies to address the potential impacts of climate change. The Corps and Reclamation have similar yet distinct roles in managing water for a wide variety of purposes. In addition to the water management challenges posed by climate change, both agencies are dealing with other issues. The agencies are collaborating in a number of efforts to incorporate climate science into water management tools. The U.S. Department of Agriculture and USGS will initiate the required monitoring plan in 2014. Since 1902, Reclamation has carried out its mission to manage, develop, and protect water and related resources in 17 western states. Some of the pilots are being conducted collaboratively with federal, state, and university partners. Corps officials expect the pilot projects to provide a body of knowledge and tested methods that will serve as the foundation for its guidance and future adaptation efforts. See appendix II for additional information on the locations and results of the Corps’ pilot studies. The agency has led or provided assistance in constructing most of the large dams and water diversion structures in the West. students with water resource planning knowledge, while the residence courses offer opportunities for gaining hands-on experience in applying that knowledge. The Corps and Reclamation have collaborated with each other and other agencies in a manner that is generally consistent with practices that we have previously identified as important to helping enhance and sustain collaboration among federal agencies. In 2005, we reported that collaboration—broadly—was important to the success of the agency's water planning program. The program is designed to provide a professional development and training series that will help managers assess climate change impacts. The Corps and Reclamation have made collaboration a key element of their adaptation policies and plans. The Corps’ climate adaptation policy states that collaborations are the most effective way to develop strategies to identify and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Reclamation has reinforced accountability for collaboration through agency performance management systems. Running throughout these practices are a number of factors, such as leadership, trust, and organizational culture, which are necessary elements for a collaborative working relationship. For more information, visit the Corps' website or Reclamation's website. most effective way to develop strategies to identify and reduce vulnerabilities to potential future climate change. As stated in the Corps’ 2012 Climate Adaptation Plan and Report, it is the objective of the agency to facilitate and promote closer and more fruitful interagency cooperation. To reinforce accountability, the draft performance metrics for climate adaptation in the 2013 Army Campaign Plan includes a target for the number of products developed in collaboration with other partners. The goal is to promote sharing of impact and adaptation data and information between federal, state, and local partners. collaboration among federal agencies. In 2005, we reported that collaboration can be enhanced and sustained by engaging in eight key practices. These include defining and articulating a common outcome; establishing mutually reinforcing or joint strategies; identifying and addressing needs by leveraging resources; agreeing on roles and responsibilities. We also reinforce agency accountability for collaborative efforts through agency accountability through the reporting of results to the public. We report on the results of these efforts in a new book, "Collaboration Among Federal Agencies," published by Oxford University Press. were incorporated, as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time we will send copies to the Secretaries of Defense and the Interior; the appropriate congressional committees; and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841.  GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) is composed of four program areas including Civil Works, Military Construction, Real Estate, and Research and Development. To carry out its Civil Works missions nationwide, the program is organized into eight geographic divisions composed of 38 districts, as shown in figure 1. Division and district geographic boundaries can be found in the appendix III of this report, which is available on the GAO website.