WHD considered these rates to be sufficiently high, particularly compared to other industries, it decided not to set goals for these industries. WHD made this decision despite the conclusions reached in its analysis of the results of the survey. The analysis stated that, while child labor compliance rates were relatively higher in these three industries. Still lower than the overall compliance rates, the rates had improved from 0 percent previously to 72 percent of supermarkets with prior violations, 52 percent of full-service restaurants, and72 percent of fast food restaurants. received from a survey of employers. WHD conducted investigations of statistically valid samples of supermarkets, full-service restaurants, and fast food restaurants that employ children. The overall compliance rates for these industries were 82 percent, 78 percent, and 70 percent, respectively. But WHD chose not to set specific goals for improving compliance in the grocery and restaurant industries in its fiscal year 2001 and 2002 performance plans. It made this decision even though the rate of non-compliance for fast food restaurant was 30 percent. child labor compliance rates were relatively higher in these three industries than overall FLSA compliance rates. At least 52,000 and as many as 220,000 children illegally employed in the three industries. We do not believe that the most important indicator of compliance is the percentage of children who are employed illegally. A few companies that employ large numbers of children can have a disproportionate effect on the numbers, the authors say. The authors say it would be a “serious mistake’ to compare the findings of the survey with compliance rates found in its surveys of other industries. regional and district offices on how to use their resources most effectively or help them consistently apply the child labor provisions of FLSA. Since 1990, Labor has developed better goals for increasing employer compliance. Over the decade, its goals for improving compliance have moved from general statements to more specific goals that focus on improving compliance rates in certain low-wage industries such as agriculture and nursing homes and residential care facilities. The goal is to improve rates established through investigations of low- wage businesses such as nursing homes. identify specific, measurable goals for the industries in which children are most likely to work. Labor does not provide sufficient guidance and training to its regional and district offices on how to use their resources. Labor also disagreed with the conclusions supporting our recommendation to develop methods of measuring the success of its child labor compliance efforts. In this regard, Labor noted that it had recently decided to repeat its compliance survey of grocery stores, full-service restaurants, and fast food restaurants in fiscal year 2004. We believe that this approach reduces attention to some of the industries that pose significant risks to children. The nation acknowledges that children can derive many benefits from working, such as independence, confidence, and responsibility. However, work may also have negative consequences for children’s physical, emotional, and educational development. In recognition of this, Labor devotes a portion of its budget to child labor investigations. The nation also recognizes the importance of protecting the environment in which children are raised and raised in the U.S., and the role that children play in the community. The U.N. has a goal of reducing child labor by 20% by the end of the year. for all children age 18 and under who are still in school, require Labor and the Census Bureau to compile data on child labor from the states, including data on injuries and illnesses, and add additional restrictions. (See app. II for a list of the legislative proposals introduced in the 107th Congress that would strengthen the child labor provisions of FLSA.) Labor’s Wage and Hour Division (WHD) is responsible for enforcing the Child Labor Act. The Secretary of Labor should provide better guidance to WHD’S regional and district offices on how to improve. WHD’s child labor compliance efforts comprise several strategies. These include enforcement, partnerships, education and outreach, and public awareness. Since Operation Child Watch, most of Labor's national child labor campaigns have focused on education. WHD conducted its “Work Safe This Summer’ initiative designed to reach children beginning summer jobs in 1996-2001. efforts to educate young workers, parents and employers about workplace hazards, proper hours of work and education. Labor's newest child labor initiative, “YouthRules!” announced by the Secretary in May 2002, is aimed at “educating young workers and parents.” WHD’s education and outreach activities are specifically targeted to groups that can have an impact on youth employment. Education and outreach include publishing and distributing materials such as bookmarks with information on the rules governing the employment of children under age 18. WHD's enforcement actions include on-site investigations of employers and other activities designed to bring employers into compliance with the law. When WHD finds violations of the child labor laws, WHD takes legal action against the offending employers. The agency also maintains a Web site with info on the child labour provisions of FLSA and state child labor law. WHD’s fiscal year 2002 performance plan established a goal of 75 percent compliance with the minimum wage, overtime, and child labor provisions of FLSA. In September 2002, Labor reported that WHD had developed specific, measurable goals in its draft fiscal year 2003 annual performance plan. The draft plan includes goals for grocery stores, fast food restaurants, and full-service restaurants. WHD did not, however, establish goals for industries in work and in which they are most likely to be injured or killed. the injuries from 1992 to 2000 required children to miss 5 or fewer days of work, while 20 percent of the injuries required them to miss more than 10 days. Labor has devoted substantial resources to ensuring compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA over the past decade. WHD is correct in its statement that the number of investigator hours has increased. The report was not intended to describe all of the agency’s child labor enforcement efforts, but rather, as requested, to determine how well Labor enforces these provisions and to make recommendations for improvement. of WHD’s commitment to child labor compliance, nor are they evidence of the success of its efforts to ensure compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA. It is unclear whether the increase in the number of violations found by WHD in fiscal year 2002 compared to fiscal year 2001 indicates a growing problem with child labor. We believe that our report provides a comprehensive and balanced picture of the effectiveness of Labor's efforts. Neither of these plans contained specific, measurable goals for the industries in which most violations were found. Prior to fiscal year 2003, WHD’s annual performance plans did not contain specific, measurable goals for improving compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA. The fact that WHD conducts investigations in these industries does not negate the need for WHD to set goals for increasing compliance for these industries. The resource allocations indicated in Labor's charts may reflect WHD's responses to complaints as much as the results of the investigations. The report has been revised to reflect the goals contained in WHDs draft performance plan for fiscalyear 2003. of FLSA is dependent, in part, upon the establishment of a sound performance management system. WHD has taken some steps towards developing such a system, as reflected in the program goals it has established and refined in recent years. However, WHD continues to lack goals for industries that have high rates of injuries and fatalities. The system does not allow managers to fully evaluate the effectiveness of their child labor compliance efforts and ensure that their limited resources are used in the most effective manner, the agency says. waive penalties for child labor violations it found. Average percentage of penalties collected varied significantly among the district offices we visited. We did not recognize WHD’s efforts to publish a final rule on the 1999 regulatory proposal to update some of the hazardous occupations orders. WHD does provide adequate training to all of its regional and district offices on statement is misleading, the report says. The maximum penalty for a child labor violation was raised from $10,000 to $11,000 in 2002. compliance with the law. When WHD finds violations of the child labor provisions of FLSA during its investigations, it may assess penalties. The penalties range from $275 for a record-keeping violation to $11,000 for a violation involving a serious injury or death. Information on WHD’s investigations, violations, and penalties assessed is tracked in its investigations database–the Wage and Hour Investigative database. It is available on the WHD website at www.whd.org. the source of investigations completed in fiscal years 2000 and 2001, was the first time that WHD had run such reports. The information on fatalities and serious injuries to children tracked by WHD’s national office and provided to us in May 2002 contained data on only 7 fatalities and 36 injuries reviewed in fiscal year 2001. We believe the anecdotal information on injuries and fatalities does not provide enough information to be useful in making WHD's resource allocation decisions. 28. We found no evidence of a pattern of abuse or neglect. and 32 injuries reviewed in fiscal year 2002. We agree with Labor’s statement that our recommendation to consider enhancing the data collected on children who work by expanding CPS to include 14-year-olds or beginning additional cohorts of NLSY cannot be implemented without additional study and resources. We recommended that the Secretary “consider” these actions instead of recommending that they be taken. We clarified our conclusions to acknowledge that collecting these data may require additional resources. 29. We continue to believe that WHD's regional and district offices cannot target their resources in the most effective manner without.  WHD does not routinely obtain information from BLS on the industries and occupations in which children work. WHD also does not use information from its investigations database or reports on local child labor initiatives to assess the results of the regional and district offices’ child labor compliance efforts. For example, we estimated that a significant proportion of illegally employed children worked in construction and manufacturing. We also found that children were more likely to be injured or killed while working in several industries in which WHD conducts few child labor investigations. WHD’s responses to complaints as much as the results of its efforts to target child labor violations in these industries. We disagree that our analysis of fatality rates is a “flawed interpretation of the BLS and NIOSH data” and that is more appropriate to use the actual numbers of children employed, injured, and killed to determine risk. While the number of children working in this industry may be small, we believe the injury rates to be sufficiently high to warrant further WHD attention. on the Youth Labor Force and WHD’s May 2000 materials prepared for its “Spring Into Safety” child labor campaign. WHD stated that his 1997 study provided “the best currently available estimate of the number of children employed in violation of Federal or State child labor laws” 2. Labor cites the drop in workplace injuries indicated by the BLS data from the Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses as evidence that ‘the workplace is becoming safer for children’ correct in its statement that the number of investigator hours devoted to child labor enforcement in fiscal year 2001, 74,000 hours, represents the largest investment of investigator time by WHD in the last 5 years. However, our report, which focuses on WHD’s efforts since 1990, shows that this is lower than the resources dedicated to childLabor enforcement in the first half of the decade. For example, in fiscal years 1990, 1991, and 1992, WHD investigators devoted 143,000, 83,000 and 105,000. hours, respectively, to child Labor Enforcement. We did not provide information on the number. of hours spent on activities other than investigations. WHD measured success of Operation Child Watch in the early 1990s by citing large number of violations and penalties produced. WHD headquarters officials told us they look at trends in the number of child labor violations found each year. It is not clear, however, what factors led to the decrease in theNumber of violations. It could have resulted from an increased rate of compliance among employers or a decrease in child labor investigations conducted by WHD. Officials say they do not know how to develop methods of measuring the success of their education. Labor recently established specific goals for fiscal year 2003 for the industries in which children are most likely to work. WHD’s national goals in the early part of the decade focused on increasing the number of its child labor enforcement activities. In fiscal year 2000, WHD conducted employ (“self-initiated” investigations). WHD officials told us that although they review every complaint they receive about a possible child labor violation, they do not receive many complaints about child labor.  WHD would have missed a large proportion of the cases with child labor violations if some district offices had not conducted self- initiated child labor investigations. WHD headquarters officials also do not use data from its investigations database to ensure that district offices nationwide are providing an adequate level of protection to all children who work, the authors say. The number of investigations conducted by each district office and by WHD’s five regions varied widely, they say. They say WHD officials were not able to explain these regional and district variances. reports we reviewed for fiscal years 1999 through 2002 showed that, in some years, many districts had no child labor initiatives. For example, in fiscal year 2000, almost all of the district offices in the northeast region had at least one child labor initiative. Two regions had regionwide initiatives that required all of their district offices to conduct child labor investigations. Some districts in the southwest region, however, had no local child labor Initiatives planned for fiscal year 1999-2002. The number of child labor Initiative in each region varied significantly from one region to another. District office practices for penalty assessment and collection vary significantly. District officials sometimes reduced the penalties for child labor violations or did not assess any penalties. In other, similar cases, they assessed penalties. For example, one district office we visited generally did not waive penalties forChild labor violations it found, but another did. For more information, visit childlaborpenalties.org or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. labor initiatives planned for fiscal years 1999 through 2002, although our estimates of illegally employed children showed greater numbers of children in the South to be illegally employed than in the Northeast. WHD leaves many of the decisions about how to deploy enforcement resources to its regional and district offices. While these estimates do not prove that illegal child labor was a problem in the area of the state covered by that district office, it is an indication that potential violations exist undetected. It is not clear that establishing a goal for improving compliance in the transportation and public utilities industry would be unrealistic. national office also does not provide regional or district offices with data from BLS on the industries and occupations in which children work, legally or illegally. Officials in one district office told us that, because of their past enforcement efforts, illegal child labor was not a problem in their area. However, our analysis showed that a large percentage of children working in this state worked in those industries where children were most likely to be injured, the report found. The report was published by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention.  WHD does not use all of the data available to plan its future child labor compliance efforts or assess their success. The initiative includes partnerships that WHD has formed with all levels of government as well as businesses, unions, and advocacy groups. WHD officials told us that they do not use data from BLS on the industries and occupations in which children work because the information is not easily accessible. The data do not provide information at the local level that could be used to help plan local compliance efforts.  WHD also does not utilize information from its investigations database to determine what types of strategies are most successful in detecting child labor violations. WHD conducts child labor investigations either as a result of a receiving a complaint about a possible child labor violation or from a decision by a WHD office to conduct investigations of employers that focus specifically on children they employ. The WHD is not able to target its local efforts most effectively or hold local offices accountable at the national level for enforcing the child labor provisions of FLSA. child labor compliance efforts. We disagree with Labor’s statement that WHD routinely uses BLS and NIOSH data to plan the allocation of its child labor resources. Labor agreed with the remainder of our recommendations or agreed to take action on them. For example, it agreed to obtain and review data from the WHISARD database to better hold local offices accountable, explore the possibilities of collecting additional data the agency's comments on our report, Labor cites the increase from fiscal years 2000 to 2001 in the number of child labor violations. WHD’s national office develops the goals and performance measures for Labor's child labor compliance efforts. Much of the responsibility for planning and executing these efforts is left to WHD's five regional offices and the 50 district offices. WHD headquarters officials do not use quarterly reports prepared by these offices on their local initiatives to ensure that, nationwide, local child labor initiatives provide adequate protection for all children who work, the report says. The reports we reviewed for fiscal years 1999 through 2002 showed that, in recent years, every district office has had some local child labour initiatives. WHD’s national office does not provide regional and district offices with adequate guidance on how to target their child labor compliance efforts. WHD lacks a sound basis for determining, among other things, the extent to which it should devote resources to child labor investigations. Labor disagreed with our recommendation to establish specific, measurable goals for industries in which most children work and in which they are most likely to be injured. provide training to all WHD staff onHow to obtain information from the investigations database. training to all of its regional and district offices on how to obtain reports from the investigations database to use in targeting their child labor compliance efforts. Two of the five regional child labor coordinators and officials at two of the district offices we visited indicated that they had not been trained. Officials at the district office we visited told us they had staff members with the skills needed to obtain the reports from WHD’s database that enabled them to identify where they had found child labor violations in the past. local offices accountable, explore the possibilities of collecting additional data through CPS or NLSY, and provide better guidance to WHD’s regional and district offices concerning penalty assessment. Labor also provided technical comments and clarifications, which we incorporated in the report as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Labor, the Wage and Hour Administrator, the Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and other interested parties. Copies will be made available to others upon request. told us they could tell their activities generate attention if WHD receives a lot of media inquires and that they count the number of times individuals access information from WHD’s Web site. However, WHD does not link its education and outreach activities with changes in employer behavior. We recognize the inherent difficulties in assessing the impact on employer behavior of WHD's education and Outreach activities. We found that some district offices were not aware of the impact of their outreach activities on compliance. limited resources. Some district offices were trying to develop such methods. Officials at one district office told us they felt it was important to obtain at least an indication of success by conducting investigations of employers after their education and outreach activities. They also said they were working with researchers at the University of Tennessee to develop methods of measuring the success of all of their child labor compliance activities. Despite having difficulty in developing methods, WHD headquarters officials told us that they were still committed to the cause of child labor. work. WHD has not developed adequate methods of measuring the success of all of its child labor compliance efforts. The Secretary of Labor should establish additional specific, measurable goals for WHD’s child labor Compliance efforts for industries in which children are most likely to be injured or killed, the authors say. They also say WHD should use data from BLS and NIOSH on the industries, occupations, and locations in which. children work and sustain work-related injuries and use them to target WHD's child labor enforcement efforts. restaurants, and fast food restaurants in fiscal year 2004. Labor has not conducted child labor compliance surveys of other industries. Some of the most serious child labor violations WHD found occurred in sawmills and companies that produce wood pallets. WHD’s opinion that targeting additional resources on this industry would not be a wise resource investment and would have no impact on occupational injuries and fatalities for children working in this industry does not factor in these high injury and fatality rates. 25. Labor took issue with our recommendation to routinely obtain data from BLS and NIOSH. The two primary sources of nationwide data on work-related injuries, one collected by BLS from employer records and the other collected by NIOSH from emergency room records, differ substantially in their estimates of the number of working children injured each year. For 1999, BLS reported that almost 13,000 children were injured on the job, while NIOSH estimated that over 80,000 kids were injured that year. BLS data for 1992 to 2000 showed that sprains, strains, and tears were the most common injuries. NIOSH data indicated that lacerations were theMost common injury. BLS reports all work-related fatalities, including those for children, in its Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries published each year. BLS identifies these fatalities through death certificates and reports from state workers’ compensation agencies, medical examiners, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and the news media. NIOSH collects data work for agricultural employers with fewer than 11 employees; and household workers.NIOSH data also underreport injuries because children who are injured may not inform hospital staff that their injuries are work- related. extent of injuries to children who work. BLS captures only injuries serious enough to require at least one missed day of work; therefore, data on many injuries are not captured. Many children who are injured may not miss a full day ofWork because they were not scheduled to work after being injured. In addition, BLS does not collect data on children who were self-employed; those who work in federal, state, or local government; or those who worked for agricultural employers with fewer than 11 employees. Officials were not able to explain why the trends indicated by the two sources differed so greatly. For example, certain types of injuries such as lacerations may be treated in emergency rooms but not necessitate one or more days away from work. Other injuries that may result in missed work days such as sprains and strains may be more commonly treated in physicians’ offices or outpatient clinics than inEmergency rooms, officials said. The BLS data from employer records on workers’ injuries was released on Thursday. important indicators that WHD should use in allocating its resources. For the transportation and public utilities industry, Labor mentions only fatality rates and the number of fatalities. We found that the injury rate was high compared to other industries. Therefore, we believe that it is important for WHD to focus some of its resources on the transportation industry. 18. The number of hours worked is preferable because different workers spend variable hours on the job in a given time period (e.g. year), and therefore have different lengths of exposure to hazards. from 108 monthly surveys to obtain the total number of hours worked by 15- to 17-year-olds between 1992 and 2000. We excluded children who worked for the government or were self-employed because they are excluded from the data for nonfatal injuries. We totaled the hours worked each week by all children for each year. We combined industries so that they would reflect the same industry groupings. We calculated industry rates by dividing the total. number of injuries to children under 18 by the total hours worked in each industry. We used the Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries and Survey of Occupational injuries and Illnesses. Because the number of fatalities in each year was relatively low, we aggregated the data over the decade to provide statistically reliable information. We calculated fatality and injury rates by using the total number of hours children worked as indicated in CPS. We did not aggregate the data on nonfatal injuries over the. decade because theNumber of injuries reported was large. We used data from 108 monthly surveys to obtain the total. number of children who work. From 1992 to 2000, the number of fatalities and the fatality rates for working children remained fairly constant. Each year, according to data collected by BLS on work-related fatal injuries,between 62 and 73 children died from injuries sustained while working. The fatality rate for children aged 15 to 17 was fairly constant, ranging from approximately 0.006 deaths per 100,000 hours worked in 1998 to about 0.010 deaths per100,000hours worked in 1992. We coded children born in 1983 and 1984 as being 13 years of age and 12 years of Age. During the decade, over 40 percent of the children killed as a result of work-related injuries worked in agriculture. Retail trade and construction accounted for 20 percent and 14 percent of all fatalities, respectively. Children who worked for small employers—those with 10 employees or less—accounted for nearly two-thirds of the fatalities. Data on fatality rates, however, show that the number of hours children work in each industry needs to be considered as well as the number Of deaths in retail trade, the fatality rate was 0.003 per 100,000 hours worked. worked, much lower than the rate in construction, 0.050, in which 14 percent of the fatalities occurred. 44 percent of all children killed as a result of a work- related injury died as a. result of transportation-related accidents, including highway collisions and nonhighway incidents, such as a fall from a moving vehicle. Other common events included being from 1992 to 2000, although transportation- related fatalities appeared to increase. In both 1992 and 2000, 60 percent of. children who died as the result of work-related injuries were 16 and 17 years old. 75 percent of children killed for whom race was available were white. Demographic data for children who died as a result of a work-related injury show that most of the children killed were boys 16 years of age or older. Girls were as likely as boys to work from 1992 to 2000, but boys were almost eight times more likely to die. Hispanic children had a fatality rate that was twice as high as the rate for white children. Fatality data also show that certain industries and types of businesses pose a risk to children.1992. About 60 percent of children killed (about 60 percent) were aged 16 and 17, but a substantial number were 13 years old or younger. Most children (84 percent) were injured while working in the two industries in which children are most likely to work. In 2000, children who worked in eating and drinking places, food stores, general merchandise stores, and health services had the largest numbers of injuries. The injury rates per hours worked were lower for the retail trade and services industries than the rates for children who work in wholesale trade, transportation and public utilities, and manufacturing. However, as with fatalities, the likelihood of injury needs to be considered in addition to the actual number of injuries, the authors say. in wholesale trade, transportation and public utilities, and manufacturing had higher rates of injury than those working in retail trade or services. Injuries are caused by a variety of factors, but most frequently from coming into contact with an object or equipment. Other common accidents were overexertion, falls, and contact with hot objects. The causes of work-related nonfatal injuries were fairly constant over this period. In 1998 a 17-year-old worker fractured his hand when a piece of metal slipped off a power-driven machine he was operating. fall from a moving vehicle. Other common events included being caught or compressed by equipment or being struck by a falling or flying object. For example, in 2000, a 16-year-old boy who worked in a supermarket was crushed to death by a cardboard box compactor. Another 16- year-old was crushed when the forklift he was operating flipped over and landed on his chest. Overall, the characteristics of children who died as a result of work- related injuries remained relatively constant from 1992 to 2000. in agriculture, possibly because of the looser age restrictions that provide younger children with opportunities for employment in agriculture. In 2001, 15 percent of black children and 17 percent of Hispanic children worked, compared to about 30 percent of white children. Despite the fact that children from lower income families are less likely to work, when they do work, they tend to work more hours. Children in families with annual incomes below $25,000 worked an average of 21 hours a week in 2001, 5 more hours than children whose families had annual incomes of $75,000 or more. children were less likely than children of other races to work in prohibited occupations. There was no correlation, however, between family income and children who worked in hazardous occupations. Children from families with lower annual incomes were not more or less likely to work than other children. Children who were not citizens were more likely than those who were citizens to be in a prohibited occupation. Although children from families of lower incomes were more Likely to work more hours than allowed, they were not necessarily more likely to be involved in hazardous work. 3.7 million children between the ages of 15 and 17 worked, about 30 percent of all children in this age range. The percentage of children who worked in summer months fluctuated over the decade from a high of 36 percent in 1990 to a low of 30 percent in 2001. Although most children work for an employer, about 52,000 (2 percent) were self-employed and about 10,000 were less than 10 years old. The U.S. labor force as a proportion of the total United States labor force remained relatively stable. 52,000 (2 percent) were self-employed and about 10,000 performed unpaid labor in a family business. Throughout the decade, children primarily worked in retail trade, in businesses such as department stores, grocery stores, and restaurants. In 2001, as in 1990, about 60 percent of all working children were employed in this industry, mostly in eating and drinking places. Children generally held jobs in sales occupations, such as running a cash register or clerking at a store, or in services such as waiting tables or cleaning hotel rooms. Although most children worked in the retail trade industry during the past decade, a substantial percentage of the illegal employment was found in other industries. In 2001, over 40 percent of all children who were employed illegally because they worked in prohibited occupations worked as truck drivers. We determined that a child’s gender, race, and citizenship status were related to the likelihood that he or she worked in a prohibited occupation, but a child's annual family income was not related. Boys were more likely than girls to work in prohibited Occupations. In 2001, working children were as sizable a part of the United States labor force as they were in 1990. Most children worked in a variety of occupations concentrated in a few select industries, primarily retail trade and services. The percentage of children who worked illegally, either because they worked in occupations prohibited under the law or more hours than allowed, also did not change. In 2001, as in 1990, minority children and children from families with annual incomes below $25,000 were more likely than other children to work illegally. As many as 4 percent of all 15- to 17-year-olds who worked in 2001 worked illegally. Hispanic children who were employed worked more hours than other children. Children who worked illegally not only worked more than the allowed number of hours, they also worked in prohibited industries and occupations. Most of the children who worked illegal were 15-year old who worked morehours than allowed worked illegally under the child labor provisions of FLSA. In 2001, Hispanic children worked an average of 24 hours a week, at least 5 more hours aweek than other kids. In school months in 2001, 32 percent of all employed 15-year-olds with family incomes less than $25,000 a year worked more hours than allowed under the law. In contrast, only 9 percent of those with incomes over $75,000 worked more than allowed. In addition to income, race is also associated with the likelihood that a child will work more hours. Hispanic children are more likely to work too many hours than other children. The region of the country in which children live as well as the type of area in which they live (metropolitan or nonmetropolitan) are also associated. In 2001, 30 percent of all children aged 15 to 17 worked in summer months, compared to 23 percent who worked in school months. Older children are more likely to work in the retail trade industry than younger children. On the other hand, 15-year-olds are more Likely than older children toWork in agriculture, possibly because of the looser age restrictions that are placed on the industry. In 2001, children worked an average of 21 hours a week inSummer months. This is similar to the number of hours they worked in both summer and school months in summer. In summer months in 2001, nearly 60 percent of employed 17-year,olds worked in retail trade. 87 percent of all working children worked part-time in 2001. In 2001, 17-year-olds worked an average of 23 hours a week in summer months. By 2001, their average hourly earnings exceeded the minimum wage of $5.15 an hour by $1.21. The older a child is, the more likely he or she is to work and the more hours he orshe is likely to work, the study found. The differences are even greater in the summer when more children work. time and captures data not collected in CPS, such as information on children younger than 15. NLSY, however, cannot be used to show how the number and characteristics of all working children have changed over time because it only includes information on one group of children born from 1980 to 1984. Labor added questions to the survey in fiscal year 2000 to obtain additional data on children who work in agriculture. Labor has not been able to obtain data on a sufficiently large number of children working in crop agriculture to provide information that is statistically reliable. Most children working in agriculture are 16 years of age and older. The percentage of younger children (14- and 15-year-olds) who work in agriculture has increased, from 17 percent to 30 percent. Both the percentage of children who entered the country illegally and those who were not accompanied by their parents or other family members rose over the decade. Children’s work has a decidedly seasonal nature. More children work in the fall and winter months than in the spring and summer months. children are asked whether or not they worked in each of the 52 weeks in a given year. Most employment questions in NLSY deal with events that take place after the child’s 14th birthday. We used a different method to estimate employment for children younger than 14 years of age. We coded children who indicated that they had received income from a job in the previous year (1996) We performed these calculations for three periods in 1996 and one period in 1997 as shown in table 4 in this report. Labor compiles two additional sources of nationally representative data on working children. The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) contains data on one group of approximately 9,000 children born from 1980 to 1984. NLSY provides detailed information on the work experiences of this group of children over time and captures data not collected in CPS. The number and characteristics of children who die each year as a result of a work-related injury have changed little over the past decade. From 1992 to 2000, Once children reach age 16, they are only prohibited from working in jobs or with equipment covered by these Hazardous Occupations Orders. They are not limited as to the number of hours or times of day they can work. For jobs in agriculture, the child labor provisions are much less restrictive. Children of any age may work an unlimited amount of hours (outside of work hours) under the age of 18. Labor is in the process of reviewing the report and deciding what actions it will take in response to the recommendations. employers whose annual gross volume of sales is less than $500,000 and whose work cannot be linked to interstate commerce are not covered under FLSA. In addition, children who are self-employed are not subject to the child labor provisions of FLSA, although they may be covered under state child labor laws. Children who work for their parents are prohibited from working in occupations and operating equipment listed in the Hazardous Occupations Orders. When children reach age 18, they are no longer covered under the Child Labor Act. In 2001, several legislative proposals were submitted in the House of Representatives and the Senate that would strengthen the child labor provisions of FLSA. The proposals include the Children’s Act for Responsible Employment of 2001, which would, among other things, increase the maximum penalties for child labor violations. The Young American Workers’ Bill of Rights would amend the FLSA to require employers to obtain work permits for all children age 18 and under who are still under the age of 18. It would also prohibit children aged 16 and 17 from working in hazardous occupations in agriculture. Children who are 14 and 15 years old may work in many jobs in retail stores, restaurants, and gas stations. They may not, however, work in any job considered hazardous, including jobs in manufacturing, mining, construction, transportation, warehousing, communications, and public utilities. Once children reach age 16, age may work an unlimited number of hours (outside of school hours) in nonhazardous jobs, either on a farm owned by their parents or on a noncommercial farm with the written consent of their parents. NIOSH collects data on work- related injuries in its National Electronic Injury Surveillance System from a sample of emergency room records. FLSA and its implementing regulations limit the types of jobs, number of hours, and times of day that children younger than 16 years of age can work. Children younger than age 14 are prohibited from working in nonagricultural employment other than casual free-lance jobs such as babysitting and delivering newspapers. Children who are 14 and 15 years old may work in some jobs. Our estimates of illegal employment are both under- and overstated. Many activities prohibited, particularly the many types of equipment children are prohibited from using, cannot be gleaned by reviewing the occupational categories in CPS. The estimates are also overstated because they include some activities that are not prohibited by CPS. For example, all children younger than 18 are banned from using meat slicers. However, although CPS shows that many children work in “food services,” it does not indicate how many of them work with meat slicer. estimates are also overstated because they include some activities that are allowed in occupations that are prohibited. For example, because work as a public messenger is expressly prohibited for15-year- olds, we included children who worked in the occupation category “mail carrier” in our estimates of illegal employment. It was not, however, possible for us to determine the extent to which our estimates are under- or overstated as result of these limitations. In addition, our estimates were based on estimates of the number of children who were unemployed. This report is also available at no charge on the GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you have any questions concerning this report please contact me at (202) 512-7215. Other major contributors are listed in appendix. V. This appendix discusses in more detail our scope and methodology for (1) estimating the number of working children in the United States who are employed illegally, (2) using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), and (3) computing fatality. 14-year-olds in the United States who work, (3) computing fatality and injury rates for working children, and (4) using data on occupational injuries to calculate relative risk. Most of the estimates in the report were calculated using data obtained from samples and, therefore, have sampling errors associated with them. All differences included in theReport were tested for statistical significance at the 0.05 level. To estimate the number of children who are employed illegally in the U.S., we compared data from the Bureau of “Other,” which contained anyone who identified a race that did not fall within the other categories listed. Using methods developed in our previous report and refined by Douglas Kruse, we defined a list of 100 occupational codes that correspond to activities prohibited by the Hazardous Occupations Orders. Any child in the base population with one of these codes was included in our estimates of children employed illegally. In this instance, 216 occupational codes matched the descriptions of activities prohibited for 15-year-olds to children. matched the descriptions of activities prohibited for 15-year-olds to children under 16. Any child identified in the base population with one of these codes was included in our estimates of children employed illegally. Due to the small sample sizes of children identified in these groups, cross tabulations were not statistically significant at the 0.05 level. To determine demographic differences in the likelihood of working illegally, the following variables were included in the model: sex, race, urbanicity and urbanicity. We conducted a logistic regression to identify the children who were most likely to work in illegal occupations. We used the CPS variable that describes the number of hours actually worked each week to determine whether 15-year-olds worked more hours than allowed each week under FLSA. Children who worked over 18 hours in a week in school months, from September to May, were included in our estimates of illegal employment. We further refined this analysis by conducting cross tabulations for race, industry, occupation, sex, geographic region, metropolitan area, and income. Differences that were found to be statistically significant are indicated in table 12 below. CPS treats ethnicity separately from race. A child can be identified in CPS as both “white” and “Hispanic.” To separately determine the effect of illegal employment on whites, blacks, and Hispanics, we coded the number of children who worked illegally in summer months. The number of illegal workers in the U.S. in the summer months was higher than in the school year, according to the CPS report. The CPS report was released on Tuesday. It is available online at www.cps.org. South Dakota, and Wisconsin; Northeast: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont. South: Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia. West: Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming. of illegal employment on whites, blacks, and Hispanics. For children whose race was identified as “black” or “white,” we included them in the category of race identified. This resulted in four racial categories: white, black, Hispanic, and other. For 1996 and 2001, “Other” included Asians and Native Americans. For 1990, ‘Other’ included Asians, Native Americans and “ other” which contained anyone who identified a race that did not. Data on children who work has been collected in CPS for 50 years. One limitation is that data on children younger than age 15 are not collected. 15-year-olds who lived in metropolitan areas were 1.4 times more likely to work more hours than allowed under the law. In 1989, Labor stopped collecting data on 14- year-olds in CPS, although these children are allowed under FLSA and its implementing regulations to work in many jobs. The estimates presented in this report paint an incomplete picture of the employment patterns for younger children. The Current Population Survey (CPS) is the primary source of information on the United States labor force. CPS provides data on where children work, the types of jobs they hold, and how many hours a week they work. In addition, it provides demographic information on children such as age, race, ethnicity, and family income. Because the data have been collected for over 50 years, they can be used to help identify working children in the U.S. The CPS is compiled monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) most of the information in CPS on working children is provided by an adult member of the household, in most cases a parent. Because the adult answering the questions may not be aware of the full extent of the child’s activities, information about the child's employment may be underreported or omitted. Another BLS survey, NLSY, collects information on children differently. In NLSy, children are directly asked by interviewers to describe their jobs as well as their activities at work. Because children are asked directly about their work and Standards Act (FLSA)—we compared data obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’s (BLS) Current Population Survey (CPS) on children in the United States who work to the child labor provisions of FLSA. Because CPS does not capture data on children who work in occupations that are illegal under criminal statutes, we could not include them in our estimates. FLSA and implementing regulations and guidance describe activities that children are prohibited from performing. Although CPS data on occupations are fairly specific, they do not list the actual activities children perform on the job. surveys from CPS for the following years: 1990, 1996 and 2001. For each year, we created data sets with children aged 15 to 17. Each year held roughly 70,000 observations. We defined the base population by using the child labor provisions of FLSA as a guide. Because FLSA does not apply to children who are self-employed and the provisions are much less stringent for children who work in agriculture, we eliminated children who were self- employed and those who worked in agriculture from the data set. Key questions concerning child employment in a family business were not added to CPS until 1994. To obtain numbers of children who worked illegally, we averaged the results of the nine school months to obtain the number of children in the U.S. who worked in aFamily business in 2001. To compare results for 2001 with results for 1990, we included children who working in a Family Business in the 2001 base population, even though these children are not covered by FLSA. See app. III for more information on the data set. believe that the amount of this understatement is large because many of the child labor violations found by WHD in its investigations of employers are violations of the restrictions on number of hours and times of day that children are allowed to work. Finally, our estimates are overstated to the extent that they include children whose employment is not covered under FLSA. While recognizing these limitations, we continue to believe that our analysis provides the best estimates that can be made with available data. In fact, we used the same methods as those used to develop estimates cited by BLS and WHD. information on the characteristics of employers for which children work, such as sales volume or other proxies for annual dollar volume of sales. As with the other limitations, however, the extent to which our estimates are overstated because not all children work in employment covered under FLSA cannot be determined. We used data from NLSY97, the survey of children born from 1980 to 1984, to estimate the number of 12- to 14-year-olds who work. In NLSy, children are asked whether or not they worked in each employer. since children under 15 make up less than 1 percent of all injuries to children, this discrepancy did not affect our estimates. Several legislative proposals were introduced in the 107th Congress to strengthen the child labor provisions of FLSA. The number and characteristics of children who worked from 1990 to 2001 as tabulated from the Current Population Survey (CPS) data we obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) are detailed in the tables below. In July 2002, the Senate passed the Traveling Sales Crew Protection Act, legislation designed to ensure that child employees of traveling sales crews are protected underFLSA. We question how WHD determined that “many of these specialty trade contractors are so small that they do not meet the FLSA coverage criteria” because this information is not tracked in. 21. The injury rate for children who work in this industry was relatively high. We noted that the injury rate was higher than for children in the transportation and public utilities and wholesale trade industries. We also noted the fatality rates for the construction industry were higher than those for the wholesale trade industry. We questioned WHD’s decision to determine that these contractors were too small to be covered by FLSA because they were so small. FLSA coverage criteria’ because this information is not tracked in WHD’s investigations database and we found no data on employer coverage under FLSA. We also found, in our discussions with WHD officials, that establishing coverage for employers in the construction industry was not a problem for some of the district offices we visited, particularly those on the east coast. CPS data on occupations show that many children are employed as truck drivers. However, our draft report incorrectly indicated that 43 percent of all children who are employed illegally are employed.