piracy threatens tankers transiting one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes near key energy corridors and the Suez Canal. The vast areas at risk for piracy off the Horn of Africa, combined with the small number of military ships available for patrolling them, make protecting energy tankers difficult. According to the International Maritime Bureau, 30 percent (490 of 1,650) of vessels reporting pirate attacks worldwide from 2006 through 2010 from 2006 to 2010.are sprawling installations often close to population centers. of vessels reporting pirate attacks worldwide from 2006 through 2010 were identified as tankers. pirate attacks against tankers have tripled in the last 5 years. From January through June 2011, 100 tankers were attacked, an increase of 37 percent compared to tankers attacked in 2010. In addition, tankers are fetching increasing ransom demands from Somali pirates. The International Maritime Organization is working to reduce the threat of pirate attacks on tankers in the Gulf of Aden and the Red Sea. The U.S. State Department is working with the U.N. Security Council and the European Union to combat piracy in the region. Media reports indicate a steady increase in ransoms for tankers. The U.S. Maritime Administration and the Coast Guard have issued guidance for commercial vessels to stay 200 miles away from the Somali coast. pirates have adapted and increased their capability to attack and hijack vessels to more than 1,000 miles from Somalia using boats and helicopters. The pirates are based in the Somali port city of Kismayo, about 1,500 miles from the coast of Somalia, according to reports. The Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) contains an estimated 85 million barrels of oil. The Louisiana Offshore Oil Port (LOOP) is responsible for transporting about 10 percent of imported oil. Unlike OCS facilities, deepwater ports enable tankers to offload oil or liquefied natural gas for transport to land by underwater pipelines. In 2007, we assessed Coast Guard and FBI efforts to ensure the security of energy tankers and respond to terrorist incidents involving energy Tankers. The Coast Guard seeks to mitigate many kinds of security challenges in the maritime environment. About 49 percent of the nation’s crude oil supply was transported by tanker into the United States in 2009. The remaining oil and natural gas used in the U.S. comes from Canada by pipeline or is produced from domestic sources in areas such as offshore facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. The United States’ economy and security are heavily dependent on oil, natural gas, and other energy commodities, the authors say. The authors say the government needs to do more to ensure the safety and security of the country. hijack vessels to more than 1,000 miles from Somalia using mother ships, from which they launch smaller boats to conduct the attacks. Offshore energy infrastructure also faces risks from various types of attacks. In 2004, a terrorist attacked an offshore oil terminal in Iraq using speedboats packed with explosives, killing two U.S. Navy sailors and a Coast Guardsman. Potential attack methods against offshore energy infrastructure identified by the Coast Guard or owners and operators include crashing an aircraft into it or using a submarine vessel. many miles from shore. The FBI shares responsibility with the Coast Guard for preventing and responding to terrorist incidents in the maritime environment. Energy tankers face risks from various types of attack, including suicide attacks, armed assaults by terrorists or armed bands, and launching a “standoff” missile attack using a rocket or some other weapon fired from a distance. In recent years, we have issued reports that discussed risks energy tankers. face from terrorist attacks and attacks from other criminals, the FBI says. tankers face from terrorist attacks and attacks from other criminals, such as pirates. Terrorists have attempted and in some cases carried out attacks on energy tankers since September 11, 2001. To date, these attacks have included attempts to damage tankers or their related infrastructure at overseas ports. In 2002, terrorists conducted a suicide boat attack against the French supertanker Limburg off the coast of Yemen. In 2010, an incident involving another super tanker, the M/V M. Star, in the Strait of Hormuz is suspected to have been a terrorist attack. Three main places in which tankers may be at risk of an attack: foreign ports; in transit, especially at narrow channels, or chokepoints; and at U.S. ports. For example, foreign ports, where commodities are loaded onto tankers, may vary in their levels of security. Tankers remain at risk upon arrival in the United States because of the inherent risks to port facilities, the authors say. In addition, while tankers are in transit,. they face risks because they travel on direct routes that are known in advance. Energy tankers often depart from foreign ports and are registered in countries other than the United States. The United States has limited authority to oversee the security of such vessels until they enter U.S. waters. Offshore energy infrastructure also presents its own set of security challenges because some of this infrastructure is located many miles from shore. The FBI shares responsibility with the FBI for protecting the nation's energy infrastructure. The agency says it is working to identify security gaps and take actions to address them.. energy tankers and respond to terrorist incidents involving energy tankers. The Coast Guard visits foreign exporting ports to assess the effectiveness of anti-terrorism measures in place. Port stakeholders in the United States have taken steps to address vulnerabilities at domestic ports. For example, the Houston Ship Channel Security District is a public-private partnership that was established to increase preparedness and response capabilities with the goal of improving security and safety for facilities, employees, and residents of the Houston area. The U.S. There are two main types of offshore energy infrastructure that the Coast Guard oversees for security. The first type are facilities that operate on the OCS. The second type are deepwater ports, which are fixed or floating manmade structures used or intended for use as a port or terminal for the transportation, storage, or handling of oil or natural gas. If a facility of this type meets or exceeds any one of three thresholds for production or personnel, it is subject to 33 C.F.R. part 106 security requirements. MSRAM assessments for all 50 of the OCS facilities that are subject to federal security requirements in 2011. Coast Guard officials generally agreed with our finding and they have since incorporated these 12 facilities into MSRAM and completed the required risk assessments. Revising policies and procedures to include such a requirement is important in that the number of O CS facilities could change each year. We provided a draft of this testimony to DHS and DOJ for comment. The Coast Guard concurred with our recommendation to revise policies. Coast Guard does not consider OCS facilities that it has assessed in MSRAM to be high risk. DHS and DOJ provided oral and technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. Improvements in security could help to prevent a terrorist attack against this infrastructure, which could have significant consequences, such as those resulting from the Deepwater Horizon incident. This testimony concludes our work on Coast Guard efforts to assess security risks for offshore energy infrastructure. However, we will continue our broader work looking at the security of offshoreEnergy infrastructure, including Coast Guard security inspections. and other measures to better secure OCS facilities and deepwater ports. We will continue to work with the Coast Guard to develop solutions to ensure that inspections of OCS facility are completed as required. I would be happy to respond to any questions you may have. The testimony was written by Christopher Conrad, Assistant Director; Neil Asaba, Analyst-in-Charge; Alana Finley; Christine Kehr; Colleen McEnearney; Erin O’Brien; Jodie Sandel; and Suzanne Wren. The Coast Guard uses a tool called the Maritime Security Risk Analysis Model. The tool assesses security risks to about 28,000 key infrastructure in and around the nation’s ports and waterways. The Coast Guard”s efforts to assess security risks are part of a broader effort by DHS to protect critical infrastructure and key resources. To assessments, the Coast Guard has taken a number of actions in assessing security risks of OCS facilities and deepwater ports. The agency has also used an independent risk assessment to assessed security risks as part of the application process for recently constructed deep water ports. MSRAM produces a risk index number for each OCS facility and deepwater port. Based on MSRAM’s output, which is a relative risk ranking, OCS facilities are not considered to be high-risk targets. The Coast Guard has also taken actions to supplement MSRAM by, among other things, including new data fields on the frequency with which tankers visit a port and oil and gas production data from the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement. small boat attack, sabotage, or an attack by a swimmer or diver. Analysts use MSRAM to evaluate vulnerabilities of OCS facilities and deepwater ports. MSRAM’s output produces a risk index number for each maritime target—such as an OCS facility or a deepwater port. The analysts use MS RAM to evaluate potential consequences of an attack, such as deaths or injuries and economic and environmental impacts. It also assesses factors such as the ability of key stakeholders, including the owner, operator, or law enforcement, to interdict an attack. Coast Guard may recommend conducting more research on the vulnerability to and consequences of attack scenarios. The Coast Guard is currently conducting a study on OCS facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. The study initially reviewed the “lessons learned” from Deepwater Horizon and how those lessons could be used to improve MSRAM. Gaining a better understanding of target hardness of these and other threat scenarios could improve the quality of the output from MSRAM, Coast Guard officials say. The scope of the study has not yet been determined. Coast Guard officials are studying the “lessons learned” from the Deepwater Horizon incident. Part of the study involves examining whether analysts should use MSRAM to assess MODUs in the future. MSRAM does not assess systemic or network risks because, according to Coast Guard officials, it does not have the capacity to do so.a blowout. Gaining a fuller understanding of the security risks associated with MODUs could improve the quality of program decisions made by Coast Guard managers. Coast Guard officials say the scope of the study has been expanded to include OCS facilities. The Coast Guard has limited not be used where the consequences of a terrorist attack are mainly interruption to land or water transportation. Coast Guard officials added that they are working with DHS’s Office of Risk Management and Analysis in studying ways to improve how it assesses secondary economic impacts. However, the Coast Guard did not conduct MSRAM assessments for all 50 of the O CS facilities that were studied. The Coast Guard does not have data on the ability of an OCS facility to withstand an attack. The Coast Guard recognizes that target hardness is an important consideration in assessing the vulnerability of OCS facilities. MSRAM analysts described challenges in assessing target hardness because empirical data are not available or research has not been conducted to do so. For example, research on whether a facility can withstand a direct attack is not available. The challenges are faced by others in the homeland security community involved in conducting risk assessments. risk to a facility. The Coast Guard has limited data for assessing secondary economic impacts from an attack on OCS facilities or deepwater ports. Coast Guard analysts stated that gathering these data is a challenge because there are few models or guidance available for doing so. During the course of our review, the Coast Guard started using a tool, called “IMPLAN,” that helps inform judgments of secondary economic impact. The tool, however, has limits in that it should not be used where the consequences of a terrorist attack are unclear. U.S. Counterpiracy Action Plan Gains Urgency as Piracy Escalates off the Horn of Africa. GAO-11-449T. Quadrennial Homeland Security Review: 2010 Reports Addressed Many Required Elements, but Budget Planning Not Yet Completed.GAO-10-940T. Maritime Security: Actions Needed to Assess and Update Plan And Enhance Collaboration among Partners Involved in Countering Piracy off the. Horn of African. GAE-10/10/856. Maritime security: DHS Progress and Challenges in Key Areas of Port Security. Horn of Africa is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. This article was updated on September 24, 2010, to reflect a new update to the National Infrastructure Protection Plan. It was originally published on December 15, 2005, on CNN.com. For more, go to www.cnn.com/horn-of-africa and www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/2013/09/25/horns-of Africa-report-10-856. were directed to the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Attorney General. The departments concurred or partially concurred with all of the recommendations. The Coast Guard and the FBI have made progress in implementing these recommendations. Two have been implemented, and the Coast Guard is in the process of implementing a third. But actions have not yet been taken to address the remaining two recommendations. See table 2 for a summary of our findings, recommendations and the current status of agency efforts to implement our recommendations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. of agency efforts to implement our recommendations. DHS is in the process of revising this document and did not have further information regarding whether or how the spill and terrorism response annexes may be revised. Further, the FBI has not taken independent action to implement this recommendation, in part because it did not concur with the need to develop a separate operational plan. In the event of a terrorist attack, the Coast Guard and the FBI will work together to develop an operational plan that integrates the different spill and terror sections of the National Response Framework. goal of improving security and safety for facilities, employees, and communities surrounding the Houston Ship Channel. The security district has installed technology, such as night vision and motion-activated detection equipment, and conducts patrols on land and in the water. We also reported on challenges that remained in (1) making federal agencies’ protective actions more effective and (2) implementing plans for a response to an attack, if a terrorist attack were to succeed despite the protective measures in place. We made five recommendations in our 2007 report, three of which were directed to the Secretary of Homeland Security. In 2009 DHS issued an updated version of the 2006 National Infrastructure Protection Plan which describes the department’s strategic approach to infrastructure protection. The plan placed an increased emphasis on risk management and it centered attention on going beyond assessments of individual assets by extending the scope of risk assessments to systems or networks. The Coast Guard has taken a number of actions assess systemic or network risks because, according to Coast Guard officials, these types of assessments are beyond the intended use of MSRAM. Examining how such vulnerabilities create strategic opportunities for intelligent adversaries with intelligent adversaries. collectively identified and assessed threat scenarios as well as the potential consequences and vulnerabilities of each scenario. Based on this assessment, stakeholders identified and agreed to carry out security measures to mitigate the risks, such as installing camera systems and increasing radar coverage. The Coast Guard recognizes these challenges and generally has actions underway to study or address them. Coast Guard officials noted that some of these challenges are not unique to the Coast Guard’s risk assessment model and that they are faced by others in the military. The Coast Guard assesses security risks as part of its responsibilities for ensuring the security of OCS facilities and deepwater ports. Performance measures would allow DHS to set priorities for funding on the basis of reducing overall risk, thereby helping ports obtain resources necessary to respond. Coast Guard officials agreed that assessing “network effects” is a challenge and they are examining ways to meet this challenge. However, the Coast Guard’s work is this area is in the early stages of the process. The threat of terrorism against energy tankers and offshore energy infrastructure highlights the importance of the Coast Guard having policies and procedures in place. The Coast Guard has taken steps to implement prior GAO recommendations to enhance energy tanker security, and it continues to work towards implementing the three outstanding recommendations. However, there is uncertainty regarding the way in which the Coast Coast Guard will move forward in measuring “network effects.” The U.S. Coast Guard’s work is this area is in its infancy. need to develop a separate operational plan. In the event of a successful attack on an energy tanker, ports would need to provide an effective, integrated response. Clearly defined and understood roles and responsibilities for all essential stakeholders are needed to ensure an effective response, the authors say. DHS has begun to revise its grant programs, but it is still too early to talk about emergency response capabilities, they say. The authors say DHS should develop performance measures for emergency response capability. They say the agency should also look at the role of ports in the emergency response effort. Mobile offshore drilling units (MODUs) do not generally pose a risk of a terrorist attack. There is a brief period of time when a drilling unit strikes a well, but the well has yet to be sealed prior to connecting it to a production facility. The Deepwater Horizon was in this stage when it resulted in such a large oil spill. Such risks could involve the reliability of blowout preventer valves—specialized valves that prevent a well from spewing oil in the case of a blowout. How the Coast Guard assesses offshore infrastructure within the broader set of networks is important. For example, knowing what damage a malicious adversary could achieve by exploiting weaknesses in an oil-distribution network offers opportunities for improving the resiliency of the network within a given budget. The report noted that “complex systems almost always fail in complex ways” and cautioned that attempting to identify a single cause for the Deepwater Horizon incident would provide a dangerously incomplete picture of what happened. How such vulnerabilities create strategic opportunities for intelligent adversaries with malevolent intent is central to this understanding. could change each year. For example, some facilities may drop below the production or personnel thresholds described earlier in this statement, thereby falling outside the scope of 33 C.F.R. part 106. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government state that policies and procedures enforce management directives and help ensure that actions are taken to address risks. In addition, internal control standards state that such control activities are an integral part of an entity’s planning, implementing, reviewing, and accountability for stewardship of government resources. is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.