been taken to eliminate or consolidate mandates. Member states continue to disagree on the scope and process of the review and lack the capacity to carry out the review. Consultations among member states on how to move forward on the issue will continue into the 62nd session. New parameters for the continuation of the mandate review process have been proposed, but progress remains to be seen. Several factors have slowed the UN’s efforts to improve the management of the Secretariat. Many remaining UN management reforms cannot move forward until these factors are addressed. The Secretariat has not issued a comprehensive report on public access to UN documentation. The General Assembly requested the report be submitted during the 61st session. The Secretariat developed a detailed policy proposal that includes resource requirements, financing mechanisms, and proposal of a fee structure. However, according to Secretariat officials, the Secretary-General intends to discuss the proposal with member states before formally submitting it. Member states agreed to continue a review of UN programs and activities in 2007, but no actions have been taken to eliminate or consolidate mandates. 15 of the 17 delegations told us that the number one challenge to continued progress on management reform efforts is member state disagreements on the priorities and importance of the remaining reform efforts. For example, member states continue to disagree on the scope and process of the review of UN mandates. Some member states are concerned that mandates important to them will be eliminated. For that reason, no mandates have been eliminated or consolidated as a result of the reform efforts, the delegates said. The reform efforts are still ongoing, they said. mandates have been eliminated or consolidated as a result of the reviews. Four member states have launched the Four Nations Initiative in an effort to provide new ideas and perspectives on governance and management of the UN Secretariat. A State official told us the process appears to be a “credible effort” by member states that complements the UN. The U.S. and G-77 countries have repeatedly stated a clear need for more constructive engagement on reform efforts, particularly between the United States andG-77. efforts because of the recentness of their implementation. Little or no progress: There is evidence that few or no steps have been taken on the reform effort. Substantial progress: The reform effort has been mostly or fully implemented. To identify factors slowing the progress of the UN reforms we examined, we reviewed reports and documentation of the reforms. The GAO determined which category of progress to assign to each reform effort based on documents we collected and discussions we had with State, UN, and other officials. evaluation methodology. State and the UN Secretariat provided technical comments that we have incorporated into the report, as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees, the Secretary of State, and the U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations. We will also make copies available to others upon request. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9601. February 2004, we reported that 60 percent of the 88 reform initiatives in the 1997 agenda were in place. In September 2005, world leaders gathered at the UN World Summit in New York to discuss global issues such as UN reform, development, and human rights. Successful management reform requires that its components are ultimately effective in modernizing the management functions of the United Nations. We recommend that, as management reforms are implemented over time, the Secretary of State and the U.S. Permanent Representative to the UN include an assessment of the effectiveness of the reforms. Completion of the reform agenda will require overcoming several factors, particularly disagreements among member states. Some past reform efforts remain incomplete because they did not get sustained and broad support. The current effort faces this same risk. While implementation is a necessary element in meeting the goals of the 2005 World Summit outcome document, it is not in itself sufficient. It is important to ensure that the reforms are implemented in a way that meets the needs of the world. The reform agenda should be completed by the end of the year or early 2015. The UN has not developed comprehensive long-term implementation plans for some management reform proposals. Establishing implementation plans is a practice that increases the transparency and accountability of the reform process. Since October 2006, a “credible effort” by member states that complements the UN management reform process has been underway. However, other member states’ views on this initiative and the potential of the initiative to overcome disagreements among member states are unclear, the authors say. The UN should encourage the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to include cost estimates and expected time frames for implementation and completion of each proposal. reforms: (1) disagreements among member states on UN management reform efforts. (2) lack of comprehensive implementation plans for some management reform proposals. (3) administrative policies and procedures that continue to complicate the process of implementing certain complex human resource initiatives. (4) competing UN priorities, such as the proposal to reorganize the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, that limit the capacity of General Assembly members to address management reform issues. The UN is composed of 192 diverse member states that have differing views on a wide array of issues. the reform efforts, including the U.S. government’s share, remain unclear. The UN currently has no formal plan to evaluate the effectiveness of its management reform efforts to determine whether they have achieved the goals set out in the 2005 World Summit outcome document. Administrative policies and procedures, such as staff regulations and rules that are directed by the General Assembly, continue to complicate and sometimes restrict the process of implementing certain human resources initiatives. Such guidance, some of which has been in existence for decades, is part of the UN's existing resource management framework. Secretary-General proposed a broad reform agenda to transform the UN into an efficient organization focused on achieving results as it carried out its mandates. In May 2000, we reported that while the Secretary-General had substantially reorganized the Secretariat’s leadership and structure, he had not yet completed reforms in human resource management and planning and budgeting. In September 2002, to encourage the full implementation of the 1997 reforms, he released a second set of reform initiatives, some expanding on those introduced in 1997 and others reflecting new priorities. GAO staff who made contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. We obtained and reviewed official reports of the Secretariat and the Office of Internal Oversight Services. We also interviewed senior officials from UN departments in New York City. We discussed the status of UN management reforms with officials from the Department of State in Washington, D.C., and the UN in NYC. We met with representatives from 17 of 192 member states representing various geographic regions, including Africa, Asia, Europe, and Africa. State endorsed the main findings and conclusions of our report and noted that our assessment of UN progress on management reform efforts was accurate and balanced. State agreed fully with the need to keep Congress informed of the effectiveness of management reforms, adding that the department will continue to monitor and inform Congress, as we recommended. We selected management reform issues in the key areas of ethics, oversight, management operations of the Secretariat, and review of programs and activities (known as mandates) to examine in more detail. We focused our work on management reforms that began in 2005. Calls to reform the UN began soon after its creation in 1945. Despite cycles of reform, UN member states continue to have concerns about inefficient management operations. The United States, through the Department of State in Washington, D.C., and the U.S. Mission to the United Nations in New York, continues to advocate reform of UN management processes. In July 1997, the Secretary-General proposed a broad reform agenda to transform the UN. The UN is the largest contributor of 192 member states. has issued several reports with proposals that, if implemented, could improve some human resource functions. The proposals are, in large part, still awaiting General Assembly review. In late September 2006, the Secretary-General released a report entitled Investing in People that included a human resources management framework aimed at strengthening the UN’s human resources goals. The report included discussions of several human resources issues and specifically stated that staff mobility is essential to creating a more-versatile, more agile workforce. The UN has not completed reviews and analyses of other human resource reform proposals. UN’s existing resource management framework that, according to the Secretary-General, still lacks flexibility and is largely headquarters-based. Although the Secretariat has made progress on some administrative reform initiatives relating to human resources and information technology, it has not addressed several other administrative policies and procedures issues, including conducting a one-time staff buyout and outsourcing and telecommuting for certain administrative services. As we discussed in our October 2006 report, the overall restrictiveness of these policies and policies and stated that staff mobility is essential to creating a more-versatile, multiskilled, experienced staff. A one-time staff buyout could enable the Secretary-General to realign staff to meet the UN’s changing priorities, while facilitating retirement or separation of staff who can no longer meet the needs of the UN. An effective career development policy serves both the UN and its staff members by building and maintaining an international civil service capable of meeting the UN's needs, as well as meeting the development needs and aspirations of the staff. Reforms Progressing Slowly with Many Awaiting General Assembly Review. United Nations: Lessons Learned from Oil for Food Program Indicate the Need to Strengthen UN Internal Controls and Oversight. U.N.: Sustained Oversight Is Needed for Reforms to achieve Lasting Results. United. Nations: Procurement Internal Controls Are Weak. United UN: Funding Arrangements Impede Independence of Internal Auditors. United Nation: Oil for. Food Program Provides Lessons for Future Sanctions and Ongoing Reform. The outcome document from the World Summit, endorsed by all members of the UN, outlines broad UN reform efforts in areas such as oversight and accountability and human rights. The document also called for the Secretary-General to submit proposals for implementing reforms to improve management functions of the Secretariat. In April 2006, we reported on weaknesses in the UN’s oversight and procurement systems, both of which have been identified as important areas for reform. Numerous reform proposals were either awaiting General Assembly review or had been recently approved. UN reforms we examined, we reviewed reports and documentation of the Secretariat, General Assembly, OIOS, and the ethics office. We also met with representatives from several member states and spoke with U.S. officials in Washington, D.C., and New York. Many cost estimates for the proposed reform initiatives are preliminary, and detailed longer-term cost estimates are being developed;. We interviewed outside observers of the UN system, including nongovernmental organizations and members of academia. are preliminary, and detailed longer-term cost estimates are being developed. We did not analyze the assumptions underlying these estimates to determine whether they are reasonable and reliable. We believe that the cost estimates and the associated funds that the General Assembly has appropriated to date for reform efforts are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. We conducted our work from March to November 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. During our review, we found that UN and nongovernmental organization staff had concerns about weaknesses in the UN internal justice system. little or no progress has been made in reforming the UN’s internal justice system, reforming certain budgetary and financial management functions, and improving the delivery of certain services. Since our October 2006 report, the Secretariat has issued several reports on management operations that the General Assembly is expected to consider during the current (62nd) session. Progress on reforming management operations of the UN Secretariat is shown in figure 4. The UN has made some progress in improving human resource functions. If implemented, if implemented, these proposals could have a positive impact. The UN’s internal justice system was outdated, ineffective, and compromised. An independent external panel of experts concluded that effective reform of the UN is not possible without an efficient, independent, and well-resourced internal justice System. The General Assembly agreed in April 2007 to establish a newinternal justice system. Many issues involving organizational relationships, personnel, and funding of theUN are still being worked out, the UN says. The UN says it is committed to working with the international community on issues of human rights. Mandate review has not advanced due to the lack of capacity among member states to evaluate the mandates in a substantive matter, according to State.of the organization. Phase I of mandate review, which covered all mandates 5 years old or older and not renewed that originated from the General Assembly, was completed in November 2006. Member states agreed to carry out a Phase II review of mandates to include mandates both renewed and not renew. The planned approach was to review mandates by thematic cluster. The initial goal for beginning Phase II was January 2007. I review, member states disagreed on which mandates to include in the review and what to do with any savings generated by the potential elimination or consolidation of mandates. Members of the G-77 contended that the scope of the review should include only those mandates 5 years old or older that have not been reviewed since they were adopted. Phase I thus consisted of a review of 626 mandates originating from the General Assembly. As a result of Phase I, memberStates agreed to set aside 74 completed mandates and requested more information. Working Group on Mandate Review from January 2007 to April 2007 and again from July to October 2007. In October 2007, the process was far from complete, with only one of the nine clusters addressed. The General Assembly adopted an oral decision to continue consultations among member states on how to proceed with mandate review in the 62nd session. State officials told us that a new approach is necessary for the review and that it would be meaningless to proceed unless member states identify a new way of doing things. process for several years, and, according to Secretariat officials, implementation of the system is expected to start in 2008. As of October 2007, the Secretariat had not selected the firm that will implement the new system. The Secretary-General did not submit a comprehensive report on information management, including cost estimates, to the UN Secretariat in 2007. According to UN officials, thesecretary-general will announce a decision on the new information management system by the end of 2008. The new system will support the global functions of the UN. In May 2006, the General Assembly asked the Secretary-General to conduct several cost-benefit analyses to determine whether certain UN services could be improved. Among the services are internal printing and publishing processes; medical insurance plan administration; information technology support; payables, receivables, and payroll processes. Subsequently, the Secretariat initiated several projects to address these reform proposals but has not completed its analyses. The Secretariat is currently collecting data from staff participants in the UN medical plan and reviewing alternative delivery methods for payroll and other functions. program objectives to be integrated with budgetary and financial data into one process. The goal is to enable the Secretariat to act more transparently and efficiently in managing staff and procuring goods and services. The UN has made little or no progress in reforming its internal information system. The Secretariat plans to present reports on information technology to the General Assembly during the 62nd session, on topics such as the implementation of the ERP and governance of information and communications technology. The CITO is especially important at the present time because the UN is in the process of developing a new organizationwide information system known as the Enterprise Resource Planning. The UN has made some progress in improving information technology. The position of chief information technology officer (CITO), created by the General Assembly in August 2006, was filled in July 2007. The leadership of a CITO is necessary to help ensure greater integration of the Secretariat’s workflow and knowledge management by allowing program objectives to be integrated with budgetary and financial data. Of the 17 member state delegates we spoke with, reforming these and other human resource functions is likely to continue to be difficult because of long-standing disagreements. The General Assembly did not consider several procurement reform issues during the recently completed 61st session. Issues that are currently unclear include operational procedures, such as establishing lines of accountability, delegation of authority. The UN has taken actions to improve some of the management operations of the Secretariat, but many reform proposals still have not moved forward. Some progress has been made on issues involving human resources and information technology, while little or no progress on reforming the address these issues. The U.S. government has been a priority of the United Nations for many years, as long-standing weaknesses and inefficiencies have persisted. From March to May 2007, the Secretariat submitted reports to the General Assembly, as requested, on human resource issues. The General Assembly’s focus on the reorganization of the DPKO and other issues during that time frame did not consider these issues, which are currently rescheduled for consideration during the 62nd session. According to U.S. and UN officials and most of the 17 member state delegates we spoke with, reforming the UN Secretariat is a priority for the United Nations. responsibilities of the advisory committee include advising the General Assembly concerning any administrative and budgetary matters referred to it. Figure 6 depicts the typical management reform decision-making process at the UN for issues requiring General Assembly approval. In October 2006, the Secretariat’s estimated costs for implementing certain management reform initiatives were approximately $40 million. Since then, due to additional actions taken during the 61st session, the revised cost estimate, as of October 2007, had risen by about $13 million to approximately $53 million. and expected time frames for implementation and completion of each reform effort as it is approved. During our current review, we found little evidence that time frames, completion dates, and cost and savings estimates for completing the long- term implementation of specific management reforms had been established. Most of the approximately 20 cost-benefit analyses and other assessments of management reform issues have not yet been submitted to the General Assembly. As a result, the total long-term costs of the reform efforts, including the U.S. government’s share, remain unclear. retirement or separation of staff who can no longer meet their career aspirations. The General Assembly considered the report during the 61st session and, in large part, postponed making decisions on key issues. For example, in a January 2007 resolution, the General Assembly postponed decisions regarding streamlining contractual arrangements and harmonizing conditions of service. Also, since its May 2006 rejection of the concept of a one-time staff buyout, the Assembly has not taken steps to redefine the role of the Deputy Secretary-General. October 2006 report, the overall restrictiveness of these policies and procedures continues to complicate the management reform process. In February 2007, several procurement-related reform issues, such as clear lines of responsibility and accountability, were not taken into consideration by the General Assembly during the spring 2007 session. The General Assembly did not address these issues because the new Secretary-General concurrently proposed a new procurement program. The new procurement plan was not presented to the general assembly in time for the spring session, as planned. General Assembly has rejected some proposed reforms and taken no action on others. For example, to improve cash management and operational flexibility, the Secretary-General proposed that peacekeeping accounts be consolidated. In July 2007, the General Assembly rejected this proposal. The Secretary-general also proposed to improve strategic budgetary planning and implementation by reducing the number of sections in the budget from 35 sections to 13. However, as of October 2007,  the General Assembly had not taken action on the proposal. Other financial management reform proposals that have not been adopted include financial management reform proposals that have not been adopted. The Secretariat has prepared a number of reports that the General Assembly is scheduled to review during the current (62nd) session. The UN has made little or no progress in improving the delivery of certain services, says the UN Secretariat. In May 2006, the UN General Assembly voted in favour of a proposal to create a separate account to cover certain unanticipated expenditures arising from exchange rate fluctuations and inflation. The General Assembly also voted in favor of a plan to charge interest on arrears of member states’ assessed contributions. many issues involving organizational relationships, personnel, and funding of the new system are still unclear. As of October 2007, the General Assembly had yet to decide who would be covered by a new system. According to the Secretariat, member states aim to implement the newSystem by January 2009. Since our October 2006 report, the UN has made little or no progress in improving certain budgetary and financial management functions. The General Assembly has rejected some proposed reforms and taken no steps to implement them. The UN has also taken no further steps to improve its financial management.  Steps have been taken to improve UN oversight capabilities. Independent Audit Advisory Committee (IAAC) established in June 2007. UN funding arrangements continue to constrain OIOS’s ability to audit high-risk areas. General Assembly has not authorized OI OS’S financial and operational independence. The UN has made some progress in creating IAAC, but the committee is not expected to be operational until January 2008. The guidelines and requirements represent a compromise among the member states, according to member state representatives and State. IAAC will focus primarily on the work of OIOS while taking into account the work plans of the other UN oversight bodies. State Department officials told us they were satisfied overall with the creation of IAAC despite the various compromises. The five members of the newly created IAAC were elected in November 2007, and the committee is expected to be operational in January 2008. The UN has made some progress in strengthening the Office of Internal Oversight Services. The office has made a number of improvements to its operations. private sector as well as the experiences of other international institutions. membership of 5 individuals, preferably from a pool of at least 10 candidates proposed by member states. An evaluation process for candidates through consultations with an external relevant institution, such as the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. membership appointment for a term of 3 years, with the possibility of a second term of three years. The General Assembly also established the committee’s terms of reference. These terms include the following guidelines and requirements. the member states, according to member state representatives and State Department officials. Member states disagreed on some of the initially proposed responsibilities of IAAC. The United States and several other countries had originally favored that candidates for membership be referred by the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions and that members not be eligible for re-election. Other member states disagreed. State wanted IAAC to be responsible for assessing the work of all UN oversight bodies, including the UN Board of Auditors and the UN Joint Inspection Unit. 16 complaints warranted a preliminary review. Of these 16, the ethics office referred two cases to OIOS for further investigation. Of the remaining 36 complaints, 19 fell outside the scope of its responsibilities and/or referred them to other offices. The ethics office provided advice and guidance on more appropriate actions to address 11 complaints. In addition, the office was copied on six complaints that were primarily addressed to other office or departments in the UN. In these instances, the UN ethics office keeps track of these complaints. activities remain. The OIOS Procurement Task Force reported in October 2007 that it had found multiple instances of fraud, waste, and mismanagement. The task force reported that a number of cases have been referred to national authorities for criminal prosecution or to the UN for consideration of subsequent legal action. It has also recommended civil recovery of monetary damages. As of October 2007, an estimated $1.2 billion in waste and fraud remains in the U.S. government's procurement system. OIOS has strengthened the capacity of its internal audit, investigation, and evaluations and inspections sections. However, OIOS funding arrangements continue to hinder its operational independence. For example, the office has combined two previously separated internal audit divisions in New York and Geneva within a single division. The office has established a professional practices section—fully staffed with six regular staff and three general services staff—that is fully-staffed. The Office of Internal Oversight Services has also created nine new audit posts for its internal Audit division. with six regular staff and three general services staff. OIOS also established an information and communication technology section, which has developed an audit strategy and conducted risk assessments. Member states decided to keep investigations in OI OS rather than move it to the Secretariat’s Office of Legal Affairs, despite a July 2006 decision to do so. The group is responsible for developing a quality assurance program, devising productivity tools, and improving performance reporting to management. It also conducts risk assessments for the information andcommunication technology functions of various departments at headquarters. progress in reducing its range of functions and improving the capacity of its evaluations and inspections sections. In 2006, the evaluation section was strengthened by the addition of two posts to increase the number of evaluations that can be undertaken. Funding arrangements at OIOS continue to impede the independence of internal auditors. OI OS is designed to be an operationally independent entity. OiOS is designed to be an Operationally Independent Office (OIOS) and has no direct links to the UN. OIOS argued that such a shift would significantly diminish the UN’s oversight functions. Since 2006, about 16 new posts have been created for the investigations division. OIOS has established a separate special investigations task force for sexual exploitation and abuse. The UN has made progress in reducing its range of functions and improving the quality of its investigations, says the report. The report was based on an external evaluation of the UN Office of Legal Affairs, which is part of the Secretariat. OIOS must negotiate funding for nearly two-thirds of its budget with the entities it is chartered to audit. Without operational independence, OIOS is constrained in its ability to prevent or mitigate risks to the UN’s resources and personnel. These risks include fraud, waste, abuse, inefficiencies, and mismanagement. Serious deficiencies in internal controls have left the UN susceptible to mismanagement and fraud, particularly regarding procurement activities in Sudan and Congo, the report says. The U.S. State and OIos generally agreed with our overall findings and recommendations.  Discussion of the revision of OIOS’s funding arrangements was deferred from the 61st to the 62nd session of the General Assembly due to a lack of consensus on funding issues. The UN does not yet have a formal and structural internal control framework that would provide reasonable assurance to management that its financial resources are being handled effectively and that its objectives are being achieved. OIos pointed out that serious deficiencies in internal controls have been identified. The U.N. General Assembly is scheduled to meet in New York on September 14 and 15. The General Assembly’s approval of the creation of an independent bid protest system was a critical first step toward enhancing transparency in the UN's procurement award process. But there was evidence that few or no steps had been taken towards actual implementation of the system. State said it understood that this assessment was consistent with our evaluation methodology. These weaknesses on the implementation of a successful whistleblower protection policy. We agree with these concerns. As State notes in its comments, our assessment that the UN has made little or no progress in establishing an independentbid protest system for. The lack of an independent bid protest system limits the transparency of the procurement process. Such a system would provide reasonable assurance that vendors are treated fairly when bidding. It would also help alert senior UN management to situations involving questions about UN compliance. According to the UN Procurement Division, a draft process, which includes an emphasis on best practices, is currently being drawn up. The draft process is expected to be completed by the end of the year and will be released to the public for comment. no progress in establishing an independent bid protest system for UN procurements is consistent with our evaluation methodology. The management reform decision-making process at the UN involves multiple entities. The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, a subsidiary organ of the General Assembly, consists of 16 members appointed by the assembly in their individual capacity. The functions and responsibilities of the advisory committee include advising the General assembly. The committee's role is to advise the UN General Assembly on issues that affect the organisation's finances. The UN Procurement Division has made some progress in developing a comprehensive training program. The program is not expected to be formally in place until early 2008. The training is part of a development plan to provide a career path for procurement staff. Those who complete the training will be eligible to be certified by internationally recognized procurement institutions. In addition, according to UN procurement officials, all procurement staff will be trained in contracting, acquisition, and other specialized subjects. It is expected that the training program will be completed by the end of the year. UN expects to have provided the training to all field staff by the end of March 2008. The UN Procurement Division has made some progress in its efforts to develop a risk management framework. In July 2007, a Planning, Compliance, and Monitoring Section was established and a chief was appointed to establish tools to detect potential transaction problems and minimize risks. Also, a proposal has been put forward for the creation of a UN Security Council resolution on ethics in the procurement industry. In 2007, all procurement staff in headquarters received ethics training in 2007. OIOS concluded that its dependence on extra- budgetary funding significantly affects its independence. The UN Secretariat has improved the UN procurement process, but a number of reform issues have not moved forward since our October 2006 report. Some progress has been made in strengthening the procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers, developing a comprehensive training program for procurement staff, and developing a risk management framework. However, the UN has made little or no progress in establishing an independent bid to host a climate change conference. The UN Department of Management is in the initial planning stages of establishing a UN-wide risk management framework. As of September 2007, the concept is still in the planning stages, time frames and costs for its implementation have not been established. The concept of best-value-for-money is under development and expected to be put into practice by the Procurement Division in March 2008. For example, the OIOS procurement Task Force reported that the U.S. government was using the concept to identify potential transaction problems and minimize risks. The UN has made little or no progress in establishing a lead agency concept. Draft process, which includes an emphasis on best practices from public- and private-sector procurements, is expected to be finalized by the first quarter of 2008. In the meantime, they have enhanced communications with vendors, including developing a more systematic debriefing procedure for vendors whose bids were unsuccessful. For example, the World Food Program might be best suited to procure items for air transport needs, while the UN Inter-Agency Procurement Services Office may be best at procuring certain vehicles. made little or no progress in establishing an independent bid protest system and creating a lead agency concept for procurements. The UN Secretariat has made some progress in strengthening the operating procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers. In December 2006, the Secretariat issued a bulletin on postemployment. In addition, since our October 2006 report, other organizational issues have arisen that may affect the UN’s procurement reform efforts. The progress on UN procurement reform is shown in figure 3. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. In December 2006, the Secretariat issued a bulletin on postemployment restrictions for former UN staff involved in procurement. The bulletin was issued following several incidents in recent years in which UN officials and former officials were involved in unethical and improper procurement activities. Former UN staff members, for 1 year following UN employment, are prohibited from accepting employment or compensation from any UN contractor. For 2 years, they are prohibited. from acting on behalf of others in procurement- related matters. In May, the UN also issued, in May, a measure to strengthen its procedures. The UN issued a revised supplier code of conduct in May 2007. The code requires that suppliers are responsible for adhering to the postemployment restrictions by not employing former UN staff members for at least 1 year. A proposal to increase the minimum threshold for contracts required to be reviewed by the Headquarters Committee on Contracts from $200,000 to $500,000 has not been approved. OIOS previously recommended that the threshold be increased, and, according to Procurement Division officials, increasing the threshold would assist in expediting procurements. UN has made some progress in collecting and analyzing financial disclosure forms for 2005 and 2006. The primary purpose of the financial disclosure program is to identify potential conflicts of interest arising from staff members’ financial holdings. About 1,700 staff members were required to file financial disclosure or declaration of interest statements for 2005. About 98 percent of staff complied, and the remaining 2 percent were referred to the Office of Human Resources Management for disciplinary action. The current UN Secretary-General and Deputy Secretary- General voluntarily made their recent financial disclosure Forms public. a private contractor and analyzed to determine any potential conflicts of interest between the staff members’ confidentially disclosed private interests and their official duties and responsibilities. In May 2007, the contractor identified potential conflicts. of interest in 17 of the cases reviewed, or about 1 percent. Of these cases, 14 staff members accepted the advice of the private contractor to address the potential conflict and 3 cases were referred to the ethics office for final resolution. The 2006 review is not yet complete. The deadline for submitting forms for 2006 was delayed until May. Deadline for submitting forms for 2006 was delayed until May 31, 2007. Private contractor developed an online e-filing system to simplify and expedite filing requirements. The ethics office plans to review the online financial disclosure form and accompanying guidelines in consultation with other agencies. The director of the ethics office told us that the process for the 2006 review was ongoing, and, as a result, the compliance rate was not finalized as of September 2007. The deadline for filing 2006 forms was May 31. had sufficient staff to carry out its responsibilities. As of October 2007, the UN ethics office had made some progress in developing and circulating ethics standards and guidance. The office has also developed new ethics standards, such as postemployment restrictions standards. The ethics office has begun to develop a systemwide code of ethics for all UN personnel, including those of UN bodies and agencies other than the Secretariat as requested by the General Assembly in the 2005 World Summit outcome document. The director of the ethics office told us the development of a system Wide Code of Ethics was a priority. progress in staffing its ethics office by hiring a permanent director and additional permanent staff. In the fall of 2006, we reported concerns of UN experts that the newly created UN ethics office was insufficiently staffed with a temporary director and four professional and two administrative staff members. In May 2007, a new director of the ethicsOffice was appointed to a 3-year term. As of October 2007, the ethics office had six professional and three administrative staff. At that time, the office told us the office had sufficient staff to carry out its responsibilities. The UN has taken steps to improve organizational ethics since the fall of 2006. The UN has made substantial progress in enforcing a whistleblower protection policy. The development of a systemwide code of ethics was one of his top priorities and would be undertaken in the near future, in consultation with staff and management from multiple UN entities. In the past year, the ethics office has hired a permanent director and additional staff and has developed and provided ethics standards, training, and guidance. Between August 1, 2006, and July 31, 2007, the Ethics Office received 52 complaints of whistleblower retaliation. UN has begun to enforce a whistleblower protection policy. Concerns have been raised about the policy’s lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and programs. The UN has made some progress in collecting and analyzing financial disclosure forms for 2005 and 2006. The Government Accountability Project has criticized the effectiveness of the current UN whistleblower Protection policy. It has recommended that the jurisdiction of the ethics office be extended to UN funds, programs and possibly to specialized agencies. The Secretary-General has recommended the General Assembly consider broadening the jurisdiction to cover all UN entities. policy is its lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and programs. In August 2007, after initially reviewing a whistleblower retaliation case of an employee at the UN Development Program, the ethics office and the Office of Legal and Procurement Services concluded that the UN’s whistleblower protection policy applies only to employees directly under the Secretary-General. UN and State officials told us that the whistleblower protection. policy is limited in its effectiveness if it is not applied to the entire. of the United Nations, including the Development Program. Congress, as we recommended. In addition, State agreed with us that more could be done to ensure credible oversight at the UN. State did not agree with our statement that successful whistleblower protections cannot be established without substantial reform of the UN’s internal justice program. Without a fair and impartial justice system that effectively executes corrective action in cases of retaliation or threatened retaliation, staff may not submit cases to the ethics office. Also, the annual activities report of the ethicsOffice states that protection against retaliation is linked to the internal justice system. current system to be fair or impartial and, consequently, might not come forward with claims of retaliation. In its August 2007 annual activities report, the ethics office expressed a concern that it had not had an opportunity to provide input into its role in the proposed new internal justice system. UN and State officials told us another concern about the whistleblower protection policy is its lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and other funds. The office expressed the importance of its inclusion in the justice reform process and said it was looking forward to working with the new system.