the Fed, negotiates with foreign regulators and multilateral organizations to coordinate prudential supervision and regulation for all highly leveraged and interconnected financial companies. The Secretary plays a role in recommending receivership procedures for failing firms that have been designated as systemic. Once a recommendation for receivership has been made, the Secretary is to make the determination and findings that trigger the resolution regime under the FDIC. The determination must address (1) the likelihood that the firm will default or is in default; (2) the likely effect of the firm's failure on financial stability. the FDIC as receiver. Note that the determination requires two-thirds vote of both the Fed and the FDIC board. The FDIC is to provide to the Secretary and the comptroller general an annual accounting report of receiverships. The Secretary must notify certain majority and ranking members of Congress within 24 hours of the appointment. The rules and regulations that theFDIC issues for the use of funds pursuant to receivership must be acceptable to the secretary. The secretary has a number of roles regarding orderly liquidation plans of covered institutions. FDIC may pay resolution costs as described in Section 204(d) of the DFA. Once a resolution has been undertaken, the FDIC has reporting requirements to the FSOC and to Congress. The FDIC must deliver a written report to the appropriate congressional committees, providing additional details of the receivership. These additional details include but are not limited to (1) describing the financial condition of the failing firm at the time of receivership, and (2) describing FDIC's plan to resolve the failing company. of roles regarding orderly liquidation plans of covered institutions. Amounts from the resolution fund to support orderlyLiquidation under a liquidation plan must be acceptable to the Secretary. To date, no firms have been subject to an orderly Liquidation. Since its creation in 1913, the Federal Reserve (the Fed) has had the authority to liquidate covered institutions with the help of the FDIC. The FDIC is to assure the Secretary of a repayment plan for the orderly liquidations plan, and the Secretary and theFDIC must report to Congress on the terms of the repayment plan. Congress created the Fed as a lender of last resort following the recommendations of a commission established to investigate the causes of a financial panic that had occurred in 1907. Relative financial stability after WWII, and congressional directives to focus on price stability and maximum employment, may have redirected the Fed's focus to macroeconomic variables. But addressing financial market instability has always been a core mission of the Fed. Under the FSOC, the Fed will not only be a lender, but will also conduct monetary policy under the new rules. The FDIC has had the authority to administratively resolve insured depositories (banks and thrifts) that fail, rather than proceed through the bankruptcy courts. The DFA extends this authority to certain large and complex non-bank financial companies, under some circumstances. In addition to the Treasury Secretary's authority, the FDIC, with the concurrence of the Fed, may also recommend a determination of systemic risk from failing non-banks. The FDIC's determination must include the votes of two-thirds of theFDIC's Board. The FDIC has powers over any of the firms' subsidiaries that pose systemic risk. The FDIC is to pay valid obligations, subject to its systemic risk determinations. The resolution is intended to ensure that shareholders and unsecured creditors bear losses. TheFDIC may pay resolution costs as described in Section 204(d) of the FDIC Act. It can form bridge companies for the purpose of orderly liquidation. It has the rights, titles, and privileges of the failing firm. It takes over its assets, with rights of collection. For banks that accept deposits insured by the FDIC, technically "insured depositories," the general prudential regulatory approach and resolution regimes were relatively unchanged. For large, complex non-banks, the DFA instructs the FSOC to identify which firms are systemically important, designates the Fed as the prudential regulator of these firms. The FDIC can resolve covered non- Banks outside the bankruptcy courts under certain circumstances. Under the D FA, policymakers have tried to construct resolution regimes for both banks and non-bank financial firms that will dispel investor fears. The DFA permits the Fed to establish standards for systemic firms in a number of additional areas. In cases in which the covered firm has another primary regulator (such as the OCC), the Fed is to give the primary regulator reasonable notice of the proposed examination. These areas include a contingent capital requirement, enhanced public disclosures, short-term debt limits, and such other prudential standards as the Board of Governors, on its own or pursuant to a recommendation made by the FSOC, determines are appropriate. The FSOC has the ability to classify (or "designate" as used in the law and this report) certain non-banks as systemic. Systemic firms with more than $50 billion in assets must also provide and maintain resolution plans (so-called living wills), which must be jointly approved by the Fed and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The FSOC provides a common forum for financial regulators to evaluate and address risks to the stability of the financial system, including systemic risks that might emanate from less regulated non-bank financial institutions. A two-thirds vote of the FSOC is required to designate a non-bank as posing systemic risk. However, one of the affirmative votes must be that of the Secretary of the Treasury. This applies to domestic and foreign firms, and for anti-evasion. In other words, the chair of theFSOC has an effective veto over the designation of individual firms as systemically important. The chair's vote is required. to address those concerns at the hearing. The Secretary has special powers regarding the designation. of systemic non- bank firms. would be difficult to construct or estimate a firm-specific index of systemic risk arising from this type of contagion. The next section discusses the membership of the FSOC, and the special roles that some members have with respect to these six policy tools. The FSOC has 10 voting members and 5 nonvoting members. The council is chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury. Voting members include prudential bank regulators (e.g., the Office of the Comptroller and the Currency [OCC] and the FDIC) securities market regulators (e.g., the Commodity Futures Trading Commission [CFTC] and the SEC), and an independent insurance expert appointed by the President, with Senate confirmation. The nonvoting members include state level representatives from bank, securities, and insurance regulators, as well as the directors from the OFR and the Federal Insurance Office (FIO) Several agencies have special roles in addressing the kinds of systemic risks that the FSOC was designed to monitor. The DFA grants specific authority under certain circumstances for the Secretary of the Treasury, the Fed, and the FDIC to act without further approval. Treasury Secretary has a number of important functions on the FSOC that differ from the other members of the council. The Secretary of the Treasury has a consultative role with the OFR, which is responsible for certain research functions related to those reports and in other areas. The Treasury Secretary, along with the Fed, negotiates with foreign regulators and multilateral organizations to resolve non-banks' financial problems. The Fed's role as prudential regulator of firms designated systemic by the FS OC is beyond the scope of this report. The FSOC was created to address some of the perceived regulatory weaknesses that may have contributed to the magnitude of the financial crisis of 2008. OFR is housed within the Department of the Treasury, although it is funded separately. Congressional staff may be interested in the organization, actions, and assessments of the FSOC, especially if a systemic financial event were to occur, a covered non-bank financial institution were to fail, and when the Secretary of theTreasury offers testimony fail. The FSOC provides a common forum for financial regulators to communicate. FSOC meetings, congressional reports and testimony, and certain rulemakings and recommendations of the council. The Secretary must testify before the House Committee on Financial Services and the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs in conjunction with the release of the annual FSOC report. If any member agencies have notified Congress of deficiencies in systemic risk efforts, the Secretary is to address those concerns at the hearing. The secretary may call a meeting of the FSOC if a majority of the members call it. The DFA does not define the terms financial stability or systemic risk. The first FSOC annual report (2011) described some essential features of stable financial systems. Applying the FSOC's interpretation of financial stability as used in Title I of the DFA, the mission of theFSOC is to help avoid financial activities, practices, and regulations that might spread or magnify shocks to the financial system. There is no single, commonly accepted definition of the term systemic risk among financial professionals. will analyze the perceived threats to financial stability as identified in law and by the FSOC in its 2013 annual report. Items (1) and (2) are arguably directed at minimizing the chances that particular firms will be viewed as too big to fail, or too connected to fail. Item (3) is arguably a more general catch-all for any factors that might destabilize the financial system. However, the DFA uses the terms financial stability and systemic risk in several places. For example, Section 112 directs member agencies to state in writing whether the agency believes that all reasonable steps are being taken "to ensure financial stability" both banks and non-bank financial firms that will dispel investor expectations that some firms are too big to fail. This report will discuss the FSOC's mission and issues it is intended to address in Section I, and the members and their roles in Section II. Section III will analyze the perceived threats to financial stability as identified in Section IV. The report will also provide more detail on the mission, members, and recommendations of theFSOC during the 113 th Congress. It will conclude with a list of recommendations for the 113th Congress. provision of any funding to the receivership out of the Fund, and (4) explaining the expected costs of resolving the firm. The FSOC's annual report to Congress is to include an analysis of perceived threats to the financial system. The following sections analyze specific threats mentioned in the 2013 FSOC annual report. For each topic, the reader is provided a brief description of the issue, how it might contribute to a systemic event, and a analysis of the FSOC report. Although commercial banks raise significant funds through insured deposits, banks and other financial institutions also use a variety of financial institutions. The 2013 annual report noted several initiatives to address operational issues. The tri-party repo task force has recommended improvements to the settlement and clearing processes in among the two central clearing banks to reduce their intra-day credit exposure. Reportedly, major financial institutions have been subjected to attempts to access confidential information or disrupt their telecommunications (cyberattacks). In the section of the 2013 report devoted to operational issues, the FSOC highlighted the need to improve the transparency and security of the financial markets in the United States. regulation of certain non-banks . The FSOC establishes the criteria and designates which firms will be subject to additional prudential regulation by the Fed. An example of a financial market utility would be an organization that provides settlement and clearing services. The distinction between depository banks and non-bank financial firms is important to understanding the FSOC because many of the new powers attempt to create a regulatory and resolution regime for non- Banks that is similar to the way depository Banks are handled. The term bank is used to refer to a financial firm. The Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) is composed of the heads of the agencies that regulate financial institutions and markets. The council has its own permanent staff in the newly created Office of Financial Research (OFR) The DFA establishes a regulatory framework of which the FSOC is a consultative council. The new regulatory regime has six basic policy tools with which to pursue its mission. It has a permanent staff with the ability to gather confidential financial information and the staff of the OFR are to be experts in the financial field. Dodd-Frank Act provides a mechanism between the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve to decide what is an appropriate new financial activity for a financial subsidiary. Financial Stability Oversight Council — A council created by the Dodd- Frank Act. Firewalls —Barriers that prevent banks from engaging in activities that would not otherwise be permitted within the bank itself, subject to certain limits. The Federal Reserve Board of Governors — A body that reviews the performance of the Fed’s balance sheet and determines whether it is in a position to intervene. Financial intermediaries, including but not limited to banks, can be damaged by rising interest rates if they have not adequately addressed the mismatch between the interest rates on their cost of funds and their revenues from longer-term lending. The revelations of manipulation of the London Interbank Offer Rate (LIBOR) has cast doubt on the accuracy of key reference rates used to benchmark interest rates in many private contracts. The economy improves driving up the rates or because a negative shock causes a spike in interest rates. Wrong There are several examples of rising interest rates contributing to stress in the financial system. Rising rates in the 1970s and 1980s created a great deal of stress for banks. Under-reporting of LIBOR rates in 2008 may have given financial regulators an overoptimistic view of the lending ability of major financial institutions. rising rates during 2004-2006 contributed to the end of the housing bubble (which would have ended eventually, but perhaps not at that time) and a significant sell-off in the bond market. exchange rate, expansionary monetary policies can cause exchange rates to depreciate, and thus exports to rise and imports to fall. The 2013 FSOC report addressed several issues related to global financial stability. The FSOC noted a number of positive developments in Europe, including the potential for the European Central Bank (ECB) to purchase sovereign debt of member states under some circumstances. However, the report also noted that banking disruptions and policy changes could have a negative impact on the global economy. The report also noted that banking disruptions and policy responses in Cyprus (which briefly cast doubt on the status of insured bank deposits) create downside risk. austerity programs in Europe have "contributed to a contraction in euro-area economies," although euro area deficits may also have declined. The report also discussed expansionary monetary policies in Japan, which have contributed to a depreciation of the Yen. The U.S. has a strong financial stability interest in Japan finally escaping from deflation and securing more robust growth. Future interest rate changes may be a source of financial instability. A global savings glut, deficient aggregate demand, and central bank interest-rate policies have contributed to an extended period of low interest rates. At some point, interest rates are likely to rise, either because the demand for loanable funds rises as the economy improves driving up the rates or because of a change in the central bank's policy. The SEC recently proposed Regulation Systems Compliance and Integrity (Regulation SCI) to try to address malfunctions in capital markets. Investigation and prosecutions related to LIBOR (and similar reference rates) may reduce the incentive to misreport. The FSOC did express concern at potential reaches for yield, noting that the issuance of high yield bonds (riskier classes of bonds) had increased markedly. Underwriting standards for collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) had reportedly loosened. Furthermore, threats to financial stability posed by rising rates are mitigated in part by one of the potential causes of rising rates—improved financial conditions. if any of their investments experience losses. Certain pension systems may find it difficult to earn adequate returns safely. Other investors may have a greater temptation to "reach for yield" by investing in more risky categories of investments, increasing the likelihood of asset bubbles in other markets. In its 2013 report, the FSOC attributes current interest rates (low yields) to three factors. First, capital market participants forecast continued low interest rate policies by major central banks globally. Second is the second is the third. policies by major central banks globally. The second is the pricing of short-term risk, which is partially caused by the increase in Treasury market purchases by institutions with low-risk sensitivity. The third factor cited by the FSOC is the willingness of bond market buyers to accept credit risk (i.e., the risk that borrowers will not pay back fully and on time). Provisions for credit losses and loan losses have declined recently. The FSOC notes a number of initiatives to mitigate the risks when interest rates do rise. The combination of higher interest rates and higher outstanding debt can cause interest payments to crowd out other government programs. The FSOC does not see a gradual normalization of long-term Treasury yields and volatilities as a significant threat to fiscal imbalances or the wider economy. However, the long-runImbalances could threaten financial instability if there is a sudden spike in yields. TheFSOC notes that a sudden rise in yields could lead to a sharp increase in the cost of borrowing. the possibility of sovereign debt restructuring, or in the extreme a sovereign default. The resulting financial instability can cause credit to dry up, interest rates to rise, and may magnify the financial difficulties of the sovereign experiencing the financial stress. At a minimum, exposed institutions may find it difficult to find counterparties for new transactions and may suffer withdrawals, or refusals to renew loans, from existing counterparties. The mere change in the perceived risk of Sovereign debt can cause people to try to avoid institutions and markets with large exposure to that country's debt. There is no formal way to address a sovereign default. European sovereign debt crises have been a series of evolving government funding and banking crises. Even if central banks target their domestic economies rather than their exchange rate, expansionary monetary policies can cause exchange rates to go up. The global financial crisis could spread through a number of channels through which financial instability could be spread. The U.S. Federal Reserve could be forced to raise interest rates to keep the economy from overheating. The European Central Bank may have to raise its benchmark rate to keep inflation under control. There are many channels through which financial instability can cross borders. The failure of a global bank could cause cross-border resolution issues. Capital flights away from some countries can cause global investment money to flood other countries. Sovereign debt problems or banking policies in one country can cast doubt on the reliability of government debts or guarantees in other country. In introductory finance classes, sovereign debt is seen as a major source of financial instability in the U.S. It can cause asset bubbles in the recipient country. Recent events in Europe have cast serious doubt on this simplifying assumption. Changes in the perceived risk of the debt of sovereigns are potential threats to financial stability. Financial institutions and financial systems do not typically retain capital buffers against the possibility of sovereign debt restructuring, or in the extreme, writes David Blanchard at the Bank of England. In introductory finance classes, sovereign debt of the governments of developed economies is often characterized as a risk-free asset, writes Blachard. In other countries, such as Greece, Cyprus, Italy, Portugal, Ireland, many financial regulators and financial institutions treat those debts as if they were risk- free. States have been viewed as a safe haven for some foreign investors and central banks. In the short run, governments with large fiscal imbalances run the risk that investors may suddenly demand higher yields to roll-over existing debt. Unlike Cyprus or Greece, short-term fiscal problems of the U.S. could be cushioned by purchases of Treasury securities by the Fed (which would be likely because a short-run fiscal crisis is often accompanied by the same kinds of poor economic conditions that cause the Fed to expand) The FSOC notes that the financial impact of potentially disruptive short-run fiscal events has had "minimal impact" thus far. U.S. debt is still seen as a safe harbor despite the automatic tax increases and spending cuts at the start of 2013 (the fiscal cliff) and the February 2013 debt ceiling debates. Financial instability overseas can threaten financial stability in the United States. There are many ways in which financial instability abroad can affect financial stability at home, the FSOC says. The FSOC also notes that financial markets are global. Long-term fiscal policy refers to the balance between expected government spending and revenues over an extended time horizon. The United States has not experienced any backlash in bond markets for running extended fiscal deficits. Not only has the yield on U.S. Treasury bonds remained low, but obligations of the United States have been viewed as a safe haven for some. The CBO and other projections of long- term fiscal policy project an imbalance between expected federal revenues and expected federal spending for an extended period of time (spending commitments are greater than expected revenue streams) Fiscal policy refers to the relationship of government revenues and spending. Typically, recessions cause government revenues to decline and government spending to rise (fiscal policy expands) Economic booms can cause fiscal policy to contract if government revenues expand faster than government spending. Even if rates rise for the "wrong" reason, a second credit crunch is unlikely. The measurable financial resilience of major banks (such as capital levels and measures of liquidity) have improved. The potential causes of rising rates—improved financial conditions. deflation and securing more robust growth. Two companies are affiliated when one owns all or a large part of another. All subsidiaries are affiliates, but affiliates that are less than 50% controlled are usually not treated as subsidiaries. Asset-backed security is a bond that represents a share in a pool of debt obligations or other assets. The CRS Glossary of Terms has been compiled from several earlier CRS reports, the FCIC report, the CFTC and SIFMA websites, and from other sources. Business loans, and car loans. Financial institutions and activities that in some respects parallel banking activities but are subject to less regulation than commercial banks. Institutions include mutual funds, investment banks, and hedge funds. Special-purpose entities (SPEs)—Also referred to as off–balance-sheet arrangements, SPEs are legal entities created to perform a specific financial function or transaction. The assets, liabilities, and cash flows of an SPE do not appear on the sponsoring institution's books. Speculation — A venture or undertaking of an enterprising nature, especially one involving considerable financial risk. respond to emerging threats to U.S. financial stability. Firewalls —Barriers to the flow of capital, information, management, and other resources among business units owned by a common entity. In case of financial distress of one operation ("fire"), the "walls" are intended to prevent the spread of loss to the other units. Example: losses in a securities subsidiary of a holding company could not be covered by any of the holding company's bank subsidiaries. Foreign bank —Banks and their holding companies headquartered in other countries may have a variety of financial operations in the United States. Hedge funds are essentially unregulated mutual funds. They are pools of invested money that buy and sell stocks and bonds and many other assets, including precious metals, commodities, foreign currencies, and derivatives. A percentage reduction from the stated value (e.g., book value or market value) to account for possible declines in value that may occur before assets can be liquidated.a funding advantage over purely private competitors, while their charters restrict the kinds of businesses they may conduct. A haircut is a reduction in the value of assets for purposes of capital, segregation, or margin requirements. commodities, foreign currencies, and derivatives. Hedge funds are limited to qualified investors with high net worth. Illiquid Assets —Assets that cannot be easily or quickly sold. Insolvent —A firm whose liabilities exceed its assets. Institutional regulation —Regulation that is institution-specific as contrasted with activity specific (see "Functional regulation"). Investment bank —A financial intermediary, active in commodities, foreign currency, and other financial instruments. Hedge fund —Investing to reduce the impact of adverse movements in interest rates, commodities, or securities prices. that pools the funds of individuals and other investors, and uses them to purchase large amounts of debt or equity obligations of businesses and sometimes debt obligations of governments. Owners pay taxes on their distributions from a fund; the mutual fund itself is not normally subject to federal or state income taxation. Naked option —The sale of a call or put option without holding an equal and opposite position in the underlying instrument. Net Asset Value (or NAV)—Value of an fund's pool of securities in which a fund invests. Government, because their failure would destabilize the entire financial system. Tri-Party Repo Market — A repurchase agreement in which a third party agrees to clear and settle the transaction and to monitor and assure the treatment of collateral. Umbrella supervision — The term applied to comprehensive regulation of a holding company and its parts by one or more holding company regulator(s) Undercapitalized — A condition in which the business does not have enough capital to meet its needs. Variable Rate Demand Obligation — A security which pays a variable rate of interest.  Variable Rate Demand Obligation — A security which pays a variable interest rate, and can be redeemed upon the demand of the holder. Write-Downs —Reducing the value of an asset as it is carried on a firm's balance sheet because the market value has fallen. Appendix B. Acronyms for the variable rate demand obligation are: VRODO, VODO-R, VOR, VDO-R and VODR-R. For more information, visit the Bank of England's website. undertaking of an enterprising nature, especially one involving considerable financial risk on the chance of unusual profit. State regulation —Under the dual system of bank regulation, states as well as the federal government may charter, regulate, and supervise depository institutions. States are the primary regulators in the insurance field. States also have authority over securities companies, mortgage lending companies, personal finance companies, and other types of companies offering financial services. Structured debt —Debt that has been customized for the buyer, often by incorporating complex derivatives. senior debt takes priority. Subordinate debt holders receive payment only after senior debt claims are paid in full. Subsidiary is a company whose controlling shares are owned 50% or more by another corporation. Like companies with less than 50% ownership, it is an affiliate of the controlling company. A subsidiary is usually consolidated for regulatory and reporting purposes with its parent. Systemic Risk does not have a single, agreed-upon definition. Some define systemic risk as the risk an institution faces that it cannot diversify against. In other circumstances, systemic risk is Consolidated Supervised Entities program — Securities and Exchange Commission program that provided voluntary supervision for the five largest investment bank conglomerates. Conservatorship —When an insolvent financial institution is reorganized by a regulator with the intent to restoring it to an ongoing business. Counterparty —The opposite party in a bilateral agreement, contract, or transaction, such as a swap. Credit Default Swap (CDS)—A tradeable contract in which one party agrees to pay another if a third party experiences a credit event. party experiences a credit event, such as default on a debt obligation, bankruptcy, or credit rating downgrade. Credit Risk —The risk that a borrower will fail to repay a loan in full, or that a derivatives counterparty will default. Credit Rating Agency —Private company that evaluates the credit quality of securities and provides ratings on those securities. Credit Union —A nonprofit financial cooperative of individuals with one or more common bonds. May be state or nationally. May not be a credit union, but may be a member of a labor union. The Fed will also have additional supervision and examination authority for individual non-banks designated by the FSOC. The Dodd-Frank Act directs the Fed to supervise certain large non-bank financial companies. The regulatory standards for non-Bank financial firms under Fed supervision must be more stringent than the standard for not-Bank firms under the Fed's supervision. The FSOC recommends the standards for the non- bank financial firms that the Fed may supervise, including those that do not present systemic risks. characteristics of non-bank firms that the Fed may supervise. The Fed has several powers and duties over covered bank holding companies and non-banks. Standards for foreign firms are to acknowledge equality of competitive opportunity and take into account the extent to which the foreign non- bank is subject to comparable standards in its home country, the Fed said in a letter to the European Commission. The letter was sent to European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, the head of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and the European Central Bank. bank holding companies and non-banks, upon a two-thirds vote of the FSOC. For example, the Fed can limit the ability of the company to merge with other companies. It can restrict the products the firm offers, or impose conditions on the manner that the firm conducts activities. The Fed also has information collection authority, including through examinations, for covered firms, although the Fed is to rely on existing data sources to the extent possible. In cases in which the Fed decides to impose conditions, the company must sell assets or off-balance-sheet items to unaffiliated entities. share in a pool of debt obligations or other assets. The holder is entitled to some part of the repayment flows from the underlying debt. Bank Holding Company Act —The federal statute under which the Fed regulates bank holding companies and financial holding companies (FHC) Financial institution —An enterprise that uses its funds chiefly to purchase financial assets such as loans and debt securities, as opposed to tangible property. Financial institutions are differentiated by the manner in which they invest their funds: in loans, bonds, stocks, or stocks. Investment banking functions include underwriting (marketing newly registered securities to individual or institutional investors), counseling regarding merger and acquisition proposals, brokerage services, advice on corporate financing, and proprietary trading. Investment bank holding company —A holding company for securities firms authorized under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. Such holding companies are subject to regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Issuer —A person or entity (including a company or bank) that offers securities for sale. The issuing of securities, where the proceeds accrue to the issuer, is distinct from the sale of securities. National and state-chartered banks are authorized to form financial subsidiaries to engage in activities that would not otherwise be permitted. Non-depository financial institutions such as life and property/casualty insurance companies, pension funds, and mutual funds obtain funds through other types of receipts, whose values may fluctuate with market conditions. Under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ), both national and state chartered banks are authorized to form financial subsidiaries. Primary federal regulator is the Federal Reserve, under the International Banking Act of 1978 as amended. States and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency may also regulate them. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ) called for more functional regulation than in the past. Government-sponsored enterprise (GSEs) are private companies with government charters. Government sponsorship typically gives them a funding advantage over purely private competitors, while their charters are public. Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act provides a mechanism between the Federal Reserve and the Department of the Treasury to decide what is an appropriate new financial activity for FHCs. Blue sky laws —State statutes that govern the offering and selling of securities. Broker/dealer —An individual or firm that buys and sells securities for itself as well as for customers. Bubble —Self-reinforcing process in which the price of an asset exceeds its fundamental value for a sustained period. The chair's vote is required to rescind or reevaluate the systemic designation of a firm. In emergencies, the chair's affirmative vote is needed as part of the determination that a non-bank will not be granted the usual hearing before its designation as systemic. As part of those anti-evasion provisions, if certain large recipients of Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) funds (specifically, if they hold over $50 billion) cease to be bank holding companies, they are automatically considered a systemically significant firm. owners' stake in an enterprise. It is a critical line of defense when losses occur. Capital requirements help assure that losses that might occur will accrue to the institution incurring them. In the case of banking institutions experiencing problems, capital also serves as a buffer against losses to the federal deposit insurance funds. Capital Purchase Program —Initiative under the Troubled Asset Relief Program providing financial assistance to U.S. financial institutions through the purchase of senior preferred shares in the corporations on standardized terms. Charter conversion —Banking institutions may, with the approval of their regulators, change their charter. institutions that did not accept deposits, but had their own prudential regulatory regime under the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight. In common parlance, people have sometimes referred to "too-big-to-fail" firms (TBTF), but what is typically meant are complex and interconnected financial institutions that may not rely on deposits. As then-Federal Reserve Governor Donald Kohn evaluated lessons from the financial crisis, "We [the Fed] traditionally have provided backup liquidity to sound depository institutions" Governor Kohn expressed frustration for the perceived inadequacy of existing tools to deal with TBTF non-banks. Dissatisfaction with existing regulation grew with the progression of the mortgage crisis that began in August 2007. Some of this support was designed to prevent some creditors of failing non- Banks from protracted uncertainty in the bankruptcy courts or in the courts of appeal. The failure may spread and magnify losses throughout the financial system—rather than absolute firm size.and interconnected financial institutions that may not rely on deposits for a large share of their funding. Systemic risk is defined as the risk that the linkages between institutions may affect the financial system as a whole. Too-big-to-fail doctrine — An implicit regulatory policy holding that very large financial institutions must be rescued by the government, because their failure would destabilize the entire financial system. Thrift holding company —Also known as a savings and loan holding company, a business that controls one or more savings associations. These holding companies are regulated under the Home Owners' Loan Act by the Office of Thrift Supervision. FDIC (or NCUA for credit unions), not through the bankruptcy courts. Banks generally have access to liquidity facilities, such as the Federal Reserve discount window. Non-bank refers to financial institutions that offer loans or other sources of capital, but do not have a bank charter and do not rely on deposits for their own funding. Prior to the financial crisis of 2008, Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers were examples of large, complex, non-bank financial institutions, even though in some cases they may have had relatively small subsidiaries that accepted deposits. relatively small subsidiaries that accepted deposits (technically "thrifts"). Some non-banks accepted prudential regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Bankruptcy courts were to handle failures among most non- banks, and non-bank subsidiaries of banks. The government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, are large, complex financial institutions that did not accept deposits, but had their own subsidiaries that were regulated by the SEC. The insurance company American International Group (AIG) is another example of a large non- bank financial institution that had a relatively small subsidiary that accepts deposits. The term bank generally refers to financial institutions with bank, thrift, or credit union charters that offer loans and raise a large proportion of their funds through insured deposits. Insured depository banks have prudential regulators who monitor their assets and liabilities. Prudential regulators of banks coordinate through the Federal Financial Institutions Examinations Council (FFIEC) Resolution of failing depository Banks is done administratively by the FDIC (or NCUA for credit unions), not through the bankruptcy. banks are typically limited to acting as dealers in specified high-quality debt obligations, such as those of the federal government. Deposits are a customer's funds placed with an institution according to agreed on terms and conditions and represent a credit to the depositor. Derivatives are financial contracts whose value is linked to the price of an underlying commodity or financial variable (such as an interest rate, currency price, or stock index). Ownership of a Derivative is a form of ownership. residence in the same neighborhood). May be state or nationally chartered. Credit unions accept deposits of members' savings and transaction balances in the form of share accounts. The federal regulator for credit unions is the National Credit Union Administration. Commercial banks are typically limited to acting as dealers in specified markets, such as metals, foreign exchange, etc., for its own account and at its own risk as principal (see "Broker/dealer" for more information. The Federal Reserve is the nation's primary regulator of credit unions. The phrase refers to the fact that banks may be either federally or state chartered. The term derives from the practice whereby bankers would come to a Reserve Bank teller window to obtain credit in the early days of the Federal Reserve System. In the case of state-chartered banks, the state is the primary regulator; for national banks the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency is the main regulator. To have tried to borrow elsewhere first and must provide collateral as security for loans. interest rate, currency price, or stock index). Ownership of a derivative does not require the holder to actually buy or sell the underlying interest. Derivatives are used by hedgers, who seek to shift risk to others, and speculators, who can profit if they can successfully forecast price trends. Examples include futures contracts, options, and swaps. Discount window —Figurative term for the Federal Reserve facility for extending credit directly to eligible depository institutions. It may be used to relieve temporary cash shortages at banks. central marketplace with established rules and regulations where buyers and sellers meet to trade futures and options contracts or securities. Federal safety net —A broad term referring to protection of banking institutions through deposit insurance, discount window credit, other lender of last resort support. Commercial and industrial companies generally lack any of these cushions against loss. Federal Open Market Committee —Its members are the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and certain of the presidents of Federal Reserve Banks; oversees market conditions and implements monetary policy through such means. Banking institutions may, with the approval of their regulators, switch their corporate form between: commercial bank or savings institution, National or State charter, and to stockholder ownership from depositor ownership. Various regulatory conditions may encourage switching. Clearing Organization —An entity through which futures and other derivative transactions are cleared and settled. Collateralized debt obligation (CDO)—A bond created by the securitization of a pool of asset backed securities. (See CLO and CMO.) Collateralized loan obligation (CLO) is a bond created by the securitization of a pool of loans, bonds, or asset backed securities. Commercial bank is a deposit-taking institution that can make commercial loans, accept checking accounts. National banks are chartered by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency; state banks, by the individual states. Commercial Paper Funding Facility Emergency Program — created to provide funding for commercial paper transactions in the wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. savings and loan association, mutual savings bank, or federal savings bank. charters have been expanded to allow them to provide commercial loans and a broader range of consumer financial services. The federal regulator for most savings associations is the Office of Thrift Supervision. Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC)—a private nonprofit membership corporation set up under federal law to provide financial protection for the customers of failed brokers. Also known as savings and loans, thrifts, and mutual savings banks, these institutions encourage personal saving and home buying through mortgage lending. to provide financial protection for the customers of failed brokers and/or dealers. SIPC is a liquidator; it has no supervisory or regulatory responsibilities for its members. It is not authorized to bail out or in other ways assist a failing firm. Securitization is the process of transforming a cash flow, typically from debt repayments, into a new marketable security. Holders of the securitized instrument receive interest and principal payments as the underlying loans are repaid. Types of loans that are frequently securited are home mortgages, credit card receivables, student loans, small business loans, and car loans. Over-the-counter (OTC)—Trading that does not occur on a centralized exchange or trading facility. OTC transactions can occur electronically or over the telephone. Receivership —When an insolvent financial institution is taken over with the intent to liquidate its assets. Repurchase Agreement (Repos) —A method of secured lending where the borrower sells securities to the lender as collateral and agrees to repurchase them at a higher price within a short period, often within one day. Federal Reserve Governor Daniel Tarullo identified four such ways that in his view are most common. Domino effects occur when the failure of one firm causes its creditors to fail, which causes the creditors' creditors to failing. Fire sales may become reinforcing when a product serves.standing in a crowded stadium sees better, that strategy will fail if everyone stands at the same time. The FSOC's approach addresses commonly understood channels of risk proliferation, one might examine central bankers' views of ways that failing firms can damage financial stability.  domino effects, fire sales, and critical functions, depend upon a firm's connections to other firms. These three forms of interconnectedness will typically be correlated with the size and scope of the firm. If potential creditors to large firms judge that governments are likely to intervene to prevent an eventual bankruptcy, then this lower perceived risk of default may result in creditors being willing to offer the firms loans on easier terms than their less interconnected competitors. Big firms may thus gain funding advantages over smaller competitors, reinforcing the tendency. the same industry or with similar assets are likely to be in financial trouble. Contagion can result in the restriction of liquidity to other firms as possible counterparties shy away. The failure of critical functions can cause systemic risk if a firm provides a unique financial service with no close substitutes. For example, if a clearinghouse has a monopoly on settlement services for a market, and the clearinghouse fails, then other market participants may not be able to process their own transactions. Three of the sources of systemic risk identified by Tarullo, domino effects, fire sales, and critical functions, depend on each other. The remaining source of systemic risk identified by Tarullo, contagion, is relatively independent of firm size and complexity. Like the death of a canary in a coal mine, the failure of even the smallest firm may signal that large firms, if they are exposed to similar risks, may be in danger. Systemic risk regulators may attempt to construct and estimate a firm-specific index of systemicrisk arising from these three sources of instability. The information that comes from these sources is based on the information that is available to the public. define systemic risk, all definitions attempt to capture risks to the stability of the financial system as a whole. Possible features of systemic risks include externalities and the fallacy of composition. With externalities, there are costs or benefits of actions by financial market participants that are not borne by those participants. With fallacies of composition, what is true for each individual firm in isolation may not be true when all firms follow similar strategies. Just as while one person standing in a crowded stadium sees better, that strategy will. in danger. Tarullo interprets the run on money market mutual funds that occurred in September 2008 as contagion that had little to do with the size, complexity, or transparency of Lehman Brothers. Contagion is thus based on the information that a firm's failure provides to investors, rather than a specific transactions or interconnections of the failed firm. If correct, it would be difficult to construct or estimate a firm-specific index if it were to be constructed or estimated. reliance on government assisted sources of funding increased markedly as a share of all mortgage funding in 2008. At the origination level, the mortgage market share of Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans increased even for borrowers who could offer significant down payments with their house purchase. Private mortgage securitization almost completely evaporated, making the government sponsored enterprises (GSEs) the dominant providers of wholesale mortgage funding. GSE funding has a variety of government support, including preferred stock purchases by the government. variety of government support, including preferred stock purchases by the U.S. Treasury. The lack of significant private capital in mortgage funding is a sign that financial instability in mortgage markets has not yet completely healed. It has been an announced goal of the FSOC to restore private capital as the primary source of long-term mortgage funding, along with improvements in consumer protection and consumer protection. The FSOC was formed in September 2008 to stabilize the mortgage market and prevent a repeat of the Great Depression. The 2013 annual report says that there has been significant improvement in mortgage markets, but additional progress is needed. There may be regulatory uncertainty as federal agencies implement changes to regulations related to the mortgage market. The conservatorship agreements (Treasury Preferred Stock Purchase Agreements, PSPAs) have been modified to expedite the wind-down of the retained portfolios of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Regulatory uncertainty in mortgage Markets may be reduced by the publication of final rules for the Real Estate Settlement Procedures. long-term mortgage funding, along with improvements in consumer protection and financial stability. House prices have begun rising in a number of areas, default rates and foreclosures are no longer rising sharply. The flow business (current mortgage revenues and guarantee fees compared with current payments) of the GSEs has been positive in recent quarters. One possible contributing factor for a delay in the return of private capital to mortgage markets is general pessimism about the speed of economic recovery in general and housing in particular. failing non-banks from protracted uncertainty in the bankruptcy courts or other resolution process. Similarly, for some qualified financial contracts, support may have been designed so that some creditors would not suffer losses in a bankruptcy process. For example, in March 2008, losses on mortgage-related securities caused the distress sale of investment bank Bear Stearns. The Fed provided financial support for the purchase of Bear St earns by JPMorgan. In July 2008, the GSEs, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, had trouble raising additional capital. Policymakers tried unsuccessfully to enhance investor confidence by pledging financial support. enhance investor confidence by pledging financial support for the GSEs. Despite this pledge, in September 2008, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were placed in conservatorship with explicit financial support from Treasury. Lehman Brothers failed shortly thereafter, and declared bankruptcy when no firm was willing to purchase the investment bank without additional public support, which was not forthcoming. AIG, one of the world's largest insurers, would have failed the day after Lehman, but the Fed intervened on behalf of AIG. declaration of bankruptcy by Lehman Brothers, financial panic spread to other non-bank institutions and markets. Treasury offered a temporary guarantee program for money market mutual funds. Congress provided Treasury with up to $700 billion to address troubled assets (such as mortgages) in the financial system. Despite these interventions to recapitalize and restore confidence in financial institutions, damage to the broader economy (as measured by unemployment and lost output) was severe. Congress passed the DFA to reform the financial regulatory system. W wholesale funding can have many of the characteristics of a bank run by depositors. Unlike deposits, sources of wholesale funding typically do not have any government guarantee. Collateralized lending can be subject to fire sales because borrower defaults are likely to occur at the same time that the market for the collateral is also distressed. When the lender seizes the collateral, the value of the collateral may be falling. The addition of the distress sales by lenders can magnify a downward spiral in prices. The 2013 annual report notes some positive and negative developments (from the FSOC perspective) in wholesale funding. Fire sales may become self-reinforcing if failure to pay causes lenders to seize the collateral (the good itself), sell it at distressed prices, and thereby cause further losses on other holders of the asset. These holders may then default on their loans or fail to post margin. Contagion can occur if the failure of one firm is a signal to investors that firms in the same industry or with similar assets are likely to fail. On.on.co.uk, please click here for more information. Deposits, banks and other financial institutions also use a variety of other funding sources. Many of these alternative funding sources, often blending securities contracts and traditional loans, are categorized as wholesale funding. Examples of wholesale funding sources include money market mutual funds and repurchase agreements (repos) Wholesale funding sources are not eligible for certain government initiatives that assist financial stability, such as deposit insurance. Non-banks that use wholesale sources to fund capital market activity may be subject to runs similar to a depository bank. access to certain emergency lending facilities such as the Fed's discount window. Some wholesale funding markets can be subject to runs and fire sales. Financial intermediaries may lose trust in each other, and refuse to extend or roll over their loans to each other. The resulting reduction in wholesale funding can have many of the characteristics of a financial crisis. It can also lead to the loss of confidence in the financial system and a decline in confidence in banks and other financial intermediaries. It also can lead to an increase in the cost of borrowing. The annual report notes that intra-day credit exposure of the two clearing banks (JPMorgan and BNY Mellon) in the tri-party repo market has declined significantly. However, the potential for runs on broker-dealers, or fire sales should there be a default by a major market participant, has not been completely eliminated. Efforts to address potential instability in money market mutual funds have not as yet been finalized by the SEC (as regulator of the money market) in wholesale funding. The financial infrastructure can also be a source of systemic risk. This is essentially the "plumbing" of the financial system. It includes the environment in which financial trading occurs. It also includes communications of the interbank payment system, clearing and settlement of retail payments (including mobile payments) and the security of confidential financial information. The Dodd-Frank Act's ability-to-pay standard. Additional work may need to be done to raise GSE guarantee fees to make room for private competitors to the GSEs. The financial infrastructure is vulnerable to natural disasters and human activity. Hurricane Sandy temporarily halted trading on the New York Stock Exchange in October 2012. Malfunctions have disrupted the issuance of payments and the security of confidential financial information. The "plumbing" of the financial system evolves with changes in communication technology and the organization of firms. The stability of such systems can be threatened by the potential disruptions to the operational network. The risk of a cyber-attack on the U.S. financial system is very high. Commercial Paper Funding Facility Emergency Program — Created by the Fed in 2008, this program purchased three-month unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper from eligible companies. Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 (CFMA, P.L. 106-554, 114 Stat. 2763)—Overhauled the Commodities Exchange Act to create a flexible structure for the regulation of futures and options trading. Largely repealed by the Dodd-Frank Act. Community Reinvestment Act 1977 — A federal law which encouraged depository institutions to make loans and provide services in the local communities in which they take deposits. Net Asset Value (or NAV)—Value of an asset minus any associated costs; for financial assets, typically changes each trading day. Operational risk —The possibility that a financial institution will suffer losses from a failure to process transactions properly, from accounting mistakes, from rogue traders or other forms of insider fraud. Office of Financial Research (OFR)—An office created by the Dodd-Frank Act ( P.L. 111-203 ) to support the Financial Stability Oversight Council and member agencies. Market risk is the risk that the price of a tradeable security or asset will decline, resulting in a loss to the holder. Money market mutual fund (MMF) pools funds of individuals and other investors for investment in high-grade, short-term debt and bank deposits paying market rates of return. Examples of these money market instruments include U.S. Treasury bills, certificates of deposit, and commercial paper. Most MMFs offer check-writing redemption features. Moral hazard is the tendency of people to take more risks. Moral hazard is the tendency of people to take more risks once another party has agreed to provide protection. Regulatory interventions to bail out failing firms are often said to create moral hazard, on the assumption that others will expect to be saved from their mistakes, too. Mortgage-backed security (MBS)—A bond backed by a pool of mortgage loans. Mutual fund —An investing company that pools the funds of individuals and other investors, and and other institutions to form a single investment vehicle for investors. Low interest rates make it difficult for savers to earn significant returns with relative safety. Money market mutual funds are at greater risk because their income stream (from relatively safe bonds) is close to zero. Certain pension systems are more likely to "break the buck" (return less than a dollar for each dollar invested) If any of their investments experience losses, these pension systems could be at risk of financial instability. The current interest rate environment could contribute to financial instability, according to the IMF. of an asset exceeds its fundamental value for a sustained period, often followed by a rapid price decline. Speculative bubbles are usually associated with a "bandwagon" effect in which speculators rush to buy the commodity (in the case of futures, "to take positions") before the price trend ends. Regulators often require financial firms to hold minimum levels of capital. It is a critical line in the road to a bubble, as it is the owners' stake in an enterprise that must be protected. price, or the condition of a market with many buyers and sellers present. Also, the ability of a person or firm to access credit markets. Liquidity risk — The possibility that the market for normally-liquid assets will suddenly dry up, leaving firms unable to convert assets into cash. Mark-to-Market — The process by which the reported amount of an asset is adjusted to reflect true the market value instead of the purchase price, or expected future sale price. The risk that other firms will refuse to extend credit on any terms to a firm that is perceived as distressed. the proceeds accrue to the issuer, is distinct from the secondary, or resale, market, where securities are traded among investors. Lender of last resort —Governmental lender that acts as the ultimate source of credit in the financial system. In the United States, the Fed has this role. Leverage —The ability to control large dollar amounts of a commodity or security with a comparatively small amount of capital. Liquidity — The ability to trade an asset quickly without significantly affecting its price.