Russian, European, and Japanese vehicles are launched on expendable rockets. The ATV and HTV also carry less cargo than the shuttle. Because the Russian Soyuz and Progress are the vehicle. A new, unique transfer vehicle would need to be developed in order to rendezvous and dock assembly elements with the space station. The European Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicles (HTV) are scheduled to be available in 2006 and 2008, respectively. The HTV is scheduled to be available in 2008 and will fly within the proximity of the space station. The payload fairings would have to be modified from the current 5-meter to a 6-meter version. A carrier to go inside the new transfer vehicle to replicate the space shuttle attach points would need to be developed. The HTV will be used to rendezvous and dock to the space space station via the Russian Service Module. It will be caught by the space Station’s robotic arm before being berthed. with an alternative means of providing logistics support to the space station in case delays occur requiring extension of the planned 2010 date. A comprehensive and thoroughly documented analysis of launch requirements and launch alternatives can provide NASA with comparative cost information and afford the agency the opportunity to use its resources more effectively and efficiently. We recommend the NASA Administrator take the following three steps: Direct current efforts to explore other space launch options. Perform a detailed analysis of these alternatives to determine the best option for delivering the logistics cargo required for space station operations prior to and after space shuttle retirement. NASA is evaluating responses from commercial industry on different ways to provide logistics services to and from the space station. According to a recent revision of NASA’s internal guidance, the most important aspect of formulating a program technical approach is conducting a thorough analysis of alternatives. NASA did not have the full breadth of knowledge necessary to conclude the space shuttle was the best option to support space station operations, the agency says. The agency is examining configurations of the space Station that meet the needs of the new vision and the international partners with as few shuttle flights as necessary. NASA guidance defines an analysis of alternatives as a formal method that compares alternatives by estimating their ability to satisfy mission requirements and life cycle costs. The results of these two analysis are used together to produce a cost-effectiveness comparison that allows decision-makers to assess cost and effectiveness simultaneously. An analysis of. alternatives broadly examines multiple elements of program alternatives (including technical. performance, risk, life cycle cost, and programmatic aspects), and is. typically an important part of the formulation studies. NASA views a thorough analysis ofalternatives as. preclude the use of an alternative vehicle. NASA did not have sufficient knowledge to conclude that the shuttle was the best option for logistics missions prior to its retirement of the shuttle in 2010. Several of the space shuttle’s final flights are planned logistics support missions that might be conducted using alternative launch vehicles. By completing a comprehensive analysis, NASA could also identify the feasibility and risks associated with an alternative means of providing logistics support to the space station, the authors say. The authors conclude that NASA should consider alternatives to the existing space shuttle manifest currently under review. program delays and would cost more than returning the space shuttle to flight. NASA did not perform a comparative cost analysis that considered the schedule impacts or associated costs of planned space shuttle operations. According to previous studies and our discussions with commercial industry representatives, the time involved for developing an alternate capability would probably preclude assembly missions from consideration. The space shuttle is the best option for both assembly and logistics missions through the end of the decade, the report says. The report concludes that the shuttle should be used to support the U.S. space program. 2004 informal assessment. AAS contractors projected the cost to develop an alternate launch capability would be approximately $1 billion, take 3 to 5 years to develop, and require $2 to $3 billion per year for operations. Since a majority of the space station assembly missions are scheduled within the next 3 years, these types of missions could preclude the use of an alternative vehicle. However, NASA did. hold discussions with commercial industry representatives who concurred with this time frame to developing an alternate capability to support space station operation. of using alternate launch systems with the scheduled space shuttle program costs, to include the cost of returning the space shuttle to flight. In fact, NASA officials stated that they did not compare estimated costs for developing alternative launch vehicles against budget estimates for the 28 space shuttle flights currently planned to support the space station. NASA has also requested $1.8 billion for the return of the shuttle program, which will cost $22 billion between fiscal year 2005 and fiscal year 2010. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. our work from August 2004 through April 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. According to NASA officials involved in the 2004 assessment, accommodating a transition to other launch vehicles would create significant challenges that drive risk, schedule, and costs. NASA officials stated the space station elements were designed and built to take advantage of the more benign launch environment in the space shuttle’s cargo bay. The elements were to be removed and repositioned by the space Shuttle's robotic arm, and then connected together during space walk activities. There would be a need to develop a new process to assemble the space station. Using another launch vehicle would require the redesign and retesting of space station elements already built. NASA officials stated the space shuttle launch environment cannot be duplicated on an expendable launch vehicle. A new, unique transfer vehicle would need to be developed to transfer the station to the ISS. The space station would be able to carry out a variety of activities, including medical and scientific research, as well as a range of human activities. NASA plans to return the shuttle to flight in July 2005. While the shuttle has been grounded, space station crew transfers and logistics resupply have depended on Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles. Europe and Japan are also developing logistics cargo vehicles to support space station operations later this decade. These Russian, European, and Japanese vehicles are launched on expendable expendable vehicles. The board issued its report in August 2003 with 29 recommendations for improvement—15 of which must be implemented before the space shuttle can return to flight. The Russian Soyuz and Progress are the only vehicles currently available and carry significantly less payload than the space shuttle. Operations are generally limited to transporting crew, food, potable water, as well as propellant resupply for reboosting the space station to higher orbits. Launches of space station assembly elements and large orbital replacement items for maintenance have effectively ceased. In a 90-day study conducted in 2000, NASA determined that no commercial launch vehicles could provide logistics services to the station. NASA conducted a detailed assessment of alternatives to the space shuttle for completing assembly and providing logistics support to the International Space Station. We obtained and analyzed pertinent NASA documents and briefing slides related to the ISS, space shuttles, and other launch alternatives, such as Expendable Launch Vehicles. We also analyzed NASA documents, including: European Space Agency Segment Specifications for the Automated Transfer Vehicle; Specification for the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. We looked at space station and space shuttle status, history, and cost briefings; Return to Flight Status Briefings; and, Alternate Access. request for proposal for commercial space station cargo services later this summer. NASA also said that its acquisition strategy will be consistent with space station requirements, international partner agreements, and available funding. We are encouraged that NASA has taken steps to pursue a deliberate alternative cargo transportation system assessment. However, NASA should not limit documentation of this effort to the acquisition strategy meeting, but should also document the decision paths leading up to that event and throughout the evaluation of the transportation systems proposed by contractors responding to NASA’s request for proposals. a 90-day study conducted in 2000, NASA determined that no commercial logistics service for the space station was possible. As a result of this study, NASA decided to solicit and fund a more detailed review of concepts. The Alternate Access to Station (AAS) study contracts were awarded in July 2002, with 1-year contracts given to four contractors. In summer 2003, these contractors presented architectures that relied on existing domestic or international domestic and international infrastructure. The AAS study was completed in July 2003. alternatives to determine if any planned space shuttle logistics missions could be performed by or complemented with commercial launch vehicles later this decade. NASA outlined a number of technical challenges to using an alternate vehicle for space station support, especially for assembly missions where the space shuttle’s crew and remote manipulator arm perform key functions. NASA officials stated they used the AAS study, which concentrated solely on logistics support missions, as the foundation for its 2004 informal assessment. In a summary of that study, NASA said: covering the entire range of missions for space station support cannot be verified, and the agency’s position on the space shuttle being the best option cannot be validated. NASA plans to seek more detailed information from the commercial launch industry for additional study or development work in June 2005. According to NASA officials, the responses from industry with regard to space station logistics support have been very promising. Officials indicated that it might be possible to have a developed and certified capability to provide commercial cargo launch service to the space station prior to space shuttle retirement late this decade. contractors presented architectures that relied on existing domestic or international expendable launch vehicles. In the fall of 2003, the contracts were extended, and the contractors were asked to address larger cargo delivery capabilities and “downmass” requirements. This study ended in January 2004 with the contractors briefing on their study results. NASA concluded that developing a domestic capability to meet most of the space station cargo service needs was possible within 3 to 5 years. In January 2004, the President announced a new Vision for the Space Station. year 2010. NASA has also requested $1.8 billion for crew and cargo services over the same time frame to purchase commercial services. In its fiscal year 2006 budget request, NASA indicated that such commercial services are expected to be available not later than 2009. In addition to lacking sufficient knowledge with regard to the use of alternatives for logistics missions, NASA did not document the proceedings and decisions reached in its 2004 assessment. It is expected that these services are a key element in the future of the space station program. Cost briefings; Return to Flight Status Briefings; and, Alternate Access to Station briefings. Reviewed previous GAO reports on NASA, the Space Shuttle Program, International Space Station Program, and best practices in many areas and multiple agencies. Interviewed officials responsible for managing the programs within the Space Operations Mission Directorate at NASA headquarters, as well as program managers at Johnson Space Center, Texas. We also interviewed Air Force officials from the Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle Program at Kennedy Space Center,. We also received, reviewed, and analyzed follow-up written and oral comments from several individuals at these locations. we met with at headquarters and each of these centers included space station program officials, space shuttle program officials. We also visited the Boeing Launch Services, Inc., in Huntington Beach, California, and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Boeing Commercial Space Systems in Research Park, Huntsville, Alabama; and Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company in Littleton, Colorado. We conducted our work from August 2004 through April 2005 in accordance with NASA's Space Shuttle Program Integration Office at Kennedy Space Center. We are proud to have been a part of the shuttle program. NASA officials at Kennedy Space Center, Florida, who are responsible for processing space station payloads. We interviewed contractors at Boeing Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Space Systems. We also reviewed NASA’s request for information related to commercial industry interest in providing that capability. And we interviewed NASA officials within the Space Operations Mission Directorate and at Johnson Space Center in Texas for this report. The report was published by The Astronaut's Magazine, a division of the American Astronaut Society. For more information, visit the Astronauts' Magazine website. NASA and its international partners are building the space station to serve as an orbiting research facility. The space shuttle is the primary vehicle supporting the assembly and resupply of the station. Figure 1 shows the Space Shuttle Endeavour docked to the International Space Station. Following the Columbia accident in February 2003, the NASA Administrator grounded the space shuttle fleet pending an investigation into the cause of the accident. The administrator appointed the Columbia Accident Investigation Board to determine the cause and to make recommendations for improving the safety of the space Shuttle. as launch human missions to the moon between 2015 and 2020. In essence, NASA’s implementation plan holds aeronautics, science, and other activities at near constant levels. Funding currently dedicated to the space station and space shuttle programs will transition to the new exploration strategy. The vision also changed the space stations’ on-board research focus to include life sciences research on how humans adapt to long durations in space, biomedical research, and materials-processing research. Under the new in space, biomedical research, and materials-processing research. Under the new vision, the research will be focused on determining the effects of long duration space travel on humans. The space station research necessary to support human explorers on other worlds would be complete by 2016. According to program officials, NASA’s 2004 informal assessment concluded that alternative launch vehicles would present operational risks, technical challenges, and long program delays and would cost more than returning the space station to Earth. The new vision calls for a return to Earth in the 2030s. shuttle retirement late this decade, rather than only after its retirement. However, we were told these services would not eliminate any of the scheduled space shuttle flights, but only augment the capabilities of the space shuttle. NASA plans to document its acquisition strategy through a NASA Headquarters Acquisition Strategy Meeting prior to release of a request for proposal for commercial space station cargo services later this year. In written comments on a draft of this report, NASA concurred with our recommendations and stated that the agency seeks to fully explore space launch options. In January 2004, the President announced a new Vision for Exploration that called for retiring the shuttle in 2010. The President called for a shift in NASA’s long-term focus, envisioning that NASA will retire the space shuttle after nearly 30 years of service as soon as assembly of the International Space Station is completed, planned for the end of the decade. NASA will develop a new crew exploration vehicle as well as launch human missions to the moon between 2015 and 2015. The shuttle will be retired in 2010, requiring NASA to find an alternative to support space station operations through 2016. document the proceedings and decisions reached in its 2004 assessment. The agency did not record the processes it followed and therefore did not capture the basis of the decisions reached. NASA officials indicated that the informal assessment was based primarily on the expertise within the headquarters and they did not formally document the decision paths. While we recognize that the extensive experience of its senior managers is an important element in evaluating alternatives, the existence of any formal assessment of alternatives covering the entire range of missions for space station support is not known. distribution of this report until 15 days from its issue date. At that time, we will send copies to the NASA Administrator; the Director, Office of Management and Budget; and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. Please contact me at (202) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions about this report. current 5-meter to a 6-meter version to accommodate the larger diameter payloads to the space station during assembly missions. Current 5- meter version will be replaced by a 6m version for larger payloads. The new version will have a diameter of 6m to accommodate a larger diameter of payloads on board the ISS. It will be used to carry heavier payloads such as solar panels and other heavy equipment to the station for assembly missions in the 2030s and 2050s.