In 1998, HEA was amended to include a provision stating that eligible lenders that act as trustees are responsible for meeting statutory and regulatory requirements for the loans they hold as trustees. Loss of the federal guarantee due to servicer problems has occurred under the auspices of trustee arrangements in the past. For example, in the late 1980s, Bank of America served as trustee for the California Student Loan Finance Corporation. Education determined that the loan servicer, United Education and Software Company, failed to transfer certain information to its new computer system.  servicer problems that may result in loan guarantee loss can also occur on loans held by eligible lenders and are not unique to trustee arrangements. Department of Education reports that approximately 125 trustee arrangements exist between eligible and ineligible lenders. These arrangements account for $25.3 billion in outstanding loans— approximately 19 percent of all student loans. As a result of these problems, student loans totaling approximately $400 million lost their federal guarantee. The federal government will not be able to guarantee any more student loans than it already has. Education reimburses guaranty agencies for most of their claims paid to lenders for defaulted loans. Most lenders contract with a third-party entity to service the loan and collect payments from borrowers. Education may assess penalties, refuse to make future payments, or recover payments already made to lenders and agencies for such things as interest subsidies and insurance claims. Some loans lose their federal guarantee because lenders, servicers, or guaranty agency fail to follow the Department’s requirements for making, servicing, and collecting loans or because of fraudulent activity. while allowing ineligible lenders to participate in the program. The HEA provision that holds trustees responsible for an ineligible lender’s loans allows the federal government to recoup the losses from the eligible lender trustee rather than the ineligible lender. Education officials believe they do not have direct oversight authority of ineligible lenders. The federal government will not reimburse the guarantor or the lender for the associated dollar loss. However, because some problems may not be found until after the government has already provided reimbursement, the government may have to recover these monies from the parties involved. agencies. When states failed to establish such agencies, the Congress enacted legislation with several incentives to increase lender and guaranty agency participation. Congress has since shifted some risk back to the guaranty agencies and lenders by reducing the maximum reimbursement and insurance rates on defaulted loans. These actions were intended to encourage both lenders and Guaranty agencies to work with borrowers to make sure they got the loans they were owed. The Congress kept the financial risk almost entirely with the federal government. It also provided federal funds for guaranty. agencies to use as seed money to pay claims. Education officials told us that although Education has inconsistently applied the regulations in the past, it currently interprets the provision as excluding trustee-held loans. Education has no direct oversight authority to ensure that ineligible lenders are operating their programs in accordance with HEA. Obtaining a trustee arrangement does not appear to be a widespread problem among ineligible lenders to date. If eligible lenders remain unclear and therefore continue to interpret the 50-percent rule as applying to loans they hold as a trustee, the number of trustees could decline. act to mean that the lender’s FFELP loans cannot total more than one-half of the lender's combined consumer credit loan portfolio. This provision is commonly known as the 50-percent rule. Strict application of this rule would require eligible lenders to include loans they hold as a trustee for an ineligible lender in this calculation, although the regulations do not specifically address these loans. Education officials told us that although Education officials tell us that this is not the case, the rule would still apply. Representatives of one bank incorrectly interpreted an exception to the 50-percent rule. A representative of another bank said he had turned down eligible lender trustee business because the additional trustee-held loans would put the bank above its legal limit. One trustee representative was not concerned because either calculation—including or excluding the loans—would place the bank in compliance with the act. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. For more information, visit the S.M.A.S.C. website. which policy to establish nor how to formalize the decision once it is made. Education did not say when it expected to implement our recommendation. Education also provided technical comments, which we incorporated where appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the Honorable Richard Riley, Secretary of Education; eligible lender trustees; ineligible lenders; and other interested parties. Copies will also be made available to others on request. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please call me at (202) 512-7215. Ineligible lenders fall into two categories: secondary marketsthat have not been designated as an eligible lender for a state and private companies that wish to make and hold student loans. Eligible and ineligible lenders agree that participation by ineligible lenders increases competition among lenders and can, in turn, contribute to improved service and lower costs for student borrowers. Some ineligible lenders believe that two factors --HEA requirements and the general evolution of financial markets -- could affect their participation in the student loan market in the future.  HEA designates which entities are eligible to make FFELP loans to students. An eligible lender is defined as under certain circumstances, a national or state chartered bank, a mutual savings bank, or a savings and loan association. A pension fund as defined in the Employee Retirement Income Security is an eligible lender. A single agency of the state or a single nonprofit private agency designated by the state are also eligible lenders, HEA says. For more information, go to www.hea.org. the state or a single nonprofit private agency designated by the state; under certain circumstances, an eligible institution; and a consumer finance company subsidiary of a national bank. The majority of organizations making loans to students fall into one of these categories. The Student Loan Marketing Association or the Holding Company of the Student Loan marketing Association is the most common. The state or an agency of any state functioning as a secondary market is also a guaranty agency; a Rural Rehabilitation Corporation is a guarantee agency; and any nonprofit privateagency functioning in any state as asecondary market. Education administers and oversees federal student aid programs authorized by HEA. Among these financial aid programs is FFELP. The five principal entities involved are students, schools, lenders, guaranty agencies,and Education. At schools participating, students apply to a participating lender for a loan. The school verifies the student’s eligibility and determines the loan amount the student is eligible to receive. The student then receives the loan from the lender. The guaranty agency guarantees the loan against default. to originate student loans or to purchase them from another originating lender. Ineligibles use trustees to securitize portfolios of student loans. Some secondary markets raise capital by selling tax-exempt bonds to investors. This report is concerned primarily with trustee arrangements used to enable ineligible lenders to make and hold student Loans. The government expected to share the program’s financial risks with state-designated guaranty agencies. However, when states failed to establish such agencies, the FFELP was created. Eligible lenders are generally not subject to financial safety and soundness reviews by government agencies. Most eligible lender trustees also hold student loans in their own name and receive regular FFELP- related payments from the government for those loans. The presence of an eligible lender from whom the government can recoup its financial losses is critical since Education has no direct oversight authority to assess a bank’s operations as well as its financial condition. The federal government has additional sources from which to recover any repayments due the government on ineligible lenders’ loans. due the government on ineligible lenders’ loans that lose their guarantee. For example, lenders usually receive special allowance payments (SAP) and interest subsidiesfor the FFELP loans they hold. If the government were owed monies on an ineligible lender’s loans, it could recover those funds by withholding the SAP on the eligible lender trustee's self-originated loans. Both eligible and ineligible lenders reported that trustee arrangements have had a positive effect on the student loan market. for example, both participant Eligible lender trustees and ineligible lenders reported limited day-to-day interaction. Trustee arrangements come with some protections to ensure the federal government’s investment in FFELP is secure while allowing ineligible lenders to participate in the program. Some trustees reported that they interact with the ineligible lender only when it is necessary to sign forms, such as quarterly reports that must be submitted to the Department of Education. One trustee reported no daily interaction. The program is funded by the Federal Reserve and the U.S. Treasury Department. not have direct oversight authority of ineligible lenders. Most financial institutions that serve as eligible lender trustees are subject to federal (and in many instances, state) oversight. Among the most important of these regulations are those dealing with minimum capital standards. These capital standards provide benchmarks against which regulators can assess the safety and soundness of a bank’s operations as a result of a default. The federal government is likely to recover its losses from trustees for two reasons. First, most financial institutions serve aseligible lender trustees. on the effects of past rulings regarding trustee arrangements. MajorManagementChallengesandProgramRisks: Departmentof Education. Risk-BasedCapital:RegulatoryandIndustryApproachestoCapitaland Risk. High-RiskSeries:StudentFinancialAid(GAO/HR-97-11, Feb. 1997). StudentLoanLenders:InformationontheActivitiesoftheFirst IndependentTrustCompany. The first copy of each GAO report is free. Additional copies of reports are $2 each. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. We focused our review on trustee arrangements created to allow ineligible lenders to originate or purchase student loans. To determine the number of existing trustee arrangements, we obtained data from Education’s lender database. For each lender identification number on the trustee arrangement list, we asked the lenders to verify whether the account was used for originations and/or purchases of student loans, securitizations, or some combination of these transactions. We also asked lenders to provide us with information on any additional identification numbers used for trustee arrangements. According to ineligible lenders we interviewed, current initiation and annual trustee fees do not prohibit them from conducting business in the student loan market. Trustees and ineligible lenders reported similar criteria used by trustees to evaluate ineligibles before they entered into arrangements. We conducted follow-up interviews as necessary to ensure that we received accurate information. We included information only for arrangements that allow ineligible lenders to originate or purchase student loans and securitizations of these loans. Further, we included balance informationonly for the Student Loan Marketing Corporation’s privatized business and the ineligible lenders it owns. trustee arrangements, the costs associated with them, and the key characteristics they shared. To determine the protections offered the federal government by trustee arrangements, we identified and synthesized applicable legislation and regulations. We also interviewed eligible and ineligible lenders, guaranty agencies, servicers, Education officials, and other student loan market participants on the responsibilities of an eligible lender trustee. We obtained the perspectives of participants on whether trustee arrangements have a positive or negative effect on lenders’ participation in theStudent Loan Market. agency’s report on the transaction. Trustees and ineligible lenders also reported that their contracts included similar clauses covering trustee and ineligible lender resignations. For example, trustee resignation clauses allow the trustee to resign from the arrangement by giving a specific number of days’ notice to the ineligible lender, such as 60 or 90 days. If the ineligible lenders is unable to locate another trustee within that time period, the resignation clause sometimes provides for additional time to obtain a new trustee. In any event, most trustees and ineligible borrowers reported that they had similar clauses in their contracts. trustee. In any event, most trustees and ineligible lenders reported that the trustee would probably remain in place until a new one can be engaged. The trustee arrangements we reviewed were also similar in the requirements placed on the ineligible lender and the amount of monitoring the trustee performed. For example, trustees generally require ineligible lenders to abide by HEA requirements and to oversee the loan servicer, but the trustees perform limited monitoring activities. One trustee reported thatThe monitoring is not specific or regular and mostly involves a review of annual reports. Four ineligible lenders reported they had a difficult time obtaining their current trustee arrangement. Several others said that finding a trustee in the future would become more problematic. Ineligible lender representatives expressed concern that because trustees also originate student loans for themselves, trustees may decide to end their eligible lender trustee services rather than continue to provide the mechanism for a competitor to do business. A few ineligible lenders stated they were uncomfortable with trustees having the final say as they originate student loan loans for their competitors. The Federal Reserve is expected to announce a plan to consolidate student loan institutions in the coming months. The 125 arrangements represent liaisons between 16 eligible lender trustees and 31 ineligible lenders. Ineligible lenders can be further grouped as 17 secondary markets and 14 other ineligibles. Costs of trustee arrangements fall into two categories—payments to initiate the agreement and annual fees to maintain it. The ineligible lenders we interviewed reported that initiation costs were generally a flat fee ranging from $1,000 to $2,000.for $25.3 billion in outstanding loans— approximately 19 percent of the outstanding balance of all FFELP loans as of December 1999. the additional trustee-held loans would put the bank above its 50-percent allocation of student loans. A second factor that is perceived by ineligible lenders as having the potential to limit their participation in FFELP is evolution in the financial markets. Most ineligible lenders we interviewed stated that the number of available trustees has decreased as eligible lender banks have merged with each other in recent years. Recent mergers include First National Bank of Chicago and Bank One, Norwest and Wells Fargo, and Firstar Bank with Star Bank and Mercantile Bank. outstanding loan balances or on the outstanding balance of bond issues. Some eligible and ineligible lenders reported that a variety of other factors could influence the size of both initiation and annual fees. Some of these factors included the structure of the trustee arrangement and the complexity of the the geographic region in which the trustee and ineligible lender operate. The trustee’s decision to charge administrative fees on a per-loan basis rather than as a flat fee, and the additional services the trustee will perform for the ineligible lender. in trustee arrangement contracts, (3) amounts of review performed of ineligible lenders, and (4) amount of day-to-day interaction between the trustee and the ineligible lender. For example, trustees reported that most important in deciding whether to enter an arrangement is the business reputation of the ineligible lenders. In addition, some trustees review the structure of the financing method used to raise the capital necessary to originate or purchase loans. This review might include examining a rating agency’s report on the transaction. reported that initiation costs were generally a flat fee ranging between $2,500 and $20,000. Annual trustee fees reported by ineligible lenders ranged between $4,500 to $75,000, depending on a number of factors. Some secondary markets reported that their trustee charged this initiation fee each time they issued bonds to raise capital. These lenders reported that the fees could be aflat fee or calculated as a percentage of outstanding loan balances or on the outstanding balance of bond balances.