According to NMFS funding and budget requests, the Northwest Center needs at least $8.9 million to complete ongoing and planned improvements. The actual cost of implementing remaining improvements to Pacific groundfish stock assessments may be even higher. The Northwest Center did not receive its full funding request, in part, because NMFS did not get all the funding it had requested. NMFS allocated $3.6 million (58 for all marine stock assessments), resulting in a $2.6million shortfall in the Center's request. Northwest Center has implemented some recommendations aimed at improving stock assessments. Northwest Center officials said they try to meet the training and professional development needs of their scientific staff. To date they have focused on developing external training programs, such as the University of Washington graduate program, to help staff prepare for stock assessments and related activities. The improvement plan also recommended that NMFS provide additional training to ensure that qualified NMFS staff are available now and in the future to conduct stock assessments, related activities and other activities. The $8.9 million needed to implement remaining recommended improvements is probably understated, officials say. The Northwest Center’s budget requests for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 are preliminary requests submitted before the Northwest Center received its fiscal year 2003 funding. NMFS’ science centers, including the Northwest Centre, primarily make and justify their funding requests in response to how much money Congress appropriates. After Congress passes NMFS' budget, NMFS asks its science centers to reassess and detail how much new money each needs. the quantity of the data increases, the assessments become more reliable because the data cover a longer period of time. The Northwest Center has concentrated most of its efforts on implementing improvements in data quantity, such as more frequent surveys. A better sense of trends and variability allow for improved short-term predictions of the status of the species, the center says. The center's goal is to provide a better understanding of the variability inherent in the population distribution and abundance, officials say. It's also trying to improve the quality of data, including more frequent and randomly selected surveys. 13 full-time staff are needed to expand high-priority data collection efforts. The lack of quality data was identified in the improvement plan as an impediment to reliable stock assessments. For example, when equipment on different survey vessels are not calibrated, the data are not comparable, and trends may not be accurately determined. The Northwest Center is continuing its efforts to calibrate survey vessel. The plan calls for recruitment surveys to be coastwide and conducted twice a year. It also calls for surveys in untrawlable habitat. Northwest Center has assigned data stewards to each data set used in its assessments. Data stewards are responsible for helping assessors compile relevant data and for conducting quality assurance and quality control checks on the data. The Northwest Center plans to conduct a review of the data used in the assessments to ensure that it is accurate and reliable. The data stewards will also be responsible for carrying out quality control and quality assurance checks on all data sets used in assessments. For more information about the data stewards, visit northwestcenter.org. The Pacific Council’s goal is to have long-range plans for managing groundfish fisheries. Since 1995, the Northwest Center has had lead responsibility for conducting stock assessments on Pacific groundfish. The Northwest Center conducts ecosystem research as part of its Science for Ecosystem-based Management groundfish stock assessments. NMFS is now updating its plan and cost estimates for improving Pacific ground fish stock assessments and will release an updated groundfish research plan in late 2004. The updated plan will estimate how much money will be spent on the project. Center held public meetings in several communities along the Pacific coast to discuss implementation of the Observer Program. The Northwest Center now participates in NMFS’ National Sea Grant program to augment a Northwest Center-supported graduate study program at the University of Washington that trains stock assessment scientists. The Sea grant program provides fellowships for students interested in marine research, such as stock assessment methodology and marine resource economics. The northwest center plans to employ two Sea Grant students during the summer of 2004. While the Northwest Center will continue to work with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, it will no longer participate in the National SeaGrant program. to more clearly differentiate between NMFS as a whole and NMFS’ Northwest Center in particular. We made similar changes, as appropriate, throughout the report. We revised the report to include the year and scope of the task force review. The report also included the date and citation of the National Marine Fisheries Service’s task force on groundfish stock assessments. It was updated to include that the Northwest Center is responsible for coordinating groundfish Stock Assessments (GSA). The report was also updated to indicate that the GSA was responsible for the “bottom” trawl survey, rather than the ‘top’ trawl. Efforts continue to communicate strategies needed to improve stock assessments. Northwest Center staff meet with constituents, such as representatives from state agencies and the fishing industry, to discuss groundfish management issues. In addition, the Northwest Center organized a series of public meetings to discuss new initiatives that affect the stock assessment program. Along the southern California coast. Previous surveys ended at Morro Bay, California. The Northwest Center held public meetings in several communities along the Pacific. For more information, visit northwestcenter.org.  NMFS has six regional science centers, which are responsible for generating the scientific information necessary for the conservation, management, and use of each region's marine resources. The six fishery science centers and their areas of responsibility are as follows: Alaska Center, covering the coastal oceans off Alaska and parts of the west coast of the United States. Northeast Center,covering waters along the Northeast Continental Shelf from the U.S. to Japan. Western Pacific Council, covering waters off Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and uninhabited U.s. territories in the Western Pacific. Center, covering waters along the Northeast Continental Shelf from the Gulf of Maine to Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. Northwest Center, covering the northeast Pacific Ocean, primarily waters off the coasts of California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia. Pacific Islands Center,. covering the central and western Pacific Ocean; Southwest Center, primarily covering waters off. the coast of California and areas throughout the Pacific and Antarctic Oceans. Southeast Center. covering the continental southeastern United States as well as Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. The Magnuson-Stevens Act, as amended by the Sustainable Fisheries Act, also established national standards. The Magnuson-Stevens Fisheries Conservation and Management Act granted responsibility for managing marine resources to the Secretary of Commerce. NMFS is part of Commerce’s National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) The act also established eight regional fishery management councils, each responsible for making recommendations about managing fisheries in federal waters. The eight councils include the Caribbean Council, covering waters off the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. The councils are made up of fishing industry participants and state and federal fishery managers. off the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Gulf of Mexico Council, covering waters off Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and the west coast of Florida. Mid-Atlantic Council,covering waters off New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina. New England Council,covered waters off Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. North Pacific Council, covered waters off Alaska. South Atlantic Council, cover waters off North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and east coast ofFlorida. Western Pacific Council covering waters of Hawaii, American Samoa, and Washington.  NMFS determined that darkblotched rockfish was overfished in 2000, when the last full stock assessment was conducted. Yelloweye rockfish almost exclusively inhabit rocky areas from northern Baja, Mexico to the Aleutian Islands, Alaska. The reliability of NMFS’ stock assessments is questionable for the Pacific hake and four rockfish species we reviewed, although they were based on the best information available at the time the assessments were conducted. Four of the assessments did not have enough data. Pacific hake, also called Pacific whiting, is generally found off the west coast of North America. It is one of many species of hake distributed in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Fishing of Pacific hake primarily takes place off the coasts of northern California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia. Fishermen use mid-water trawls and generally fish over the ocean bottom at depths of 100 to 500 meters. The species is also known as bocaccio rockfish, canary rockfish and darkblotched rockfish. Bocaccio rockfish generally inhabit waters off the coast of northern Baja, Mexico to Alaska. Pacific hake was declared overfished in 2002 because of low biomass. By 2004, the biomass was estimated at between 2.7 and 4.2 million metric tons. Bocaccios are commercially fished using trawls, hook-and-line and gillnets.. Adult bocaccIO commonly live over rocky areas or open areas of the ocean. They are commonly sold at market as “red snapper’ commonly live over rocky areas or open areas of the ocean’s floor to about 320 meters. Bocaccio were formally declared to be “overfished’ in 1999. The 2003 stock assessment estimated the bocaccIO biomass at 7,133 metric tons. Canary rockfish inhabit the northeastern Pacific Ocean, from northern Baja, Mexico to the western Gulf of Alaska. Adult canary rockfish are primarily found along the continental shelf, from 46 to 457 meters deep.  NMFS declared canary rockfish as overfished in 2000. The 2002 stock assessment estimated the canary Rockfish biomass at 6,197 metric tons. Darkblotched rockfish are found in the waters from Santa Catalina Island, California to the Bering Sea on soft bottom areas at about 29 to 549 meters deep. Commercial fishery concentrations are located off the coasts of California and Oregon. The species are caught primarily by commercial trawls and contribute to both commercial and recreational fishing.  NMFS reported in 2003 that 77 percent of the survey area was trawlable and 23 percent was untrawlable. Bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched live in both the trawlables and untrawlables habitats. NMFS does not have a standard for stock assessments because the surveys were conducted only in trawlability waters. As a result, some rockfish populations may be understated while others may be overstated, NMFS says. The fifth groundfish species, Pacific hake, lives primarily in mid-water habitat, so the concerns about the lack of NMFS data in rocky, untrawling habitats are not applicable. report to include the date and citation of the National Research Council report. The NMFS data used in the bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched assessments were limited because NMFS conducted its surveys in trawlable waters only. For this reason, we did not revise the report. NOAA commented that highly standardized protocols are used for collecting non-NMFS data (fishery dependent data) for rockfish. We revised the report to more explicitly distinguish the five species related to our report from other overfished Pacific groundfish. Four of the five assessments did not use NMFS survey data or the NMFS data used covered only a portion of the species’ habitats. Yelloweye live almost exclusively in the rocky habitat that NMFS trawl surveys cannot cover. Bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched assessments were limited in scope because the surveys were conducted only in trawlable waters. The yelloweye assessment was based solely on non-NMFS data. Back into the ocean. Back to the page you came from. the data unusable or could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For this reason, we did not change the report. NOAA commented that bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched assessments all obtain adequate abundance trend information from the NMFS bottom trawl surveys. The National Research Council found that the inclusion of NMFS survey data was the best option for a reliable estimate of abundance because such surveys use an unbiased statistical design, control sampling locations, and provide for for these reasons. and methodology section of the report to clearly identify the species and activities covered by the review. The statement does not address untrawlable habitat. NMFS “generally uses” NMFS’s staff or contracts with outside experts. The report was revised to more clearly differentiate between NMFS as a whole and the study as a group. The publication date was changed to show the publication date, and we revised the report accordingly. We revised the. report to show that NMFS has not collected enough ecosystem data and that the. frequency and range of recruitment surveys are limited. 26. The footnote placement is repositioned in report. 27. We revised the report to include assessment “improvements.” 28. The example we provided is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all ecosystem research conducted on the west coast. Instead, it illustrates the type of work done by the Northwest Center. 29. We added footnote 16 to clarify the actions taken by the Southwest Center. 30. We did not intend to provide a comprehensiveList of all actions conducted to improve data quantity coast wide. the west coast. Instead, it illustrates the type of work the Northwest Center is conducting and the opportunities for improving ecosystem research. For this reason, we did not change the report. annotations for projects that do not separate out groundfish funds occur only in items that are annotated as Southwest Center projects. After reviewing the report we believe no change is required because of subject-verb agreement. We added clarifying language. We believe that table 2 notes “a” and “b” in our report already adequately address this issue. change the report. We believe that our report has addressed this issue. By referring to the West Coast Groundfish Research Plan by its complete title, we adequately distinguish between the two reports. We changed “health’ to “stock abundance’ and the footnote placement is repositioned in report. The footnote placement and citation are in accordance with GAO guidelines. For this reason, we did not change the report and believe the report adequately addresses the issue of Pacific hake in mid-water. ecosystem research as part of its Science for Ecosystem-based Management Initiative. Understanding the complex ecological relationships between fish and the environment within which they exist provides a better understanding of the effects of the ecosystem on the groundfish fisheries. Only a limited amount of the data is collected and used in stock assessments. For example, ecosystem data are collected during shelf and slope bottom trawl surveys as time and resources allow. However, this information is not widely incorporated into stock assessments and is therefore not widely used. For the five species we reviewed, only the boccacio assessment used ecosystem data. According to Northwest Center officials, the collection of ecosystem data is limited. The implementation of comprehensive ecosystem research and data collection programs is contingent upon the funding of a dedicated research vessel for the west coast, the authors say. For more information, visit the Northwest Center's website or go to www.northwestcenter.org. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Data sources include fishing logbooks, dockside samples, and onboard observations. Life history includes the age and sex composition of the stock. Recruitment research includes data on the abundance of juvenile and larval fish. Data on the ocean ecosystem, such as water temperature or salinity, is also collected. The data can be used to forecast the size of a stock in the future, among other things. The information can also be used in the design of new fishing equipment and fishing gear. its efforts on implementing improvements in data quantity, such as more frequent acoustic, and shelf and slope bottom trawl surveys. Increased the frequency of the Pacific hake acoustic survey from triennially to biennially. Beginning in 2003, the survey was restructured into a single, integrated survey with Northwest Center and Canadian officials jointly planning all survey elements. Officials from the Northwest Centre and Canada now jointly conduct all of the acoustic surveys. The Northwest Center is based in Seattle, Washington, but has offices around the world. frequency of the groundfish shelf and slope bottom trawl survey from triennially to annually. Working collaboratively with the fishing industry has afforded fishermen the opportunity to become stakeholders in the data collection process. The surveys are now coastwide from Cape Flattery, Washington to the Mexican border, adding over 300 more miles along the southern California coast. Previous surveys ended at Morro, California, and are now extending to San Diego and Long Beach, California. The survey is expected to be completed by the end of the year. Northwest Center officials said they are to receive a dedicated research vessel sometime during calendar years 2008 or 2009, at the earliest. Better recruitment information for Pacific groundfish is also needed because such information provides an early predictor of fish abundance, especially for species such as hake, where there is a great variation in recruitment. Current recruitment surveys are limited because existing funds support only yearly surveys in selected areas. To achieve the best early predictions of stock status, recruitment surveys need to be carried out regularly. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full- text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. The list contains links to the full-text document files, which can be downloaded at no cost. contains links to the full-text document files. To have GAO e-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to e-mails alerts” under the “Order GAO Products” heading. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The General Accounting Office is the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through the Internet. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. The agency examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The reliability of the five assessments is questionable. Without reliable assessments, fishery managers may reach erroneous conclusions and take actions that could adversely affect the fishing industry economically. Establish a standard approach that requires that non-NMFS data used in stock assessments be evaluated for its reliability. Require that stock assessment reports clearly present the uncertainties in the assessments, such as the margin of error associated with species biomass estimates. Develop a comprehensive plan that integrates the NMFS stock assessment improvement plan with other NMFS plans. GAO: We reviewed key laws and agency reports and interviewed officials from NMFS. We did not review the stock assessments of any of the other west coast Pacific groundfish species. To determine the estimated costs associated with NMFS’ planned and ongoing improvements, we reviewed relevant budget requests and funding documents for fiscal years 2001 through 2005 and interviewed National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration officials. We added clarifying language to the scope and methodology section of the report to clearly identify the costs of implementing the improvements. laws and agency reports and interviewed officials from NMFS, including officials from the Northwest Fisheries Science Center. We reviewed the controls over stock assessment data, the types of fish population surveys used, and recent Pacific groundfish stock assessment studies. We did not simulate NMFS’ stock assessment models nor evaluate the mathematical and statistical methodologies used in the models for Pacific hake, bocaccio, canary, darkblotched, and yelloweye. To identify the relevant recommendations to improve stock assessments that NMFS has implemented and has not implemented, we reviewed agency reports. on the ocean ecosystem, such as water temperature or salinity, plankton composition, or ocean currents. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please call me at (202) 512-3841 or Keith Oleson at (415) 904-2218. We reviewed National Marine Fisheries Service stock assessments for five species of Pacific groundfish: Pacific hake (Pacific whiting) and four types of rockfish. amended by the Sustainable Fisheries Act, also established national standards for fishery conservation and management. These standards deal with preventing overfishing, using scientific information, using fishery resources efficiently, minimizing bycatch, and minimizing administrative costs. The regional councils use these standards to develop appropriate plans for conserving and managing fisheries under their jurisdiction. The Pacific Council’s goal is to protect, restore, and promote the long-term health and stability of the fishery. In 1982, the Pacific Fishery Management Council (Pacific Council) released its initial Fisherymanagement Plan for groundfish. and headquarters are ongoing, and NOAA is committed to these actions. NOAA also provided technical comments that we incorporated in this report as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 7 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies of thisReport to the Secretary of Commerce and the Director of the National Marine Fisheries Service. We will also provide copies to others upon request. In addition, we have provided detailed responses to your questions. it could be misconstrued to infer that the assessments are unreliable for use in managing the west coast groundfish fishery. For this reason, we did not change the report. We changed “survivability” to “sustainability’ and added fishery “resources” for clarification. NOAA also commented that the five assessments GAO reviewed all passed scientific review and are serving as the basis for management of the west Coast groundfish Fishery. GAO does not adequately convey the different degrees of precision associated with the stock assessments, NOAA said. plans to ensure that stock assessment improvement actions and budget requests are coordinated. We provided the Department of Commerce with a draft of this report for review and comment. We received a written response from the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere that included comments from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). NOAA generally agreed with the report’s accuracy and concurred with the reports recommendations. However, NOAA said it was concerned about the report's conclusion that the reliability of stock assessments is questionable. actions that could adversely affect the fishing industry economically or affect the recovery and sustainability of the fishery resources. Without a comprehensive, integrated improvement plan, funding requests and planned actions to improve the stock assessments may not be coordinated, jeopardizing successful and timely implementation of assessment improvements. Continue efforts to collect more types of data, such as data obtained from surveys in rocky, untrawlable waters, recruitment surveys, and reviewed all passed scientific review and are serving as the basis for formal status determination and fishery management. Stock assessments are a key tool for managing fisheries. They provide estimates of the species population, which NMFS uses to set harvest limits. The more types of information used in the assessments, the greater the accuracy and quality of the data, the more reliable the assessment results. However, the Pacific Ocean has a large number of fish stocks that are overfished and need to be re-assessed to avoid overfishing. The Pacific Ocean is a large population of fish that needs to be reassessed to ensure sustainability. Stock assessments are the biological evaluation of the status of fish stocks. Stock assessments provide official estimates in key areas, such as the size of the stock population. They form the scientific basis used by regional councils to determine biologically sustainable harvests and guide the monitoring and rebuilding of overfished and threatened stocks. For example, regional councils use stock assessments and other indicators of biological productivity to determine biological productivity of fish in a region. The bocaccio assessment was carried out by the.Center, which conducted the boc Acccio assessment.  NMFS does not have a standard process for evaluating whether the non-NMFS data used in its stock assessments are reliable. Some assessors reviewed the quality of the raw non- NMFS data, while others did not. Assessors who reviewed for data quality found mistakes that they believed made some of the data unusable or that could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For these reasons, we did not change the report. 21. We revised the punctuation accordingly. 22. making decisions about setting harvest levels and developing plans to rebuild overfished stocks. language to the report to address NOAA’s concern. Without these stock assessments, NMFS and fishery managers would have very limited information on which to base fishery management decisions. NOAA agreed with the report recommendation to continue collecting more types of data for groundfish assessments where reliable data are now lacking. NOAA said that the reliability of stock assessments will be improved if NMFS survey efforts are expanded and additional NMFS fishery data are collected. NMFS said, through its west coast fishery science centers, it participates on interagency data committees. non- NMFS data found mistakes that either made some of the data unusable or could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. NOAA commented that it is more pertinent to focus on the degree of standardization of the survey data than the source. We believe the Pacific hake biomass estimates are questionable because the assessment used non-NMFS data that NMFS did not check or subject to standard data reliability testing. NMFS generally refers to its data as fishery-independent data and to non-NHFS data as Fishery-dependent data. A 2002 National Research Council report found that the inclusion of NMFS survey data was the best option for a reliable estimate of abundance. Northwest Center officials raised concerns about basing assessments solely on non-NMFS data such as commercial and recreational catch data. Catch data do not provide the species’ relative or absolute biomass, according to NMFS officials.catch data do an unbiased statistical design, control sampling locations, and provide for quality assurance. NMFS data were unavailable for the yelloweye assessment.  stock assessors use NMFS-collected data, such as stock surveys conducted on NOAA vessels or contracted commercial fishing vessels. Data sources include fishing logbooks, dockside samples, and onboard observations, will help ensure the reliability of non-NMFS data. Plans to update the stock assessment model to provide uncertainty ranges for the 2005 stock assessments. A 2002 National Research Council report report on fish stocks in the U.S. was the first of its kind. The report was published by the National Institute of Fisheries and Wildlife Services. such as commercial and recreational catch data. Catch data do not provide the species’ relative or absolute biomass, according to NMFS officials. For example, catch data alone is insufficient because fishermen are not randomly sampling the ocean but are fishing areas that they are allowed to fish and they believe have the most fish. fishing restrictions, such as a total allowable catch, can limit the amount of fish being caught. catch data have often been inaccurate for a variety of reasons, including imprecise accounting for dead fish tossed back into the ocean. that could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For example, the assessor for the 2002 yelloweye stock assessment found numerous errors in the recreational catch data. According to another stock assessor, commercial catch data frequently have inconsistencies. California, Oregon, and Washington require fishermen to enter catch and location information into logbooks, but logbooks are often incomplete and inaccurate. While the stock assessment review review is ongoing, we are happy to share our findings with the public in the form of a blog post. The October 2001 stock assessment improvement plan identified three scenarios (tiers) to consider when analyzing the resources needed to improve stock assessments. The three tiers of assessment improvements are as follows: Tier 1—improve stock assessments using existing data without initiating new data collection programs. Tier 2—conduct baseline monitoring of species, which in most cases requires sampling the species at least every 1 to 3 years. Tier 3—implement “next generation” stock assessments by explicitly incorporating ecosystem considerations, such as multispecies interactions. programs, such as the University of Washington graduate program, to develop stock assessment scientists for the future. A comprehensive plan would allow NMFS to better integrate and coordinate program initiatives for improving stock assessments. For example, the acquisition plan identifies the need for fishery research vessels to satisfy NMFS’ data collection needs. Although the improvement plan includes the number of staff that would participate in data collection surveys, it does not contain the capital and operating costs of the research vessels. Similarly, the staffing requirements for augmenting the social sciences capabilities of NMFS are represented in the sciences plan and not in the stock improvement plan. to improve the quantity, quality, and type of data collected. Communication to educate constituents about NMFS’ strategies for improving stock assessments. Training to augment existing programs that support graduate students interested in stock assessment science. Planning to combine the improvement plan with its complementary plans. The improvement plan states that as the quantity of the data increases, the assessments become more accurate and reliable. The plan also states that the quality of the stock assessment data will improve as the data is collected more frequently and accurately. stock abundance and hence for setting allowable harvests of the fish. With such wide variations, it is important to provide uncertainty ranges, otherwise management may make inappropriate decisions. NMFS has taken some steps recommended in the Marine Fisheries Stock Assessment Improvement Plan to improve the quantity, quality, and type of data. The Pacific hake assessor used a mathematical model (AD Model Builder) that could compute uncertainty ranges and included these ranges in thePacific hake assessment report. The NMFS expects to use the updated model for all 2005 stock assessments. of uncertainty be included in future assessments because it is difficult to determine the reliability of the stock assessment without them. We believe that estimates based on samples should have a range of uncertainty to show the amount of variability in the estimates. However, the bocaccio, canary, darkblotched, and yelloweye assessments did not present a measure of uncertainty associated with the biomass estimates. It is difficult for regional councils and NMFS to know how much confidence they can have in relying on the estimates for determining stock abundance. data alone are insufficient because fishermen are not randomly sampling the ocean, but are fishing areas that they are allowed to fish and they believe have the most fish. Catch data have often been inaccurate for a variety of reasons, such as imprecise accounting for dead fish tossed back into the ocean. For these reasons, we did not change the report. 40. NOAA commented that the doubling of estimated bocaccio biomass in 2003 was due to factors that would not be addressed in this report. questionable because (1) four of the assessments did not have at least one NMFS-collected data source of sufficient scope and accuracy; (2) NMFS lacked a standard process for assessing the reliability of non-NMFS data used in all five assessments; and (3) the stock assessment reports did not adequately identify the uncertainty of the biomass estimates. The Northwest Center plans to conduct a data quality workshop in July 2004 to formally establish the roles and responsibilities of the data stewards, with the intent of standardizing the data evaluation process. on interagency data committees, to develop quality assurance protocols and to assess the quality of non-NMFS data. NOAA agreed with the report recommendation to clearly present the uncertainties in the stock assessments. While the methods used and the completeness of the uncertainty characterization varied from assessment to assessment, NOAA said it is desirable to have both a quantitative analysis of model uncertainty and an evaluation of the consequences of alternative model scenario. NOAA said that while much remains to be done, long-term planning efforts and coordination among field and headquarters are ongoing. was due to factors that would not be addressed in a standard statistical analysis. An assessment without an uncertainty range does not quantify and communicate any of the uncertainty. For this reason, we did not change the report. In addition to the person named above, Leo G. Acosta, Kristine N. Braaten, Allen T. Chan, David Dornisch, Alan Kasdan, Robert Marek, Cynthia C. Norris, Carol Herrnstadt Shulman, and Tama R. Weinberg made key contributions to this report.