Advisory committees play an important role in shaping public policy by providing advice on a wide array of issues. Their advice can enhance the quality and credibility of federal decision making. Despite the strengths associated with the federal advisory committees, agencies also need to be careful to maintain their mission to promote the public interest and take measures to safeguard against actual or perceived agency capture by the entities paying the fee. According to a Congressional Research Service report on the FDA prescription drug user fees, some critics said that giving the pharmaceutical industry a fee was a bad idea. fees, some critics said that giving the pharmaceutical industry a role in setting program performance goals creates conflicts of interest. Agencies also need to ensure that all stakeholders are given the opportunity to engage substantively. Some smaller businesses have raised concerns that FAA only consults with selected major airlines and manufacturers, ignoring commuter airlines and smaller businesses also affected by FAA regulations. Many of the stakeholders we spoke with said that although the ad valorem structure of the HMF makes it relatively easy to administer, it raises concerns about equity. User financing is one approach to financing federal programs or activities. User fees assign part or all of the costs of the benefits and services derived from these programs and activities to readily identifiable recipients. Some excise taxes, however, can also be described as a form of user financing. For example, the excise taxes on tobacco products can be used to fund the federal government's health care program for the elderly, the disabled, and the elderly in nursing homes. The federal government can also use excise taxes to fund its health care programs. increased spending on harbors or reduced fee collections would increase the federal deficit, unless spending in other areas was decreased or other collections or revenues were increased. Providing guaranteed funding levels to any one activity in the budget protects that activity from competition with other areas for scarce resources. Given the fiscal pressures imposed by the nation’s large and growing structural deficits, given a reduction in fee receipts or an increase in appropriations—absent offsetting changes elsewhere—will increase theFederal deficit.” a form of user financing. For example, the excise taxes on motor fuels, tires, and heavy vehicles accrue to the Highway Trust Fund, from which Congress appropriates funds for the interstate highway system, mass transit, and transportation projects. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) operations are funded in part by excise taxes assessed on airline tickets, aviation fuel, and certain cargo. Both the Chief Financial Officers (CFO) Act and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-25 provide that agencies review their user fees biennially. any needed cost adjustments. If imposing such fees is prohibited or restricted by law, agencies will recommend legislative changes as appropriate. OMB encourages agencies to examine potential effects of design alternatives when reviewing and proposing changes to regulations. The user fees considered in this report, and summarized in table 1, are assessed under specific statutory authority and levied on air and sea passengers, vessel operators, or other users of the government’s services. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Corps prepares an annual report to Congress on the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. The report includes a substantive review of the fee, but does not include information on these costs. The HMTF is not the only fund for which revenues flow in automatically from earmarked taxes or fees and spending must be appropriated. In the 1990s the Highway Trust Fund also built up a surplus. At the time, Congress and the President modified the discretionary spending caps to provide for a separate cap on highway funding. In 1998, Congress specified a more automatic link between spending from the HMTF and highway spending. More automatic link between spending from the Highway Trust Fund and receipts into the Trust Fund. Spending was tied to estimated receipts with a retroactive adjustment. When receipts came in below estimated levels and would have resulted in an automatic cut in highway program funding levels, the cut was overridden. A different mechanism is used for the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) prescription drug user fee. If actual FDA fee collections are higher than estimated, the fee is not adjusted for inflation. If receipts are lower than expected, the adjustment is not made. prescription drug user fee: if actual FDA fee collections are higher than the amount appropriated, FDA must adjust fee rates in a subsequent year to reduce its anticipated fee collections by that amount. Even if there were a tighter link between collections and expenditures, the HMTF should not necessarily aim for a zero balance. Corps officials and some stakeholders agreed that there are good reasons to consider maintaining a positive balance in the trust fund. Where fees are expected to cover program costs and program costs do not necessarily decline with a drop in fee revenue, a reserve can be used. AQI program’s ability to perform border inspections and that, in fiscal years 2003 through 2005, user fees were not sufficient to cover program costs. In 2007, APHIS and CBP further improved the AQI cost estimates by agreeing on a common set of assumptions used to forecast the cost of AQI activities. In contrast, the customs and immigration inspection fees are structured to recover partial costs. Although CBP includes the MPF in its biennial user fee review, the information provided is not enough to project fee collections or inspection costs.  legacy fees supporting these inspections are still governed by separate, dissimilar authorizing legislation. APHIS uses the federal regulatory process to propose rate increases and invites comments on its proposals and implementing regulations via a public notice and comment in the Federal Register. Although various Congressional committees oversee this process, Congress has delegated to APH IS the authority and responsibility to set and adjust AQI fee rates to match program costs over time. In contrast, both the immigration system and the border control system are overseen by the Department of Homeland Security. match program costs over time. The AQI fee statute grants the Secretary of Agriculture broad discretion to prescribe and collect fees sufficient to cover the cost of providing agricultural quarantine and inspection services. In 2006 we reported that financial management issues at CBP and APHIS adversely affect the AQI program’s ability to perform border inspections and that, in spite of this, the program continues to perform well. In contrast, both the immigration and customs fee rates are set in statute. These fees can only recoup authorized program costs to the extent that total reimbursable program costs do not exceed the rate caps prescribed in statute, we found. DHS recognizes the importance of using cost-effective methods to collect fees. In its oral comments, USDA noted it was impressed with the level of explanatory detail and analysis contained in the report. If USDA believes that the statutory authority does not permit it to cover such indirect and imputed costs, then we believe USDA should seek additional authority from Congress consistent with our recommendation. USDA also noted that it will need to (1) work with DHS to identify DHS’s imputing costs for the AQI program. payments and to support electronic payments, rather than payment by check or cash. Assess interest and penalties on late HMF payments for domestic shipments, shipments into foreign trade zones, and sea passengers. Direct CBP to include in its biennial report on the Merchandise Processing Fee information on total program collections relative to total program costs. In accordance with OMB Circular No. A-25 guidance and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, include in AQI fees the indirect and imputed costs not considered when setting AQI fee rates. with a drop in fee revenue, a reserve can be important. For example, the AQI fees are maintained with a reserve of approximately 3 months worth of program costs in case of emergency. As with similar situations, deciding whether and how to link HMF collections with expenditures is complicated. On the one hand, aligning collections and expenditures can promote economic efficiency and enhance stakeholder support for the fee. But on the other hand, increased spending on harbors or reduced fee collections would increase. on the customs, immigration, and AQI vessel fees, and the reviews generally do not reflect input from the other. CBP’s review of the MPF does not detail program costs and project fee collections, or provide enough information to determine if the amount, structure, or authorized uses of the fee should be updated. If agencies cannot determine the extent to which these fees are recovering costs, Congress cannot be sure that resources are allocated to the activities it most values. The principles of effective user fee design discussed earlier in this report can both offer a framework for considering the implications of various statutory structures. amount of money available in the HMTF to be appropriated for other purposes. Unless agencies present a comprehensive picture of the customs, immigration, and AQI fees, Congress will continue to lack a complete picture of whether the fees work in concert or conflict with each other. Furthermore, agencies will be less able to develop and maintain the partnerships necessary to collect and distribute the fees as efficiently and effectively as possible. The lack of complete, transparent cost and collections data for the MPF and AQi fees, could hamper oversight. fees contributes to a several month delay between the use of appropriated funds and receipt of reimbursement from the immigration and AQI user fee accounts. To address this challenge, CBP told us it has developed a legislative proposal that would, in part, require monthly instead of quarterly remittance. A representative of a cruise line industry association we spoke with noted that monthly payments would increase the administrative costs to the cruise lines, but that if a steadier supply of funding was provided, it would reduce costs. there are opportunities at the local level for payers to provide input on fees and the services they support. Ineffective communication may reduce stakeholder cooperation and support for the fees, contribute to misunderstandings and confusion. Congress does not have a comprehensive view of the vessel and passenger AQI, customs, and immigration inspection fees and how they are funded. The fees are intended to fund a range of activities, including immigration and customs enforcement. They are not intended to cover all of the costs associated with immigration and Customs Enforcement. information provided is not sufficient to project fee collections or to provide assurance that the amount of the fee is aligned with program costs. CBP cannot reliably project future MPF collections because the agency has not estimated the effects of exemptions, entries made through foreign trade zones, the decline in the constant dollar value of the minimum and maximum fees, or changes in import demographics. Since fiscal year 2004 collections have increased relative to program costs and in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 collections exceeded costs. Since 2003, cost calculations have included activities that are not directly associated with processing cargo or that are covered by other fee programs. and in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 collections exceeded costs by a total of approximately $221 million (see fig. 6). CBP’s most recent biennial report notes that a detailed analysis of the current and projected effects of MPF exemptions and an accurate cost estimate for processing merchandise is needed. CBP officials told us that they plan to conduct a detailed review of the MPF in the second phase of a three-phase review. They said that they estimate beginning the MPf review in early 2008, but the timeline depends on when the first phase is completed. APHIS says fee rates are now set to recover all program costs except for certain indirect and imputed costs, such as the cost of employee retirement benefits. OMB Circular No. A-25 guidance and USDA policy require the inclusion of such costs in setting full-cost recovery fees. APHIS said that because USDA receives appropriations to pay for departmental and staff office costs, it did not have the authority to include those costs in the fee. We interpret the AQI user fee statute, however, as permitting USDA to recovery all costs associated with its program, including imputed and indirect costs. pension liabilities, may be more directly linked to the fee- funded activity and more easily calculated than seeking to allocate departmental and staff office costs. Further, “full cost recovery” should be viewed from a governmentwide perspective. Even though USDA would have to deposit those portions of user fee collections as miscellaneous receipts in the general fund of the Treasury, it would still defray a cost that Congress determined should be paid for by the user fees. If USDA believes that the statutory authority does not permit it to do so, it can ask Congress to change the law. To be reimbursed for time spent on authorized activities for various fees, CBP must track the time spent. The inspection processes have been largely combined but the separate distinct fees supporting these activities are not uniform. At one port, on each shift, a full-time CBP officer was assigned solely to tracking staff time. In general, the three fees are not levied uniformly, and sometimes sometimes the fees can be difficult to figure out, the authors say. The need to separately track three inspections that have largely been consolidated adds complexity and increases the potential for error. For immigration inspections conducted on a Sunday, holiday, or between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., CBP must charge a vessel operator, owner, or agent for the overtime cost of the immigration inspections. The statutory authorities governing immigration overtime inspection charges mandate that the amount of the charge be dependent upon the amount paid to the inspector, subject to specified limitations. However, CBP officers are paid under a different statutory scheme, which does not contain the same limitations. According to CBP, the agency cannot automatically bill the vessel operator or shipping agent for immigration overtime services. hours vary by port, the hours during which an inspector might be working overtime vary. In addition, the amount charged depends on the number and pay grade(s) of the officer(s), adding to unpredictability and increasing DHS’s costs to administer the fee. According to CBP officials, collections for reimbursable overtime agriculture inspections total about $1.2 million annually. AQI regulations explicitly prohibit charging for similar overtime inspections of aircraft when passengers have already paid an AQI fee for that flight. increase in the customs vessel inspection fee rate without a corresponding increase in the annual fee cap. Before the fee was raised in April 2007, the annual cap was equal to 15 payments. Because the customs fee was increased but the cap was not, the cap is now equal to approximately 13.6 payments. CBP officers must be aware when processing payments that the 14th payment will be for a different amount than the typical fee rate. The quarterly remittance schedule for the passenger inspection fees contributes to a several months delay between the use of the fees and their payment. General, the three fees are not levied uniformly, and sometimes involve cross-subsidization (see table 2). For example, although air passengers are charged an AQI fee, sea passengers (generally cruise ship passengers) are not. According to APHIS finance officials, the costs of inspecting sea passengers, fee-exempt vessels, and vessels that have met the annual fee cap are spread among all payers of the AQI vessel fees. They said that although although the fee rates. Cruise ships routinely exceed the cap because they arrive in the U.S. far more than 15 times each year. According to CBP data, fiscal year 2006 CBP costs for the AQI commercial vessel inspections were approximately $35 million. About $2.2 million for passenger inspections and about $4 million for inspections of exempt private vessels. The cost data that CBP provides to APHIS does not indicate what portion of the $35million is for passenger and private vessel inspections. In fiscal year 2006, commercial vessel customs inspections fee collections covered about 66 percent of related program costs. DHS does not know the portion of total immigration inspection costs covered by immigration fee collections. Since the fees can pay for only some inspection activities and only under certain circumstances, ensuring proper use of fee collections can require detailed cost data. Collecting these data, however, can be particularly costly given the disparate fee collection rates for vessel inspection and other immigration-related activities. For more information, go to: http://www.dhs.gov/immigration/costs. managed channels are undermaintained. The customs inspection activities and the authorized uses for the customs passenger and vessel fee collections are misaligned. Customs inspection-related activities that occur while a CBP officer is earning overtime or premium pay, or during preclearance, can be funded by the user pay. But the same activities conducted during regular time cannot be funding by the fee. Therefore, not all of the activities that may be funded from the customs fee are associated with conducting customs inspections. Both the immigration and customs statutes contain language that fees equal or be reasonably related to the cost of services. But the two statutes actually prescribe an exact amount in law to be charged for their respective inspection services. The immigration statute makes immigration user fee collections available to refund any appropriation for expenses incurred in providing immigration inspection. The customs statute further restricts cost recovery by limiting the set of activities for which collections may reimburse appropriations. The fees are used to pay for immigration inspection and pre-inspection services as well as for other purposes. committee for a similar program that funds new work construction and rehabilitation on inland waterways. The purpose of this Inland Waterways Users Board is to make recommendations on priorities and spending for inland waterway construction and Rehabilitation projects. CBP’s Airport and Seaport Inspections User Fee Advisory Committee meets biannually to advise the commissioner of CBP on issues related to the performance of airport inspections. Both the customs and immigration passenger inspection fee statutes required the establishment of advisory committees consisting of industry representatives. of CBP on issues related to the performance of airport and seaport agriculture, customs, or immigration inspections. The committee members represent entities subject to the fees, including airlines, airports, cruise lines, and industry associations. We recently reported that stakeholders felt that the advisory committee provided only limited opportunities for substantive two-way communication. As a result, they said they lack data necessary to know whether the passenger inspection fees are set fairly or accurately, or are being spent on the appropriate activities. GAO: Despite integration of the inspection processes for the three sea passenger and vessel fees, the administering agencies report separately on their respective fees. DHS has acknowledged that the challenges described in our previous work extend beyond air passenger inspections to other fees managed by the agency, GAO says. GAO: Agencies with shared responsibilities for common outcomes or related functions should reinforce agency accountability for collaborative efforts through common planning and reporting. The agencies and Congress lack vessel and sea passenger fees and information on the total costs of the combined inspections. The fees vary in the way they are set, collected, used, and reviewed. APHIS does not indicate what portion of the $35 million is associated with inspecting cruise ships that have exceeded the fee cap. As a general rule, the costs of crew inspection are not charged to vessel owner/operators, although they may be charged for overtime immigration inspections of vessel crew at some ports. This makes fees unpredictable. Predictability of inspection fees enables users to plan, charge clients for, and account for related costs. arriving international air passengers. Where appropriate, changes made to one fee should be designed to complement rather than conflict with the other fees. The separate, disparate fees supporting the largely consolidated inspection process appear to aggravate disconnects between the customs passenger and vessel fees and the corresponding inspection activities. Unless remedied, differences such as the way overtime charges are assessed for commercial vessel will continue to be a problem, the report says. The need to address some of the user fee challenges presented in this report may appear obvious, but how to accomplish this is less clear. all ports even if it chooses to change the design of that fee from ad valorem to one based on a ship’s size or draft. Stakeholders expect that inspections will occur in a timely manner. Cruise lines, importers, and ships’ agents all said that delays for passenger and vessel inspections are costly to industry. One agent said that a 1-hour delay can cost a carrier $15,000 in longshoreman labor costs. In some ports, the cargo cannot be unloaded until a ship is cleared. in longshoreman labor costs. Crew changes cannot occur until a vessel has cleared its immigration inspection. During this time, the ship must pay expenses for two crews. Stakeholders told us that when multiple ships arrive at the same time, ships have waited up to 4 hours before being cleared. CBP officials said these types of inspection delays are generally caused by staff shortages, outdated or crowded facilities, clustered arrivals, or some combination of these factors. We recently reported similar findings related to delays for arriving international air passengers. their type and volume of trade and commerce (including cruise lines, container ships, petroleum products, and liquefied natural gas); maintenance dredging needs, and specific issues facing them. We also considered travel costs in selecting the site visits. In light of the significant amount of ongoing audit work in the Gulf region, and because other ports in our selection are representative of important characteristics associated with Gulf ports, we did not include a Gulf port in our Selection so as not to exclude it from the list. include a Gulf port in our selection so as not to unnecessarily burden an area in crisis. The ports we selected include medium and large ports, natural deepwater ports, and those that require frequent dredging. We visited the ports of Boston, Massachusetts; Charleston, South Carolina; Newark, New Jersey/New York, New York; Baltimore, Maryland; Miami, Florida; Port Everglades, Florida. Seattle, Washington; and Los Angeles/Long Beach, California. At each port, we spoke with various stakeholders, including port authority officials, customs brokers, shipping agents. found that the authorized depth was available in the middle of the channel only approximately 35 percent of the time in fiscal year 2005. Although ships continue to use these channels and harbors, not maintaining them to their justified design dimensions can cause problems. For example, according to Corps officials in one port we visited, some vessels are delayed because they have to wait for high tide in order to pass through the channels. They also reported instances where ships skipped a port of call altogether if such a delay was reported. skipped a port of call altogether if such a delay would have caused the ship to miss its scheduled appointment at the Panama Canal. These types of disruptions affect both regional commerce and port profits. A 2007 report by the U.S. Committee on the Marine Transportation System (CMTS) found that vessels often deal with the challenges of poorly dredged and maintained channels and harbors by “light loading,” i.e., loading less cargo than their full capacity. This in turn increases shipping costs. 28,000 tons with a 27-foot channel. They said that this “light-loading” of vessels significantly drives up its operating cost and impacts construction costs. The 2007 CMTS report found that channel limitations may lead to unsafe conditions and interaction with other vessels. A full oil tanker ran aground in East Rockaway, New York, in 2006 due in part to a lack of maintenance. Corps officials said the Corps now uses a performance-based budgeting model to set harbor maintenance priorities. The Corps is developing a national estimate of the cost to make the 59 busiest channels available 95 percent of the time at their full-use dimensions. Without regular, substantive fee reviews, agencies, stakeholders, and Congress lack complete information about changing program costs and whether authorized, reimbursable activities align with program activities. For example, CBP and APHIS report separately on the customs, immigration, and AQI vessel fees, and the Customs and Border Protection agency reports separately on vessel fees. a port is not well maintained, it may lack the capacity to handle increasingly larger vessels and therefore lose business or drive up costs. For example, the authorized depth of the Port of Georgetown is 27 feet, but the channel has silted in to 25 feet on numerous occasions over the past several years. With the channel at only 25 feet, a company bringing in rock for the regional construction industry can only bring in about 24,000 tons per vessel, down from 28,000tons with a 27-foot channel. There is currently no formal vehicle for payers of the HMF and other port stakeholders to provide input to the Corps. The HMF authorizing legislation did not establish an HMF advisory committee, though it did establish an advisory committee for a similar program that funds new work construction.will e-mail the office to find out when highlighted areas will be dredged. Also, several of the CBP field offices. hold regular meetings with port stakeholders. to share information and address stakeholder concerns. method for the Corps to provide information on domestic vessel movements to CBP. Information on CBP’s costs to collect and administer the HMF, for inclusion in the Corps’ annual report to Congress on the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. An annual budget request for CBP-related salaries and expenses equal to, rather than in excess of, CBP's actual costs associated with collecting theHMF. We provided a draft of these proposals to the CBP Office of Regulatory Audit. cruise lines, but that if a steadier supply of funding helped CBP to provide better service, it would be worthwhile. Insufficient coordination between CBP and the Corps inhibits CBP’s ability to ensure that certain HMF payments are properly made. CBP reviewed recent payment history and found that 42 percent of payments were late or improper. The Corps gathers information on domestic vessel movements and could provide this information to CBP. However, CBP does not request and the corps does to establish a receivable and ensure proper payment. CBP does not request and the Corps does not share information with CBP on these types of domestic freight movements. An official from CBP’s Revenue Division said if CBP had information on freight movements it could reconcile them to HMF payments. The Revenue Division receives this type of “front-end reporting” for other, similar fees, the official said. It is one of the best ways to establish a receivable and ensure proper payment, he said. The official said CBP could monitor compliance rather than relying on self-reported payer information. customs, immigration, and agriculture inspections that did not vary by port or the rank of the inspecting CBP officer would increase revenue, decrease administrative costs, and improve CBP’s relations with the trade community. Ineffective and outdated collection methods for vessel inspection fees increase administrative costs for both agencies and payers. A lack of coordination between the Corps and CBP inhibits oversight of HMF payments for passenger vessels, domestic shipments, and shipments into foreign trade zones. Unless CBP automates its collection methods, requires monthly remittance, and aligns fee rate increases with the annual fee caps, CBP will continue to incur unnecessary administrative costs. division has not conducted any audits specific to the HMF since 1996; rather, the fee is audited incidentally during the course of audits related to other fees or duties. CBP accepts electronic payment for these fees along with customs duties, CBP has not requested and the Corps has not offered any HMF-related referrals. In contrast to theHMF collections process for passenger vessels, domestic shippers, and shipments into foreign trade zones,CBP’s collection process for both the MPF and HMF assessed on formal customs entries has several advantages. CBP already values cargo for the assessment of duties, so there is no duplication of effort. CBP also determines if the correct amount was paid for HMF and MPF. Because these are ad valorem fees, if the value of the goods is understated, additional HMF or MPF fees may be due. All of the fees we reviewed suffer from some misalignment—although the nature of that is unclear. The fees are all subject to review by CBP's inspector general. payer misplaces the receipt proving that the vessel has reached the fee cap, the fee must be paid. The payer may request a refund if the receipt is later found, although several stakeholders told us this process is lengthy and burdensome. Some stakeholders and CBP field office staff expressed frustration with the paper-based system. An automated payment and record-keeping system would speed the collection process, reduce the likelihood of payment errors, and reduce administrative costs for both parties, the authors say. Collection methods function best when they minimize administrative costs and maximize compliance. CBP is automating collections for several user fees but to date, the commercial vessel fees may still only be paid in person by check or cash. Payers must retain each paper payment receipt and present them at each entry so that CBP can determine whether that particular vessel has reached the annual fee cap. Treasury’s Financial Management Service has made it a priority to increase the use of electronic collection methods for government collections. accepts electronic payment for these fees along with customs duties, which are typically paid by a customs broker on behalf of an importer. Customs brokers we spoke with said that the system works well, is efficient, and imposes minimal administrative costs. It is less costly for the government and payers of the fee for CBP to collect the fee as part of the formal entry process than it would be for the Corps or another entity to establish a fee collection system of its own. The system allows entry summaries to be electronically transmitted, validated, confirmed, corrected, and paid. reimburse authorized inspection activities conducted at air, sea, or land ports of entry. CBP officials said that since the events of September 11, 2001, the focus of merchandise processing has shifted toward security. They said that certain activities associated with merchandise processing and performed by CBP officers, including screening and inspecting conveyances, are not reimbursable MPF activities. The legislation governing the MPF should be explicitly consistent with the CBP regulations, officials said. The MPF is not required to reimburse CBP for certain activities, they said. $1,000, and quarterly payment is not required if the total value of all shipments for which a fee was assessed for the quarter does not exceed $10,000. No payment is required for imported cargo that is entitled to be entered under informal entry procedures. Jacqueline M. Nowicki (Assistant Director) and Susan E.M. Etzel managed this assignment. Jessica Nierenberg, Kathleen Padulchick, and Amy Rosewarne made key contributions to all aspects of the report. We examined the Harbor Maintenance Fee (HMF), Merchandise Processing Fee (MPF), Customs Inspection Fees, Immigration User Fee, and Agricultural Quarantine Inspection (AQI) User Fees. In examining the fees, we reviewed user fee legislation and guidance, agency documents, and literature on user fee design and implementation characteristics. We interviewed officials responsible for managing the selected user fees at the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) and Customs and Border Protection (CBP) GAO consulted with port security experts from within and outside of GAO. We chose ports that varied in their type and volume of trade and commerce. We also consulted with CBP and Corps officials, and with outside stakeholders, in order to choose ports. The U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) offices in Washington, D.C. administers the MPF and Customs inspection fees, and it collects the HMF on behalf of the Corps. CBP administers Immigration user fees jointly with ICE. The AQI user fees are jointly with APHIS. We recommend that the Secretary of Homeland Security take the following four actions. Develop a legislative proposal, in consultation with Congress, to harmonize the customs, immigration, and agricultural quarantine inspections fees. Establish an advisory committee on the HMF and the activities that it funds, that includes payers of the fee. Increase the cap on customs inspection fees for commercial vessels, in line with the 2007 increase in this fee, so that the fees can be harmonized. The Secretaries of Agriculture and Homeland Security should conduct joint reviews of the fees and consolidate reporting. DHS characterized the report as balanced and accurate and agreed with the overall substance and findings of the report. Of the six recommendations directed at DHS, DHS concurred with five of them and partially concurring with the sixth. DHS concurring in part with our recommendation to automate collections of the customs and AQI fees assessed on commercial vessels. The agency will analyze the feasibility of this approach and work to identify and obtain funding to implement the recommendation if it is deemed cost beneficial. We appreciate that DHS recognizes the importance of using cost-effective methods to collect. We provided a draft of this report to the Secretaries of Homeland Security and Defense, and to the Acting Secretary of Agriculture for review. DHS characterized the report as balanced and accurate and agreed. We also provided portions of the report to nonfederal stakeholders for their review and made technical corrections as appropriate. We received written comments from Homeland Security (DHS), which are reprinted in appendix III, and oral comments from the Departments of Agriculture (USDA) and Defense (DOD). In addition, each agency provided technical comments, which we incorporated asappropriate. oral comments, and concurred with the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the report related to the Army Corps’ Harbor Maintenance Fee. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its date. At that time, we will send copies to the Secretaries of Homeland Security, Agriculture, Army, and Defense and interested Congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me on (202) 512-9142. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. In order to provide context as Congress considers funding options for port programs, we examined what is known about the way selected fees assessed on air and sea port users are set, collected, used, and reviewed. Some Corps and CBP officials have established successful, two-way communication practices at the local level. Some Corps division offices publicly post survey results and maps showing the controlling depth reports for local harbors and channels. One local Corps official said this practice encourages more dialogue with stakeholders, noting that they will e-mail the office to find out when highlighted areas are to be improved. The timeline depends on when the first phase of the project is completed, but agencies can accommodate stakeholder input in various ways. Briones and Carlos Diz provided legal support and Donna Miller developed the report’s graphics. Briones, Diz and Miller also provided legal help for the report. The report's graphics were developed by Donna Miller. The full report is available on CNN.com/soulmatestories and on CNN iReport.com. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. artificially high. On the other hand, applying the fee equally to all eligible ports offers a relatively simple collection mechanism. Congress could decide to impose a uniform fee structure at all ports even if it chooses to change the design. Whether the fee is based on the value of the cargo (ad valorem) or on the size and draft of the ship is a separate decision from whether fees should vary by the dredging needs and condition of a given port. The fee helps to create a level playing field for all ports, which in turn helps minimize competition between individual ports. it relatively easy to administer, it raises concerns about equity. There is no link between the value of their cargo and the depth or width of the harbor needed by the ship on which it is carried. For example, importers of high-value goods, such as natural gas and pharmaceuticals, told us they essentially pay a much greater share of dredging costs. Stakeholders said that a ship’s size and draft combined with harbor conditions drive harbor maintenance costs, and therefore may more closely link benefits received with the cost of providing the benefits. Some stakeholders say the HMF fee structure does not reflect the individual dredging needs of ports. Other stakeholders noted that a benefit of the ad valorem structure is that it may better reflect the users’ ability to pay. The overall cost of moving goods through the nation’s marine transportation system is artificially high. On the other hand, applying the fee equally could reduce the cost of shipping goods through U.S. ports by as much as 50 percent, according to some estimates. Since 2003, HMF collections have significantly exceeded funds appropriated for harbor maintenance. This may be inconsistent with users’ expectations of the fee’s purpose. Congress should consider reviewing the link between the amount of the HMF and the amounts of expenditures for the harbor maintenance program. Such a framework could also provide the basis for future reviews of federal user fees as Congress works to ensure that user fee financing mechanisms remain relevant and up-to-date. It could help clarify and illuminate the tradeoffs associated with various policy choices available to Congress. Not all authorized, reimbursable activities for the sea passenger and vessel inspection customs fees and MPF are associated with conducting inspections. Not all inspection-related activities may be charged to these fees. HMF collections far exceed funds appropriated for harbor maintenance, resulting in a large and growing surplus in the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. Corps officials and port stakeholders assert that many federally managed channels are undermaintained. The HMF is not assessed on domestic cargo valued at less than $1,000. There is a backlog of harbor maintenance, which can result in costly delays and more dangerous shipping conditions. A recent Corps analysis of the 59 busiest commercial federal channels in the U.S. found that the authorized depth was available in the middle of the channel. decisions about changing the HMF should consider its continued relevance and relative priority within the context of reexamining the base of all major federal spending and tax programs, the authors say. The authors say the decision should be made in light of the nation's large and growing structural deficits. In 2001 HMF collections exceeded expenditures by about $44 million. By 2007 that gap had grown to over $506 million. Total collections grew 101 percent from $704 million to $1.416 billion from 2001 to 2007. Corps officials told us this was driven by the ad valorem nature of the fee—receipts grow with both volume and value of shipments. Annual expenditures grew from $2.2 billion to $3.4 billion. Annual collections grew from £1.1 billion to £2.6 billion. The gap between collections and expenditures has grown from £44 million in 2001 to £506 million in 2007. grow with both volume and value of shipments. Annual harbor maintenance project expenditures, which are subject to annual appropriation, grew more slowly. The difference between the amount collected and the amount expended has led to a growing balance in the HMTF. Between fiscal years 2001 and 2007, the balance grew from $1.8 billion to $3.4 billion. Corps officials told us they expect it to reach $8 billion in fiscal year 2011 (see fig. 5) and they expect the balance to grow to $10 billion in 2011. reach $8 billion in fiscal year 2011 (see fig. 5). Since 1996, the President has included in his annual budget requests and Congress has appropriated $3 million from the HMTF to compensate CBP for costs associated with collecting the fee. CBP finance officials told us that they estimate the annual cost of collecting the HMF to be approximately $2 million. The extent and nature of the link between HMF collections and expenditures are policy choices only Congress can make. However, vital information about the tradeoffs associated with such a link is lacking. recent payment history and found that 42 percent of payments—representing approximately 18 percent of the total dollar value—were late. According to these officials, they are taking steps to begin collecting interest on past and future late payments. They estimate interest collections for last year to be about $182,000; they do not yet have an estimate for annual penalties. Further, they said that they have begun reviewing the authority related to penalties in order to determine an appropriate dollar threshold that would trigger assessment and collection actions.