Maintaining living standards over the long term will likely require private sector expansion or increased remittances. FSM and RMI private sectors face significant constraints to growth. Lack of marketable skills is a hurdle to increased remittance revenue. Even with the needed reforms, growth in the FSM’s and the RMI’’ private sectors may be limited by structural constraints such as geographic isolation and high transport costs.“Because the amended compacts have been in place for only a few years, it is difficult to determine whether the assistance they provide will contribute to the fundamental changes in FSM,” they say. of FSM progress toward its long-term development goals. At the 2005 JEMFAC meeting, the RMI government provided a brief overview of GDP and employment data. HHS emphasized that an annualized schedule for committee meetings does not provide enough frequency for meaningful discussion of RMI growth issues. For example, while the R MI government presented data on migration to the United States, J EMFAC did not discuss the linkage between compact education spending and improving RMI emigrant’s skills to encourage increased remittance income. building grant in fiscal year 2004 and less than 1 percent of compact sector grant funding to such a grant in 2005. In the RMI’s METO 2000 Statement of Development Strategies and its 2001 Strategic Development Plan entitled “Vision 2018,” the R MI estimates that between 500 to 800 new job entrants will need to find employment each year from 1999 to 2009. We discuss remittances in our report as one option that theRMI may consider in pursuing the economic goals under the amended compact. World Bank data show that remittances have become an important source of financial flows to developing countries. As of 2005, RMI data suggest that about 15,000 Marshallese have immigrated to the U.S. to find employment each year from 1999 to 2009. To meet this objective, the ready access provided under the compact for Marshallese to live and work in the United States must be preserved. Improved skill provision should benefit both RMI emigrants as well as domestic economic prospects. that about 15,000 Marshallese have immigrated to the United States. FSM data suggests that almost twice as many Micronesians live overseas. In the RMI, the 2002 household survey suggests that RMI citizens send more money out to RMI emigrants than they receive in remittances. The 2003 U.S. census of FSM and RMI migrants in Hawaii, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas Islands (CNMI) confirms that almost half of the emigrants live below the poverty line. nations’ capacity to produce future statistics. We conducted our review from August 2005 through March 2006 in accordance with generally accepted U.S. government auditing standards. We requested written comments on a draft of this report from the Departments of the Interior, State, Health and Human Services, and Treasury, as well as the governments of the FSM and the RMI. All comments are discussed in the report and are reprinted in appendixes IV through VII. Further, we considered all comments and made changes to the report, as appropriate. small island economies suggest common challenges for socioeconomic development. Developing nations in the Pacific have exhibited relatively poor economic performance. Such nations have also exhibited the need for improvements in delivery of health and education services. Environmental challenges from climate change and increasing population density are also common threats to ensuring sustainable livelihoods in thePacific. Table 5 provides estimated socioeconomic data on various Pacific island nations in. The report was published by the International Development Association (IDA) and the World Economic Forum (WEF) on November 14, 2013. In the FSM, the fisheries and tourism sectors together provide about 6 percent of employment. Commercial fishing has been plagued by poor government investments in vessels and infrastructure that have resulted in high debt levels. In the RMI, visitor arrivals have remained flat over the past 10 years despite growth in Pacific island tourism. Economic experts suggest that the F SM and RMI fishing and tourism industries could grow within specialized niche markets such as high-end tourism or dock services. Such opportunities remain limited in scale, however, and growth in these industries in both countries may be limited by current policies. benefit both RMI emigrants as well as domestic economic prospects. RMI employment data indicate that the RMI did succeed in reducing public sector employment from about 3,760 jobs in 1997 to 3,530 jobs in 2001. The World Bank has estimated that, in 2002, Kiribati had 5,000 international visitors. The per capita GDP that is less than one-third of the R MI’s. The RMI has reduced public sector jobs by about 1,000 since 2001. 3,530 jobs in 2001. Since then, public sector employment has risen to about 4,320 jobs in 2005. We have added language to the report to include the volatility in tax income from the fisheries and tourism sectors. RMI offices related to reform efforts, such as land registration offices, have been funded with compact grants. In addition to the persons named above, Emil Friberg, Assistant Director; Leslie Holen; Reid Lowe; Mary Moutsos; Kendall Schaefer; and Seyda Wentworth made key contributions to this report. In the FSM, experts report that foreign investment regulations vary between states, creating confusion and additional requirements for investors who want to invest in several states. The climate for foreign investment is also reportedly affected by private and public interests’ protecting local businesses from foreign competition. Some FSM states require a certain percentage of local ownership in foreign investment. Pohnpei state, for instance, requires 30 foreign investment permits for foreign workers. According to an Interior official, a shipping company with service from to Guam has for years been seeking permission to provide shipping service. Pohnpei state, for instance, requires 30 percent local ownership for foreign investment. Local businesses sometimes lobby the foreign investment boards against approval of certain applications. Extensive FSM and RMI government involvement in commercial activities continues to hinder private sector development. High public sector wages and government enterprises that directly compete with private industry. The FSM’s and the RMI’S public sector reform efforts since the 1990s have been based on private sector reform. The ADB is working with the governments of the FSM, RMI, and Pohnpei to improve the economy. the highest levels of aid per capita. The RMI provides a significantly higher proportion of the population access to improved sanitation. Private sector representatives in the FSM and the RMI characterized the business environment in their nation as obstructive and costly. World Bank national business environment surveys suggest that a high cost of doing business is a problem. The FSM’s. child mortality rates are significantly lower than the. RMI’S, and its immunization rates are much higher than those of the. FSM. Bank national business environment surveys suggest that a high cost of doing business is a common problem for small island states. Of 155 countries surveyed, the FSM and the RMI are among the worst 10 to 20 countries in terms of the cost of enforcing contracts and the degree of investor protection. In interviews with private sector representatives, problems were noted with F SMs and RMI business environments (see fig. 7). The following are GAO’s comments on the Department of the Interior. These industries in both countries may be limited by current structural barriers such as geographic isolation and small fragmented markets. High airfares and poor flight connections; lack of adequate hotel and airport infrastructure; low freight capacities and poor interisland shipping. Growing threat of overfishing; limited pool of skilled labor; and high production costs in terms of labor, fuel, and other supplies. In addition to facing structural barriers to growth, private industry in general faces a costly business environment in both the FSM and the RMI according to economic experts and U.S. We do not assert, however, that economic development cannot be attained. If key policy reforms were implemented, the business environment would likely improve and facilitate private sector expansion. The FSM will also likely need to identify and capitalize on niche market opportunities as well as to create conditions to maximize remittance income, particularly through improving the education and health of its citizens. Establishing connections with the overseas business community may be one way to help the FSM advance its compact goals. We agree that implementation of policy reforms will not, in of itself, produce economic development. We asked experts at the ADB, the IMF, the World Bank, and the University of Hawaii’s East-West Center to provide a technical review of our findings. In conjunction with our own assessment, we determined that trade data, remittance data, and data on the private sector profits contained weaknesses. Exact data for these elements were not presented in the report and related findings were corroborated with other reliable data. Nonetheless, our interviews with U.S., country, and international officials revealed important constraints to the FSM's and the RMI's capacity to prepare regular, reliable, and complete data. recent International Monetary Fund (IMF) Article IV documents for each nation. ADB Country Strategies and Program Updates; 2005 FSM and RMI Pacific Island Economic Reports (PIER) prepared in conjunction with the ADB. Expert reviews of FSM, RMI fiscal structures and tax systems. FSM’s 2005 Statistical Tables; the RMI”s 2004 Annual Yearbook and 2005 Employment Statistics. OECD’S international development statistics; the U.S. Department of Census. U.S. Department of Census; and the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. FSM Tax Reform Task Force 2005 Report to the President; RMI 2005 Budget Statement. ADB progress reports on the RMI Private Sector Development Project and the FSM Private sector Development Loan. RMI Final Reports from the 2005 Dialogue For Action Retreats sponsored by the ADB. We obtained data on FSM and RMI public sector enterprises from the F SMi Statistical Tables. Only 28 percent of FSM citizens have access to improved sanitation, compared with an average of 57 percent in all lower-middle income countries. In the RMI, the 1999 census suggests that 85 percent of the population has access to safe water. Recent tests in urban and rural areas indicate that a significant number of potable water sources, such as groundwater wells and water catchments— 30 percent or more in some cases—are contaminated. The U.S. also performs relatively poorly in provision of safe water or sanitation. water catchments are contaminated and deemed unsafe for human consumption. According to the FSM Department of Health, 80 percent of 35 to 64 year-olds are overweight. The number of cases involving diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, and obesity is also on the rise in the country. The FSM and the RMI also highlight the increasing prevalence of lifestyle diseases such as diabetes or hypertension. Youth health issues; and poor teaching skills are also a challenge in the F SMM and RMI. We identified key areas of concern in delivery of health and education services. We obtained socioeconomic statistics on noncommunicable diseases, access to safe water and sanitation, teacher certifications and literacy skills. We reviewed the U.S., FSM, and RMI annual compact reports for 2004; FSM and R MI development plans; recent International Monetary Fund (IMF) Article IV documents for each country. We also obtained regional statistics on population trends, teenage fertility, child mortality rates, immunizations, human poverty. FSM and RMI health officials indicated concern about growing youth problems such as suicides, sexually transmitted diseases, and teen pregnancy. With regard to teacher qualifications, the FSM Department of Education reports that 90 percent of teachers need to upgrade skills to meet new certification standards. In the RMI, a 2004 Ministry of Education assessment reported that more than 50 percent of Teachers had failed basic English literacy tests.on household and national budgets. Future health outlays will also be affected by health challenges facing F SM and R MI youths. MCC provides economic assistance to developing countries. eligibility determined by evaluating a country’s performance on select indicators associated with economic growth and poverty reduction. MCC ranks the FSM in the top 35 percent (in the 81st and 67th percentile, respectively) for expenditures on health and primary education. According to the World Bank, among 171 countries for which it reports aid per capita, the RMI and FSM ranked 5th and 6th highest, respectively, with per capita aid greater than $900 in 2003. evaluates indicators with a relationship to growth and poverty reduction. The FSM and the RMI are established democracies with free and peaceful elections. Each country also has a vocal civil society evidenced by religious organizations and nongovernmental organizations. Each democracy is stable despite the challenges of having hierarchical traditional structures; islands with scattered populations; and a citizenry of distinct cultures, languages, and histories. It ranks both countries in the top 20 percent for health expenditures relative to other lower-middle-income countries, but in the bottom third for immunizations. provides estimated socioeconomic data on various Pacific island nations. The FSM and the RMI have a relatively large population density at 331 and 181 people per square kilometer, respectively. The RMI also has a very high teenage fertility rate. Except for Palau—also a nation with a Compact of Free Association with the United States—the FSM has the highest levels of aid per capita. the FSM’s child birth rate is higher than any other Pacific island nation’. The number of cases involving diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, and cancer increased in the late nineties. Diabetes figured as the leading cause of adult morbidity in 2000 and 2001. The care and treatment of such diseases often involves expensive referrals abroad, lowered funding for public health programs that serve impoverished populations, and burdens on household and national budgets. Future health outlays will also be affected by the rising prevalence of lifestyle diseases in the U.S. and the RMI, says the World Health Organisation. The government has been criticized for not holding public hearings or disseminating sufficient information regarding a proposed dry dock. Lack of information about government activities creates uncertainty for public, private, and community leaders, which can inhibit grant performance and improvement of social and economic conditions. Although FSM and RMI health and education expenditures are relatively high, certain conditions need to be addressed to improve the quality of life in the islands. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. FSM and the RMI according to economic experts and U.S. and country officials. In interviews, private sector representatives also expressed concern with poor government provision of power, water, and infrastructure services. FSM and RMI emigrants could provide increasing monetary support to their home nations in the future, although evidence suggests that they are less likely to do so now than in the past. The FSM Department of Economic Affairs could provide more information on how to send emigrants back to the United States. and RMI departmental officials, private sector representatives, NGOs, and external economic experts revealed a lack of communication and dissemination of information by each government. Private sector representatives in several FSM states reported that the public radio station serves as the government’s primary means of disseminating information but is often nonoperational or censored. In the RMI, a State official and an official official in the FSM reported that they had not heard of the JEMCO or JEMFAC decisions. pursue budgetary self-reliance and economic advancement, yet disagreed with our conclusion that FSM development prospects remain limited. In addition to providing copies of this report to your offices, we will send copies to other appropriate committees. We will also provide copies to the Secretaries of the Interior, State, and Health and Human Services, as well as the President of the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact us. The amended compacts implementing legislation requires that we report on political, social, and economic conditions in the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix VIII. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report.or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov. the report to reflect this suggestion. We have also added language to the report recognizing HHS’s efforts to improve vaccine coverage. The FSM confirms the accuracy of our description of its recent economic performance, its constraints to growth, and its need for economic policy reforms. Given these current realities, we maintain that prospects for long-term economic growth in the FSM remain limited. We do not assert, however, that economic development cannot be achieved in the Federated States of Micronesia. the FSM’s 2005 Statistical Tables; the RMI’S 2004 Annual Yearbook; and the most recent available public enterprise audit reports. In addition, we held extensive interviews with officials from the U.S. Department of the Interior (Washington, D.C.; Honolulu; the FSM; andthe RMI) and the Department of State. We also interviewed officials. from the ADB (Manila, the Philippines), the IMF (Washington,. D.c.), the World Bank (Washington.C.) and the Pacific Islands Development. Program at the East-West Center. and the Pacific Islands Development Program at the East-West Center (Honolulu) We traveled to all four states in the FSM and to the RMI (Majuro) We met with the governor’s and legislature’’ offices in each of the F SM states and the President’S office in the R MI. We had detailed discussions with FSM (national and state governments) and RMI officials from foreign affairs, finance and budget, economic affairs, health, education, land management, tourism and fisheries. Vocal civil society evidenced by religious organizations and nongovernmental organizations (NGO) that have been active on some political issues. Both countries also participate in various regional organizations, many of which address trade, energy, and environmental challenges faced by island nations. Despite the two countries’ stable democratic systems, interviews with U.S., FSM, and RMI officials and civil society representatives indicated that key civil society issues are still not being addressed in a meaningful way by both countries. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. After more than 40 years under U.S. administration as part of the United Nations Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the FSM and the RMI became sovereign nations in 1978 and 1979. For the last 20 years, the United States’ relationship with the two countries has been defined by the original Compact of Free Association. The compact represents a new phase of the unique relationship between the United states and these island areas. In 1986, theUnited States, theFSM, and theRMI entered into the original compact. compact also gave citizens of both nations the rights to live and work in the United States as ‘nonimmigrants’ The compact exempted FSM and RMI citizens from meeting U.S. passport, visa, and labor certification requirements. In 2001, we reported that during the compact, a significant number of F SMi and R MI citizens had migrated to the United states. The United States negotiated separate amended compacts with the RMI and FSM that went into effect on May 1, 2004, and June 25, 2004. between the United States and these island areas. The compact provided a framework for the U.S. to work toward achieving its three main goals. The first goal was met; the FSM and the RMI are independent nations. The second goal has also been achieved with the compact’s establishment of several key defense rights for all three countries. The third goal was to assist the F SM and RMI in their efforts to advance economic development and self-sufficiency. The defense rights were also established. face political and social challenges with regard to improving grant implementation and health and education conditions. U.S. and country officials told us that political conditions, including a weak federation in the FSM; disputes over public institutions’ and government use of land on Kwajalein Atoll in the RMI. Both governments’ lack of communication with their constituencies have hindered compact implementation and service delivery. Despite relatively high health andEducation expenditures, both countries face development challenges in these sectors. For example, although the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC)—which evaluates indicators with a relationship to growth and poverty reduction—ranks high, the country’s poverty rate remains high. to the compact infrastructure grant, for example, has been delayed for more than 2 years owing to national and state disagreements over infrastructure priorities. Similarly, the RMI government and landowners on Kwajalein Atoll have been disputing government use of leased land and management of public entities on the atoll. Such tensions have negatively affected the construction of schools funded by compact grants. Lack of government communication has also been cited as a major problem in the development of the island nation. The report was based on interviews with U.S., FSM and RMI officials, private sector representatives, NGOs, and external experts. The compact’s third goal was to be accomplished primarily through U.S. direct financial assistance to the FSM and the RMI. For the 15-year period covering 1987 to 2001, funding was provided at levels that decreased every 5 years. For 2002 and 2003, during negotiations to renew expiring compact provisions, funding levels increased (see fig. 1) to equal an average of the funding provided during the previous 15 years plus inflation. The amended compacts continue the defense relationship, including a new agreement providing U.s. military access to Kwajalein Atoll. GAO: Reforms in each of the areas discussed are needed to improve the RMI’s prospects for long-term economic growth. We also agree that the annual decrement in compact grant funding is a major challenge to achieving this objective, particularly if implementation of key policy reforms requires fiscal resources. We recognize that the report language has been clarified. and what actions need to be pursued to improve those options. The Republic of the Marshall Islands letter dated June 1, 2006, was sent to the U.S. government. Policy reforms are needed in the areas of tax, land, foreign investment, and the public sector to improve business incentives. Tax structures in the FSM and the RMI remain complex and unequal and engender business disincentives. The FSM tax system has been criticized for multiple taxation of the same products. The RMI tax system is complex and regressive, taxing on a gross rather than net basis and having weak collection and administration capacity. The private sector representatives’ most common complaint on the R MI tax system was the need for better and tighter regulations. be supported, at least partially, by increased noncompact assistance. Such increases in assistance are not guaranteed, may vary from year to year, and may not be flexible enough to meet FSM and RMI budget needs. Tax reform may provide opportunities for increasing annual government revenue in the F SM and the RMI. Business tax schemes in both nations are considered to be inefficient by the IMF, the ADB, and other economic experts owing to a poor incentive structure and weak tax collection. private sector representatives as well as various U.S., IMF, ADB, and country reports. An enabling business environment in either country requires substantial reforms in taxes, land ownership, and foreign investment regulations. Despite several years of policy dialogue on taxes, the FSM has agreed on elements of tax reform but has no plan for implementation and the RMI has not agreed on structural change to its tax system. In attempts to modernize complex, traditional land tenure systems, land registration offices have been established in both countries. The RMI Office of Tax and Revenue reported that it has focused on improving tax administration and has raised some penalties and tax levels. Legislation for income tax reform has failed and needed changes in government import tax exemptions have not yet been addressed. Inadequate access to land and uncertainties over land ownership and land values continue to create costly land disputes, disincentives for investment, and problems regarding the use of land as an asset in both the FSM and the RMI. Land tenure systems in each nation need to be reformed. Since 1994, the IMF and other experts have recommended, among other tax reforms, implementing a value-added tax (VAT), a simplified net profit tax, and a single modernized independent tax authority. In 2005, the FSM Task Force on Tax Reform developed a tax reform proposal that included these principles. Nonetheless, despite the fact that such reforms are estimated to require 2 to 3 years for implementation, the government has neither begun to implement the proposal nor specified an implementation plan. The FSM government has. In 2005, FSM taxes provided an estimated $29 million in revenue, or 23 percent of total revenue. The largest income source is external grants, which, at $76 million, accounted for 60 percent of revenues in 2005. In terms of expenditure, the largest FSM expenditure is in the form of public sector salaries and pensions. The FSM government receives fishing access fees from foreign vessels that fish in its exclusive economic zone. The government's wage bill is high relative to regional standards. concluded that substantial tax reform could bring revenue growth by broadening the tax base, altering the structure to be more equitable and business friendly. However, although the FSM and the RMI governments have made some improvement in tax administration, tax revenues have largely stagnated. Revenue potential from further tax reform will also vary by government (national and state) and will require factors such as a sound design, adequate resources and capacity for tax enforcement; government commitment for reform; and, ultimately, private sector growth. F SM and RMI development plans identify fishing and tourism as key potential growth industries. widely from year to year; however, each has had recent budget deficits. Economic experts emphasize that, structurally, both country’s budgets are characterized by a small local revenue base and recent increases in government payroll. As a result, unless other donors provide additional assistance, expenditure reductions will be required as compact grants decline. The largest FSM expenditure component is public sector wages and salaries at an estimated $60 million. This component grew from 36 percent of total expenditures in 2000 to 2004 to 42 percent oftotal expenditures in 2005. the RMI provide about $22 million in revenue to the government. External grants are the largest income component, providing $54 million in 2005. The structure of RMI revenues remained roughly the same over the past 5 years. RMI payroll expenditures increased. In 2005, the RMI’s wage bill comprised 34 percent of total expenditures, compared with the 2000 to 2004 wage bill of 31 percent. The RMI also receives fishing access fees. At 64 percent ofTotal Revenues, External Grants are thelargest income component. FSM and the RMI. Land tenure systems in each nation are complex and based on traditional and customary rights, often for multiple individuals. Most parcels do not have a registered, legal title. Land values are also uncertain owing to the lack of a developed land market or price data on lease transactions. Given that a major proportion of FSM and RMI wealth lies in property, the inability to use it to secure financing for development is problematic. Using land for foreign investment is even more difficult. systematic method for registering parcels, instead waiting for landowners to voluntarily initiate the process. Landowners have shown little interest in land registration, partly owing to the cultural issues associated with traditional land ownership structures. The functionality of land registration offices in both the FSM and the RMI has also been limited by a lack of registered surveyors and trained staff. In the R MI, for example, only 5 parcels have been, or are currently being, registered by the land registration office. Although the F SM and RMI have amended various various. The share of employment accounted for by these enterprises, as well as estimated direct public enterprise subsidies, has declined in recent years. IMF and ADB officials expressed concern that the FSM and the RMI governments are not committed to reducing their participation in commercial activities. Most of the enterprises have drained public finances through poor financial performance, requiring subsidization or entailing debt. The FSM prepared a comprehensive program for public sector enterprise reform in 1999 that identified two enterprises per state and national government for privatization. Such privatizations later became a condition for receiving ADB loan assistance. Despite several years of commitment to, and recommendations for, policy reforms, key reforms have not yet been implemented. The FSM and the RMI face notable challenges to achieving budgetary self- reliance and long-term economic advancement. Tax, land, foreign investment regulation and public-sector reforms, when implemented, will improve the business environment, in turn facilitating the private sector expansion that may help the countries advance their compact goals. However, even with the needed reforms, the countries will need to overcome the "aid curse" reduce public sector employment have generally failed in both the FSM and the RMI. FSM, RMI public sector wages remain about twice the level of private sector wages, contributing to the large government wage bill. The most skilled employees out of the private sector into public sector jobs. In addition, the F SMs and RMI governments continue to conduct a wide array of commercial enterprises that compete with private enterprises, although the share of employment accounted for by these enterprises, as a whole, remains low. public sector reform efforts since the 1990s have been based on restructuring government operations. One example of a reform success highlighted by economic experts is the RMI’s restructuring of its Social Security Administration to reduce operating costs and improve service provision. Despite government endorsement of public sector reform principles, early efforts to reduce public sector employment have generally failed in both the U.S. and the UK, according to a report by the International Institute for Fiscal Studies (IIFS) The report was published by the IIFS on November 14, 2013. registration offices have been established in both countries. In both countries, inadequate access to land and uncertainties over land ownership and land values continue to create costly disputes. Several years of public sector reform efforts have also failed to reduce government involvement in private sector activities. Thus far, the JEMCO and JEMFAC committees have not evaluated the lack of foreign investment offices in the UK and the U.S. The regulations in both nations continue to be confusing and relatively burdensome, according to economic experts and private sector representatives. lack of progress; or the interdependence of policy reform implementation with effective compact grant implementation. Opportunities exist to create linkages between grant administration and economic reforms. For example, sector grants in public sector capacity building could be used to address capacity constraints that have been identified as an obstacle to reform implementation (e.g., the lack of certified land surveyors for land reform). Further, compact management committees could establish linkages. between, for example, grants to tourism promotion agencies and progress in reforming foreign investment regulations. secured transactions to allow movable assets to serve as collateral. Some governments have also tried to improve foreign investment processes or created small business development centers. The ADB has also recently assisted both countries in holding several “Dialogue for Action’ retreats that enable public and private sector representatives to develop a common vision for sustainable development through economic reform. The retreats can be helpful for improving the public sector/private sector dialogue on economic challenges facing each society. However, ADB experts also emphasized that, HHS agreed with our recommendation and requested that it be expanded to include JEMCO and JEMFAC requirements for establishing policy reform implementation timelines. The urgency of pursuing policy reform suggests that establishing timelines for such reforms could be a useful method to improve U.S. assistance. We also appreciate HHS’s suggestion to improve communication and information between annual meetings through periodic teleconferences and videoconferences and have added language to the report to reflect this suggestion. We have also added. The amended compacts’ fiscal procedures agreements requires the JEMCO and JEMFAC to monitor FSM and RMI progress toward their long-term development objectives. The oversight committees have not defined what actions they will take. HHS also agreed with our recommendation and requested that it be expanded to include requirements for establishing timelines for policy reform implementation. In the 2004 compact, both countries identified the need for economic reform within their national development plans, and both countries have implemented or are pursuing some legislative actions. the issue of FSM progress toward their long-term development goals was not discussed by the JEMCO. We recognize that Interior has contracted with the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Graduate School to obtain further economic information on the FSM and the RMI. While we agree with the importance of gaining this further information, we believe that sufficient information is available for the committees to begin meeting their requirement to evaluate FSM, RMI progress. For example, multiple expert studies as well as F SMS and RMI and. connections with the overseas business community may be one way to pursue such opportunities and should be included in meaningful JEMCO discussions. The coming reductions in U.S. grants, paired with current economic realities, also suggests the need for frank assessments of current limited prospects for economic growth in the FSM and what actions need to be pursued to improve those. As we emphasized earlier, the scheduled coming reductions of U.N. grants creates urgency for implementation of policy reforms and for capitalizing on opportunities to leverage compact assistance. At the fiscal year 2004 and 2005 annual JEMCO and JEMFAC meetings, compact management committees focused on approving sector grants and discussing grant administration issues. The JEMco meetings have not included discussion of FSM progress toward its long-term development goals. The oversight committees have not defined what actions they will undertake to meet this requirement. At the increase the effectiveness of U.S. assistance to the FSM and RMI, the U.N. has called for an increase in the number of American troops in the region. annualized schedule for committee meetings does not provide enough frequency for addressing both grant administration issues and long-term growth issues. HHS suggested that communication be improved through periodic teleconference and videoconference updates. FSM and RMI officials report that they have implemented a few legislation actions to improve the private sector environment, such as bankruptcy and mortgage laws, yet progress on key policy reforms required to stimulate investment has been slow. The FSM viewed the report as a potentially constructive contribution to ongoing efforts to pursue budgetary self-reliance and economic advancement. and economic conditions through reform. To maximize FSM and RMI potential for budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement, we recommend that the Secretary of the Interior direct the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Insular Affairs, as Chairman of JEMCO and JEMFAC, to ensure that they fulfill their requirements in the following three areas. evaluate F SMs and R MI progress in implementing policy reforms needed to improve the business environment and encourage increased investment and tax income. identify problems encountered with policy reform implementation. recommend ways to improve U.S. assistance for these objectives. GAO: Compact management committees have not discussed FSM and RMI progress toward budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement. GAO: Deputy Assistant Secretary submitted a statement for the record at the opening of the 2005 JEMCO meeting that mentioned the lack of sustainability in the FSM’s economic dependence on government expenditures. But, GAO says, he did not read his statement to the committee and the issue of FSM progress toward their long- term development goals. The scheduled coming reductions in U.S. grants to both countries create urgency for the implementation of policy reforms. The report examines each country’s political and social environment for compact grant implementation. It also looks at economic conditions, including overall growth, fiscal balances, and private investment. To maximize FSM and RMI assistance to those nations, the report says, the United States must help them to achieve budgetary self-reliance and economic advancement. They need to improve social and economic conditions through reform. The FSM’s weak federal structure inhibits compact grant implementation. The central government that is represented on JEMCO does not control the majority of compact funds. As a result, FSM access to the compact infrastructure grant, for example, has been delayed. The FSM and the RMI have a lack of government consensus on compact needs. The RMI has a weak constitution and authority over budgetary policies. It has been unable to secure agreement from the state governments regarding Compact needs. rather than exclusively on the 2 years of bump-up assistance in 2002 and 2003. We will address amended compact implementation issues and trust- fund issues in two separate reports, forthcoming. We have added language to this report indicating the RMI’s concern over delays in setting up its trust fund. Section 177 funds are not included in our analysis. Section 211 of Title Two of the Amended Compact with the R MI states that compact grants shall be used for assistance in the U.S. states that compact grants shall be used for assistance in education, health care, the environment, public sector capacity building, and private sector development. The effectiveness of U.S. and ADB technical assistance to the RMI is outside the scope of this report. The RMI allocated no compact funding to a public sector. capacity building grant in fiscal year 2004 and less than 1 in 2005. We have added language regarding RMI consultations with the private sector and their desire for improved tax enforcement. sectors—education, health, public infrastructure, the environment, public sector capacity building, and private sector development. The amended compacts, their subsidiary agreements, and the U.S. implementing legislation also establish numerous reporting and accountability requirements. The legislation’s direction to the JEMCO and JEMFAC to specifically address economic policy reforms to encourage investment and improve tax income. Including estimated inflation adjustments, total combined compact grant assistance to the two countries is $1.2 billion. in real terms, early 1990s levels in either country (see fig. 2). Although U.S. direct assistance maintained standards of living that were higher than could be achieved without support, we found previously that compact funds spent on economic development were largely ineffective in promoting economic growth. For example, compact funds were used to support general government operations that, among other things, maintained high levels of public sector employment and wages, creating disincentives to private sector growth. Compact funds were also used tosupport business ventures, most of which have failed. In our examination of a wide range of projects funded under the compact, we found that many projects experienced problems due to poor planning and management. In 2000, we recommended, among other things, that the Secretary of State direct the Special Negotiator for the Compact of Free Association to negotiate amended compact provisions. The compact also gave citizens of both nations the rights to vote on issues of their choice. The U.S. House of Representatives voted in favor of a resolution that would require the compact to be re-negotiated. and recommend ways to improve U.S. assistance for these objectives. We received comments from the Departments of the Interior and HHS, as well as from the FSM and the RMI. A more detailed presentation and response to the comments can be found in appendixes IV through VII. The Department of Interior concurred with our recommendation and stated that it is pursuing additional information on the F SMM and RMI economies to support its implementation of the recommendation. We also received technical comments from Interior, State, Treasury, HHS and theRMI. in the future. Trend data on a variety of social indicators, such as teacher qualifications and student drop-outs, could assist in evaluation of the effectiveness of compact education assistance. However, much of this data are just now being collected in a systematic way. Also, given that both nations have weak domestic capacity to produce statistics, they rely heavily on external consultants for this purpose. In the FSM, the contract for statistical assistance from external consultants has now expired. As such, both FSM and Interior officials have expressed concern for that nations’ capacity to producing future statistics. to trust funds—meant to provide an ongoing source of revenue after fiscal year 2023—increase annually by a comparable amount. Under certain conditions, the trust fund revenue available in 2024 may be less than even the lower level of grant funding in 2024. If the trust funds consistently earn a higher rate of return, or if additional contributions to the funds are provided, the probability rises that they could provide a sustainable income source at the level of fiscal year 2024 grants. Although the FSM and the RMI are stable democracies, both countries face political and social challenges with regard to improving grant funding. total combined compact grant assistance to the two countries is projected at an estimated $3.6 billion over the 20-year assistance period. However, to provide increasing U.S. contributions to the FSM’s and the RMI's trust funds, grant funding will decrease annually. Assuming current population growth estimates, this decrease in grant funding. will result in falling per capita grant assistance over the funding period and relative to the original compact (see fig. 3). While the level of annual grant assistance decreases each year, contributions to trust funds—meant to provide an ongoing source of revenue—will increase. value, the RMI’s wage bill increased from around $17 million in 2000 to around $30 million in 2005. As compact grants decline through 2023, government fiscal balances and GDP could be supported, at least partially, by increased noncompact assistance. The RMI also receives large grants from Japan and Taiwan and the FSM reports having received grants from China. The FSM and the R MI receive substantial U.S. program assistance from agencies such as the Department of Agriculture, Education, and Health and Human Services. The FSM and the RMI economies have performed modestly and have been characterized by continued dependence on external assistance. Private sector employment has largely stagnated in both countries, whereas public sector expenditures continue to account for almost two-thirds of GDP. Unless each nation can secure other donor assistance, maintenance of living reflecting expected compact funding at levels roughly equivalent to fiscal years 2002 and 2003, when compact funds were temporarily increased. In both the F SM and RMI, however, private sector activity has remained relatively stagnant and exists largely to provide services to the public sector. Economic development and self-sufficiency were not achieved under the original compact. Total U.S. assistance accounted for more than 50 percent of government revenues throughout the compact period. In the FSM, 2004 and 2005 GDP fell owing to compact delays and a lower level of assistance relative to 2003. For the RMI, the IMF estimates that GDP expanded moderately owing to increased public sector expenditure (see fig. 4). While the R MI also experienced compact delays in 2004, RMI public expenditure increased in both 2004 and2005, reflecting expected compact funding. of key policy reforms requires fiscal resources. We recognize that the FSM and the RMI were required under the amended compacts to contribute an initial $30 million to their trust funds. Recent RMI GDP performance may have differed if this funding were used to provide current goods and services rather than for savings. The RMI’s contribution does not alter the extent of RMI economic dependence on external assistance. Our description of R MI economic performance was also based on broad trends from 2000 to 2005, not exclusively on the 2 years of bump-up assistance.