The Army and Marines had planned to put the majority of the earlier versions of the MRAPs into prepositioned stocks at various overseas locations. With the increase of U.S. forces deploying to Afghanistan and Secretary of Defense requirements, these plans have been adjusted. About 5,750 will be assigned to infantry brigade combat teams, 1,700 to heavy brigade combat units, and about 165 to Stryker brigades. The Marines are reportedly still developing their ground vehicle strategy and have previously suggested that MR APs have deployability limitations under a sea-based, expeditionary Marine force. sea-based, expeditionary Marine force. MRAPs have proven to be 10 times safer than HMMWVs in protecting soldiers during IED attacks. Pentagon's Joint Program Office for MR APs also reportedly estimated that as many as 40,000 lives had been saved. Some defense experts suggest that the Joint Program office's estimates seem too high. Secretary Gates also noted the morale value of the MRAP to service members. The MRAP has been used in both Iraq and Afghanistan. Congress appropriated $38.346 billion for all versions of the MRAP. The full FY2011 DOD budget request of $3.4 billion was authorized by the Ike Skelton National Defense Authorization Act for FY2011 ( P.L. 111-383 ). In the President's FY2012 DOD budget proposal, there was no request for procurement funds for the MR AP program. Many older MRAPs shipped to Afghanistan are reportedly not being used because their size and weight severely limit their effectiveness. Pentagon agreed to loan 300 MRAPs in Afghanistan for one year to 15 allied nations currently fighting in Afghanistan. All countries that are loaned MR APs can request an extension on the loan and the borrowing countries are responsible for the costs associated with maintaining these vehicles. Loaning unused MRaps to coalition partners could not only help to reduce allied casualties but can also help to recoup some of the associated costs. Approximately 85 MRAP's are already out on loan to Poland, Romania, Georgia, and the Czech Republic. Mine-Resistant, Ambush-Protected (MRAP) vehicles are a family of vehicles produced by a variety of domestic and international companies. They generally incorporate a "V"-shaped hull and armor plating designed to provide protection against mines and improvised explosive devices (IEDs) DOD originally intended to procure three types of MRAPs. These included Category I vehicles, capable of carrying up to 7 personnel and intended for urban operations; Category II vehicles, able to carry up to 11 personnel; and Category III vehicles. The Army and Marines first employed MRAPs in limited numbers in Iraq and Afghanistan in 2003. They were used primarily for route clearance and explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) operations. Some have suggested that MR APs might be a better alternative for transporting troops in combat than up-armored HMMWVs. DOD officials have stated that the casualty rate for MRAPS is lower than that of HMMwVs. The Army and Marine Corps are still using MRAP's in Afghanistan. As of July 21, 2011, 14,749 MRAPs had been delivered to Afghanistan, including 6,980 M-ATVs. DOD officials have indicated that this requirement may increase depending upon the operational needs in Afghanistan. If these vehicles are not being used, is there a better use for them elsewhere or are they to be left in country after the eventual departure of U.S. forces? Are these vehicles shipped to Afghanistan for symbolic as opposed to operational reasons and, if so, what is the total cost for these unused vehicles? DOD has approved an acquisition objective of 25,700 MRAP vehicles for all services. Of this total, 8,100 will be the new MRAP-All Terrain Vehicle (M-ATV) This new vehicle weighs 12 tons and has better off-road mobility, while providing adequate armor protection. Congress might wish to explore the performance characteristics of these modified M-ATVs in greater detail with DOD to ensure a proper balance between protection and operational to ensure that a proper mix of protection and utility is reached. M-ATVs initially enjoyed success in Afghanistan, but reports suggest insurgents have increased the size of IEDs. In response to the enhanced IED threat, two additional layers of Israeli-made armor plates are being installed to the M-ATV's underside. Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology & Logistics Ashton Carter supposedly intends to outfit all of the almost 7,000 M- ATVs in Afghanistan with these armor kits. There are concerns that additional armor might have an adverse impact on vehicle mobility, which was the prime consideration. The Government Accountability Office (GAO) noted that "the introduction of MRAP, M-ATV and eventually the JLTV creates a potential risk of unplanned overlap in capabilities" Some analysts question the need for three distinct tactical wheeled vehicle programs. The use of larger and more lethal IEDs by the U.S. military can also help to recoup some of the associated procurement costs of these vehicles. But the services could run the risk of significant redundancies and not being able to afford recapitalizing and replacing the HMMWV fleet.