The study noted that EPA’s MOBILE model estimates a 24-percent reduction in carbon monoxide emissions by increasing average vehicle speed from 30 mph to 50 mph. When a 95-percent confidence interval is applied, the change in emissions can range from a 72-percent decrease to a 75-percent increase. EPA has been unable to quantify the model's uncertainty primarily because of the cost and time associated with such quantification, the fact that the on-road vehicle population is a constantly changing universe. The agency will not be able to quantify the uncertainty associated with its MOBILE model estimates. “Uncertainty is pervasive in all three emission modeling components,” the EPA says. EPA officials said they plan to address each of the above limitations in the next revision, MOBIle6. The agency will also be looking at the cost of vehicle studies. The next revision of the MOBILES model is expected to be released later this year. It will be the first in a series of updates to the model that will go into effect in 2015. result in only trivial emissions impacts and those that could be significant. Where it was possible to do so, we believe the estimated emissions impact had already been quantified or qualitatively described in the report. One of the 14 limitations of the MOBILE model is that it does not currently have information about, nor estimates of, the uncertainty associated with its emissions estimates. However, we agree that researchers viewed some limitations as having a more significant impact on emissions than others, and we have provided this view in theReport. variability in vehicle emissions (leading to further data gaps/limitations) Agency officials pointed out that there is substantial variability across vehicle types, operating conditions and driver behavior. For these reasons, OMS officials told us they do not plan to develop uncertainty ranges with the next revision to the MOBILE model. Similar to the global positioning issue for road, this is a global issue for vehicle emissions as well as for road safety in the U.S., the agency said. For more information, visit the OMS website. EPA officials said significant technological advancement may be needed before it becomes cost-effective to address this issue. Future vehicles may have on-board computers with the ability to instantaneously record and later report emissions under different operating scenarios. EPA officials pointed out that it is their plan, at some point in the future, to report uncertainty ranges for some model estimates. They said they are currently saving both qualitative and quantitative descriptors for the data being collected by and for the agency in order to perform these calculations. rates, and impact of remote sensing efforts. Except for remote sensing, the current model’s estimates for these parameters is based on aging and limited data. EPA has not performed any tampering surveys since 1992, and agency officials said that as a result of this lack of data, the tampering assumptions for MOBILE6 will remain unchanged from MOBILES5a. However, EPA's goal for MO BILE6 is to provide users with greater flexibility in designing I&M programs, as long as the state or local programs’ estimated I &M credits can be substantiated. state or local data. With respect to newer vehicles equipped with on-board diagnostics, because of the limited data on the longer-term emissions impact of this technology, the agency has provided credit for these OBD-equipped vehicles equal to that provided for operating an enhanced I&M program. A fifth concern is the proper representation of diurnal emissions. EPA officials said that, in addition to the states’ own studies, they were unsure whether sufficient data would be available in time to further revise the I &M assumptions in MOBILE6. More recent data from the U.S. Department of Transportation indicates that passenger cars are driven about 2,000 miles more annually than currently estimated by EPA’s MOBILE model. Heavy duty gasoline-powered vehicles, which have higher certification standards than their light duty counterparts, are believed to comprise a significantly larger percentage of the overall vehicle fleet. EPA plans to update the fleet characterization data forMOBILE6, including reflecting the increases in the heavy-duty vehicle population. Similarly, another fleet characterization issue involves urban buses.  MOBILE5a’ estimates are based on the assumption that, on average, light duty vehicles are driven about 14,000 miles annually when new. EPA does not envision at this time that significant changes in the in-use emissions rates for heavy duty vehicles will be included in MOBIle6. A seventh concern is the fleet characterization data in EPA’s database, stemming from a concern that much of the data used for MOBILES5a are quite old. More recent data from the U.S. Department of to estimate the deterioration rate of such vehicles and that researchers since then had had more time and more vehicles to test than were available to EPA. They also said the model’s correction factor for vehicles with 50,000 or more odometer miles would likely be lowered in MOBILE6, but they were uncertain at the time of our audit how much this emissions estimate would be reduced. A special subgroup of the FACA mobile model workgroup has been established to address this issue, and their work is still ongoing. reductions is compared with observed data. A 1997 study of wintertime oxygenated fuels suggested that the observed oxygenated fuel benefits were much lower than the 20 to 30 percent estimated by EPA’s model. A third concern is MOBILE5a’ estimates of emissions system deterioration for vehicles with more than 50,000 odometer miles. EPA officials agreed that this is also an area that needs more study, but one which they plan to address inMOBILE6.. concern is MOBILE5a’ emissions credits and assumptions about inspection and maintenance programs. According to a 1995 National Research Council report, vehicle condition—whether the vehicle is well maintained, or has been tampered with or is malfunctioning—is more important than vehicle age in determining emissions. There is a need to update the basic data supporting I&M emissions reduction credits to reflect a growing population of vehicles in which rates of tampering may be diminishing. Also, vehicle owners often replace older, carbureted vehicles with newer fuel-injected vehicles. a hill—although some studies have indicated that both the increased load on the engine from climbing a hill and the decreased load that accompanies engine deceleration significantly increase vehicle emissions. EPA officials explained that obtaining the basic data from instrumented cars and chase cars to make such adjustments would be expensive at this time. According to agency officials, it is not expected that MOBILE6 will have adjustments for road grade, although such adjustments are being planned for MOBILES7. In addition to being uncertain about the amount of emissions related to roadgrade, EPA officials said that because of the cost and length of such adjustments, it would be difficult to make them. this time and that because of the cost and length of time required for these studies, the impact of road grade will probably not be addressed until MOBILE7. State and local agencies would have to plot road grades for millions of miles of roadways in their jurisdictions, also a costly and time-consuming activity. However, as global positioning technologyfor vehicles becomes less costly and more widely available and used, it is envisioned that the impacts of roadgrade emissions will be more fully understood. It is envisioned this will lead to a reduction in road grade emissions. MOBILE6 will allow users to separate start emissions from any linkage to the FTP driving cycle assumptions. The EPA plans to partially fund ongoing research with the Department of Transportation to develop a modal emissions model that may one day allow user to model additional parameters, such as the relative emissions impact of sequencing traffic signals to enhance traffic flow. As noted above, an EPA-sponsored FACA mobile model workgroup made up of representatives from other federal, state, and local government agencies, academia, the automobile. be a high priority for MOBILE6, due to be issued in late 1998. Under this revised model, the magnitude of start-up emissions will not depend on vehicle speed or the driving cycle. Instead, EPA is proposing to allow model users to model the emissions impacts of cold starts on the basis of local areas’ estimates of the number of cold-start vehicles in the area. For the first time ever, EPA will move from an areawide, trip-based model to a roadway-specific model. The MOBILE model was originally designed only for estimating areawide emissions on vehicles. EPA plans to expand the current list of vehicle categories from 8 to 20, one of which will be a separate category for buses. The current model does not have a separate classification for urban buses, although this is a growing vehicle category in many urban areas with unique operating characteristics, such as very frequent starts and stops. An eighth concern is the level of distinctions in roadway classifications. TheMOBILE.5a was originally Designed to estimate areawides emissions on cars, trucks and buses. MOBILE5a is a computer program that estimates the emissions of carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, and nitrogen oxides for eight different types of gasoline-fueled and diesel highway motor vehicles. The model consists of an integrated collection of mathematical equations and assumptions about the emissions from vehicles manufactured from 1960 to 2020. EPA officials are examining 14 areas in the current MOBILE model in which major limitations exist. According to agency officials, it is their plan for each new version to reflect the most recent testing, data collection, and research that are being done. Table 1 summarizes the areas in which major limitations exist, as well as EPA’s plans to address these limitations in its next revision to the model, MOBILE6, due to be issued in late 1998. EPA officials told us that incorporating new estimates for these emissions-producing activities would be a high priority for MOBIL6. According to agency officials and model experts we contacted, it is the nature of models to have limitations and to be in a continuous improvement mode. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has periodically updated the estimating capabilities of its mobile source emissions model. Five of the major limitations in the current MOBILE model relate to FTP parameters. These five are emissions from road grade, air conditioner usage, emissions at higher speeds, emissions from aggressive driving, and emissions immediately after engine start-up (cold- start) EPA has added correction factors to the model to estimate what emissions would be for speeds in excess of 57 mph, for rapid acceleration beyond 3.3 mph/second, and for other scenarios such as different temperatures or different fuels. For example, the impact of temperature on emissions can be substantial. MOBILE5a reflects the 10th major revision since the model was first introduced in 1978. The underlying basis for EPA’s original model, and all subsequent versions, has been the Federal Test Procedure (FTP) The FTP is roughly based on a typical urban area trip, complete with starts and stops, covering 7.5 miles in the Los Angeles urban area in the late 1960s. Such a trip is about the length of a typical car trip in the U.S. today. reflect the most up-to-date information. More recent information indicates that nitrogen oxide emissions may be from 30 to 75 percent greater at some speeds than the current model’s estimates when the air conditioner is used. Increases in speeds above 65 mph have left data gaps in the currentmodel that are not adequately represented by existing correction factors. Others have recognized that the MOBILE model's estimates are inextricably tied to the FTP's estimates. The EPA-FACA materials disseminated in March 1997 noted that the 10-percent additional load intended to simulate the effect of airconditioner usage “is obsolete. evaporative emissions, under certain conditions. To compensate for the complexities of these and other emissions-producing activities, EPA has periodically adjusted its basic formula. In essence, the correction factor is a multiplier added to the basic formula (miles traveled times emissions rate per mile) to adjust the model’s output to more closely reflect actual emissions. Except for California, EPA supplies the baseline emissions rates and correction factors for other model users. State and local agencies typically supply their own estimates of the number of vehicle miles. The amount of data needed to estimate the impact of road grade is still years away. Time would be needed to develop consistent guidance on how state and local agencies should go about collecting these data. With respect to the representation of other emissions-producing activities not represented by the FTP, EPA officials have made periodic adjustments but recognize that the current model’s correction factor adjustments may not reflect the most up-to-date information. For example, as noted in, the EPA has made periodic. adjustments. driven, or about 8 times the amount a new car would emit. EPA acknowledges that these adjustments were made on the basis of limited data. Only recently have 1990-technology vehicles become old enough to accurately assess their emissions deterioration. An April 1997 study of 227 vehicles (model years 1991 to 1993) with more than 50,000 odometer miles found no significant changes in emissions or deterioration as indicated by the current model. OMS officials said they used all the data that were available to them at the time (1991-1992) Major updates and improvements to the model have been made as more has become known about the complexity of the factors affecting vehicle emissions. According to agency officials, these improvements have resulted in the refinement of emissions estimates for evaporative emissions, wear and tear, and for other factors. In 1978, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency made the model available for use in 1978. In 2009, the agency made the new model available to the public for the first time. In 2010, the EPA began testing new models for emissions.  declining modeling resources have affected the pace of model improvements over the years. For example, a study of the emissions characteristics of 100 passenger cars for both exhaust and evaporative emissions could cost from $1.4 to $ 1.6 million. Studies of heavy duty trucks and other larger vehicles would cost considerably more. As an illustration of the magnitude of the problem, the agency’s current estimates of the cost of such a study are $1 to $2 million. The study would not address the emissions impacts of road grade, air conditioning, or most fuel studies. Some vehicles with fuel leaks can exceed the evaporative emissions of corresponding vehicles by one to two orders of magnitude. EPA has testing under way to determine how to better define this category of vehicles with significant fuel leaks. A 1996 automotive industry study of 150 vehicles found that 24-hour diurnal emissions ranged from 0.6 grams ofHC to 777.2 grams of HC, with vehicles with liquid fuel leaks providing the vast majority of the emissions. EPA officials explained that while they may develop a separate category for some vehicles withsignificant fuel leaks, this does not necessarily mean there will be a significant overall increase in evaporative estimates. poor vehicle maintenance or tampering; and for other factors. EPA and others have indications that as much as half of all hydrocarbon emissions from motor vehicles are evaporative emissions, under certain conditions. To compensate for the complexities EPA’s significantly higher rate of emissions system deterioration once vehicles reach 50,000 odometer miles. For example, prior to MOBILE5, the model assumed that a vehicle with 100,000 miles emitted about 1.0 grams of hydrocarbons for each mile driven. fifth concern is the proper representation of diurnal emissions. Diurnal emissions refer only to hydrocarbons and are a form of evaporative emissions that occur when a vehicle is parked and the ambient temperature is fluctuating. For all previous versions of the MOBILE model, the data supporting these 8- to 24-hour emissions estimates were collected during a 1-hour period during which temperatures were forcibly increased over a range of temperatures. More recent testing over 24- hours and longer periods without constraining temperature increases to a one- hour period indicates some differences from the MO BILE5a estimates for such evaporative emission. The MOBILE model exists because precise information about the emissions behavior of the approximately 200 million vehicles in use in the United States is not known. The need exists to estimate the impact of motor vehicles on air quality. The model’s estimates provide EPA regulators with critical information that is used to evaluate the adequacy of a state's program and the relative benefits of various policies to control motor vehicle emissions. The estimates can affect state policy decisions on issues such as the content and volatility of fuels. on issues such as the content and volatility of fuels, and some decisions on highway improvement projects. The model’s original purpose was to support the development of mobile source emissions inventories. Today, its estimates have a substantial influence not only on state and local programs but also on the automobile and oil industries. For example, the 1991 Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA) required, among other things, that state transportation improvement programs in certain nonattainment areas conform with the applicable state implementation plan. control strategies, producing state implementation plans (SIP), and—subsequently— demonstrating control strategy effectiveness to EPA and others. The states are allowed to vary a number of control strategy features, including the types of fuels used, the type of inspection and maintenance (I&M) testing network, the frequency of I&M testing, the ages and types of vehicles to be inspected, the stringency of the tailpipe test, the number and percent of inspected vehicles that may receive a waiver,and a host of other factors. often replace older, carbureted vehicles with newer fuel-injected vehicles. The current model provides no additional I&M credits for vehicles equipped with on-board diagnostics(OBD), a requirement for all 1994 and later light duty vehicles and trucks. This vehicle computer technology alerts a car owner when an emissions system malfunctions, permitting quicker repairs. More recent and more complete data are needed on the effectiveness of repairs in an I &M program, including the adequacy and durability of these repairs. Research Council report, “Virtually all motor vehicle testing has been based on a limited set of driving test cycles that inadequately represent current urban driving conditions” EPA officials pointed out that there is not a consistent definition of what constitutes aggressive driving, that aggressive driving happens only over a portion of the trip and is highly variable among drivers. However, one model expert told us that it took more than 1 year to evaluate one component of the model and that collecting vehicle emissions data on large data sets is very costly. on data approximately 20 years old, and there has been much change in the technology and emissions rates of these vehicles since that time. Still, the certification standards are higher for heavy duty vehicles than their light duty counterparts, and they are generally older and driven more miles annually. EPA officials said that testing heavyduty vehicles is difficult and quite expensive and agreed that there is a lack of recent data on the in-use emissions from this category of vehicles once they have been put in service. While some studies are under way, EPA high emitters because, among other reasons, the owners of such vehicles may avoid surrendering such vehicles for inspection and maintenance (I&M) and other testing at a higher rate than the normal population. A 1993 CARB study of 186 vehicles indicated that high emitters could represent 16.8 percent of the California fleet, or nearly 5 times the assumption in the California model. EPA officials have some concerns with the study, its reliance on remote sensing devices, and the study’s use of high-tech technology. One concern is the representation of high emitters in EPA’s MOBILE model database. Sierra Research testified in 1995 that the worst polluting 22 percent of the vehicles produce about 50 percent of emissions. EPA estimates that, overall, from 10 to 30 percent of vehicles cause the bulk of the pollution problems. The impact on the emissions estimates can be substantial, as noted by Sierra Research in 1995. The data now indicate that this group of vehicles accounts for a disproportionate amount of an area's overall emissions. concerns with the study, its reliance on remote sensing devices, and its applicability to other states. EPA officials believe that the larger data sets provided by their ongoing I&M lane testing in three other states properly identify most high emitters. A second concern is the current correction factors for lower volatility fuels and for oxygenated fuels. For example, EPA officials agreed that appropriate representation of high emitter is important to the model’s emissions estimates. They noted that this is also a high priority issue currently being addressed by EPA and one of the subgroups of the mobile modeling workgroup. Model users will be able to estimate emissions for three different types of roadways. EPA officials agreed that the limitation is an area of concern and noted that the agency has ongoing work to address the issue. One concern is the representation of high emitters in EPA’s FTP. The agency has also noted that it is working with stakeholders to address this issue as well as other potential issues with the model. The model will be available to the public by the end of the year. It is available for free on the EPA website. of pollution. This was also a significant issue for one of the Session Chairs for the Coordinating Research Council’s (CRC) April 1997 Workshop, who noted that, in his opinion, this is the single greatest issue that EPA faces. He and others have concerns that the existing database may underrepresent high emitters because, among other reasons, the owners of such vehicles may not be included. The nonfederal co-chair also noted that if the occurrence ofsuch vehicles is not properly represented in the model, the model's emissions estimates can be seriously flawed. A small number of vehicles can potentially be responsible for unusually high levels of pollution. This was also a significant issue for one scientist. He told us that he still believes this to be one of the most significant issues facing EPA today, primarily because of the number of cars on the road. Cause the bulk of the pollution problems, according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) The EPA says it has no plans to change the way it calculates emissions from cars and other vehicles in the near future.  MOBILE5a likely underestimates the impact of low reid vapor pressure (RVP) fuels on hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide emissions at temperatures above 75 degrees. The correction factor for low RVP fuels has not changed since February 1989. The RVPs for most fuels used to be higher than 9.0 psi, but today they can go lower than 7.0. EPA officials said that they plan to eliminate the constraint code in the next model, MOBIle6. receive credit for correction factors for fuels lower than 9.0 psi; however, they noted that work in this area is still ongoing. In addition, a 1996 National Research Council study suggested that the model may overestimate the benefits of oxygenated fuels. Similarly, a 1997 study noted that EPA’s MOBILE model “apparently overpredicts the oxygenated fuel effect by at least a factor of two” when the model's estimate of carbon monoxide reductions is compared with observed data. being able to calculate reductions below this level. The January 1997 Auto/Oil Air Quality Improvement Research Program (AQIRP) Final Report suggested that reducing fuel volatility by 1 psi, from 9.0 to 8.0 psi, would reduce exhaust CO by 9 percent, exhaust HC by 4 percent, and total evaporative HC by 34 percent (NOx remained unchanged) The RVPs for most fuels used to be. The limited data collected since that time indicate that reducingfuel RVP from 9 to 7.0 psi may reduce hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide exhaust emissions from 18 to 27 percent more than the model estimates. among drivers, and that the above observations are not representative of average driving patterns. The Congress has also recognized that the FTP may not reflect actual driving conditions. In 1990 the Congress added Section 206(h) to the Clean Air Act, which required EPA to review and revise the FTP within 18 months “to insure that vehicles are tested under circumstances which reflect the actual current driving conditions under which motor vehicles are used” EPA’s October 1996 final rule on FTP revisions addressed four emissions-producing activities. 1996 final rule on FTP revisions addressed four emissions-producing activities that are not adequately represented in the current FTP. These activities include aggressive driving behavior, rapid speed fluctuations, emissions immediately after engine start-up, and actual air conditioner usage. EPA has not yet revised the MOBILE FTP rule for vehicles with 2WD, 3WD, or 4WD engines and 4WD with 4WD or 5WD engines. For more information, visit the EPA’s website at: http://www.epa.gov/vehicle/FTP. EPA suggested that in lieu of describing some limitations associated with its use of the Federal Test Procedure as a basis for estimating emissions, these would be better described as “FTP parameters” EPA also suggested that we provide specific citations for four studies referred to in appendix I. Report did not clearly distinguish between limitations that may result in only trivial emissions impacts and those that could have a significant impact. We made the language changes suggested by EPA, including adding the citations. Report was also concerned that the report did not clear up the distinction between trivial and significant emissions impacts. FTP may underestimate hydrocarbon, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen oxide emissions by 27, 68, and 17 percent, respectively. A 1993 study sponsored by EPA’s FTP improvement project found that more than one-third of the trips studied had acceleration rates of more than 7 mph/second. Another study found that 18 percent of total driving time in the Baltimore area was composed of higher speeds and sharper accelerations than those represented on the FTP test. According to the 1995 National Research Council report, “Virtually all motor vehicle testing has been done using the FTP.” urban area in the late 1960s. Such a trip is known as a driving cycle, which can be approximated on a dynamometer. EPA added 10 percent to the FTP dynamometer load in an attempt to simulate the effects of air conditioner usage. However, five of the major limitations in the current FTP driving cycle are still in place, including speed, acceleration, flat surface and speed over a 7.5 mile trip. The current parameters stipulate, among other things, that vehicles average 19.6 miles per hour (mph) over the 7. 5 mile trip, do not exceed 57 mph. the MOBILE model’s estimates are inextricably tied to the FTP. Some studies have questioned the representativeness of key assumptions. For example, the California Air Resources Board (CARB) commissioned Sierra Research in 1993 to develop an improved driving cycle. Among other things, this driving cycle allows cars to travel up to 67.2 mph (versus 57 mph for the FTP) and allows for acceleration at a rate of up to 6.9 mph/second. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address should be made out in the form of a check, money order, or a cashier’s check, when possible. GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. Orders may also be placed by calling ( 202) 512.6000 or by using fax number (202. 512-6061) or TDD (202). 512-2537.or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013. days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For more information, please visit: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/healthcare/how-to-get-a-list-of-benefits-from-the-government-you-can-use-for-your-taxpayer.html?utm_source=cnn&utm_medium=email. are not accounted for in the current model and that other emissions-producing activities are not adequately represented. EPA officials said that it is important to note that EPA has conducted and/or partially funded some of the studies that have led to the new data that now question the old estimates and assumptions. EPA has work under way to address most of these limitations. For example, since its formation in September 1995, an EPA-sponsored Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA) subcommittee workgroup has identified 47 high-priority issues. Advisory Committee Act (FACA) subcommittee workgroup has identified 47 high-priority items for improvement in the current model. EPA is also in the process of developing new procedures for improving models in general, which are discussed below. Several model experts told us that it is the nature of models such as MOBILE5a to have limitations and to be in a continuous improvement mode. Agency officials agreed with this assessment, noting that theCurrent model is better than any previous versions and reflects consistent growth in the quality and quantity of information available. House Committee on Commerce asked us to describe the major limitations in the current version of EPA’s MOBILE model. We also describe EPA”s process for improving both current and future versions of the MOBILES model. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/science/environment/mobile-model-limitations-congressional-comittee-on-overtime-and-investigations. We provided copies of a draft of this report to the Environmental Protection Agency for its review and comment. While still not able to quantify the improvements, they said that in their opinion, each new version of the MOBILE model is better than its predecessor. We obtained comments from EPA officials, including the Director of the EPA Office of Mobile Sources. EPA agreed with the overall message of the report but expressed concerns with imprecise language and suggested several changes to clarify information in the report. For example, EPA suggested that in lieu of describing government agencies. more groups have become involved in non-EPA-funded vehicle emissions studies than in the past, allowing EPA to benefit from their studies and observations. EPA officials said that it is their plan for each new version of the MOBILE model to reflect the most recent testing, data collection, and research that are available. Except for the impact of road grade on emissions and revising the in-use credits for heavy duty vehicles, EPA officials say they plan to continue with the current model until 1998. would cost considerably more. Since then, because of higher priority needs, OMS has been allocated only $21.8 million, cumulatively, for modeling improvements. However, many more groups have become involved in non-EPA-funded vehicle emissions studies. This June 1990 analysis indicated that the Office of Mobile Sources would need about $60 million for the modeling improvements known at that time. But since then, the research needs have increased, and the cost of the project has increased as well. Early in EPA’s study to predict whether the agency may recommend that EPA require its offices to follow the other actions listed above when creating or revising models. OMS plans to perform sensitivity analyses for the next version of the model and to have the studies supporting key changes for MOBILE6 peer reviewed. Agency officials explained that declining modeling resources are to blame for the lack of progress on the MOBIle6 project. The Office of Mobile Sources (OMS) plans to carry out all six of the above activities as part of their improvement process. consistent growth in the quality and quantity of information available on very complex issues. The revisions to the next MOBILE model have been undertaken with significantly increased openness and input from other government agencies, academia, the automobile and oil industries, environmental groups, and others. Several commended EPA’s efforts in recent years to reach out to persons outside of the agency, and some noted that the outreach effort had given them a much better understanding of the issues at play in the EPA's program. July 1995, and has held five meetings since that time to obtain external views by those not involved in the model’s development. OMS officials acknowledged that some of the key formulas in the current model have not been properly documented. However, they said they have efforts under way or planned to address these and other modeling needs. For example, one of one of the ways to improve the MOBILE model is to make it more user-friendly and easier to understand. The MOBIle model has not been peer reviewed. EPA has a project under way to develop agencywide procedures for improving models. Office of Research and Development (ORD) is planning a workshop in December 1997 to discuss the status of modeling across several media and other modeling issues. The project director also said that the Science Advisory Board’s January 1989 resolution on models was one of the best documents available on the processes for creating and improving models in general. The SAB executive director and the ORD project director told us that in their opinion, there are specific actions that, when followed, can enhance a model's predictive capabilities. other things, these actions include the following: Obtaining external stakeholders’ input to ensure that the model’s assumptions and formulas receive critical review. Documenting the implicit and explicit assumptions so that others can evaluate the basis of the formulas embedded in the model. Performing sensitivity analyses over key parameters to identify the most sensitive parameters and to establish the areas most in need of further research. Verifying the adequacy of the model's mathematical code. Testing the models predictions with laboratory and field data. EPA issued agencywide guidance in 1994 specifically calling for the peer review of such models. In September 1996 and March 1997, we reported and testified on the uneven implementation of EPA’s peer review policy. EPA agreed with our recommendations for educating staff and managers about the merits of and procedures for conducting peer review. The agency has set in motion a three-pronged approach to improve the implementation of peer review agencywide, includingpeer review of the next MOBILE model. According to the ORD project director, it is too early to predict whether the agency may review the next model. others, and we have provided this view in the report. We conducted our review from October 1996 through August 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. A detailed discussion of our scope and methodology is provided in appendix III. As arranged with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 15 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to the Administrator of EPA and other interested parties. We will also make copies available. air quality officials relative to ongoing activities and documented plans for making model revisions. We also discussed EPA’s past, ongoing, and planned actions with representatives of academia, industry, environmental groups, consulting firms, and other government agencies. We conducted our review from October 1996 though August 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Lawrence J. Dyckman, Lawrence J.-Dyckman and Robert J. Schulder conducted the review for the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)