abandoned sites and hazardous features vary substantially by state. Some states, such as Colorado and Wyoming, indicated they had done extensive and rigorous fieldwork to identify sites and were reasonably confident that their estimates were accurate. Other states, however, relied less on fieldwork, and more on unverified, readily available records or data sources such as published or unpublished geological reports, mining claim maps, and the Mineral Availability System/Mineral Industry Locator System (MAS/MILS), which states indicated were typically incomplete. used the literature only as a starting point, and then estimated the number of features on the basis of experience. Some states were less readily able to provide the data directly from their systems without manipulation or manipulation. For example, while one state estimated that there were about three times the. number of public safety hazards as identified by the literature, another state. estimated thatthere were four times as many, and a third state estimated. that there was up to six times more hazards than originally thought. only the number of sites with environmental degradation, if they reported data for this request at all. Because most states do not maintain environmental degradation data by feature, states could only speculate about this figure, or compute it by estimating an average number of features per site. Because of these limitations with feature-level data, we report only the number  sites with data on environmental degradation in order to ensure more reliable and consistent reporting across the states. As a secondary confirmation that states provided data consistent with this request. abandoned hardrock mines on their lands. Using our consistent definition, 12 western states and Alaska estimated a total of at least 161,000 abandoned hardrock mine sites in their states on state, private, or federal lands. The estimates for a particular state do, in some cases, vary widely from study to study. For example, for Nevada, the Western Governors’ Association/National Mining Association estimated that the state had 50,000 Abandoned Hardrock Mine Sites in 1998. In 2004 EPA estimated that Nevada had between 200,000 to 500,000 sites. To estimate abandoned hardrock mining sites in the 12 western states and Alaska, we developed a standard definition for these mine sites. We consulted with mining experts at the National Association of Abandoned Mine Land Programs; the Interstate Mining Compact Commission; and the Colorado Department of Natural Resources, Division of Reclamation, Mining. We then provided states with an edit-controlled data collection instrument that requested data specifically tailored to our definitions and methods. Other efforts to assess the magnitude of the abandoned mine situation have acknowledged limitations in their efforts. for abandoned hardrock mining sites for a given study. Some states define an abandoned mine site as a mine opening or feature, while others define a site as all associated mine openings, features, or structures at a distinct location. See appendix III for more information on estimates from these studies. In addition, some regional or state estimates included specifically tailored to our definitions and methods. Our definition of abandoned hard rock mine sites includes all associated facilities, structures, improvements, and disturbances. This includes prospecting, exploration, uncovering, drilling, discovery, mine development, excavation, extraction, or processing. An abandoned hardrock mine site is a site that includes all associated facilities, structures, improvements, and disturbances. Using this definition, states reported to us the number of abandoned sites in their states. At these sites, on the basis of state data, we estimated that at least 332,000 features may pose physical safety hazards, such as open shafts or unstable or decayed mine structures. At least 33,000 sites have degraded the environment, by, for example, contaminating surface water and groundwater. and associated environmental problems; and includes only hardrock (also known as locatable), non-coal sites. Features that pose a significant hazard to public health and safety include features, such as mine openings, structures, and highwalls; and impoundments. Sites with environmental degradation include features that lead to environmental degradation, and, consequently, require remediation of air, water, or ground pollution. Rather than reporting, as requested, the number of features leading to environmental degradation, most states reported only the number of features. BLM and the Forest Service are responsible for managing more than 450 million acres of public lands in their care. BLM manages about 258 million acres in 12 western states, including Alaska. Forest Service manages about 193 million acres across the nation. In 1997, BLM and Forest Service each launched a national Abandoned Mine Lands Program to remedy the physical and environmental hazards at thousands of abandoned hardrock mines on the federal lands they manage. According to a September 2007 report by these two agencies, they had inventoried Thousands of abandoned sites and taken actions to clean up hazardous substances and mitigate safety hazards. Previous state estimates of the number of abandoned hardrock mine sites vary widely in the six studies that we reviewed. In September 2007, the agencies reported that there were an estimated 100,000 abandoned mine sites. The Forest Service was unable to provide this information by state. See appendix II for BLM, EPA, and OSM total funding by state and for state funding for coal mine clean-up by state, see appendix I for state-by-state funding for clean-ups of coal mines. Some estimates included coal and other non- hardrock mineral sites because it was not important to distinguish between the type of minerals mined. EPA commented on this problem, noting that a universally applied definition of an does not exist at present. BLM officials said that the agency’s field offices used a variety of methods to identify sites in the early 1980s, and the extent and quality of these efforts varied greatly. For example, they estimated that only about 20 percent of BLM land has been surveyed in Arizona. Historically, the mining of hardrock minerals, such as gold, lead, copper, silver, and uranium, was an economic incentive for exploring and settling the American West. When the ore was depleted, miners often left behind a legacy of abandoned mines, structures, safety hazards, and contaminated land and water. Even in more recent times, after cleanup became mandatory, many parties responsible for hardrock mining sites have been liquidated through bankruptcy or otherwise dissolved. Under these circumstances, some hard rock mining companies have left it to the taxpayer to clean up the mining site. The Superfund program was established under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 to address the threats that contaminated waste sites pose to human health and the environment. The act also requires that the parties statutorily responsible for pollution bear the cost of cleaning up contaminated sites. Some contaminated hardrock mine sites have been listed on Superfund’s National Priorities List. Typically, these sites are expensive to clean up and the cleanup can take many years, according to EPA. programs at BLM, the Forest Service, EPA, and OSM to request expenditure data. We reviewed agency documents, budget justification reports and reports detailing agencies’ cleanup efforts and programs. We obtained data on total expenditures for cleaning up and reclaiming abandoned hardrock mine sites that were compiled from BLM’s Financial Accounting and Reporting System. BLM officials told us that in addition to the expenditure data they provided, the agency receives funding allocations from other sources, such as the Department of the Interior's Central Hazardous Materials fund. Testimony to determine federal funds spent to clean up abandoned hardrock mine sites since 1998. Number of abandoned mine sites and the number of associated hazards, and value and coverage of mine sites. Key contributors to this testimony were Andrea Wamstad Brown (Assistant Director), Casey L. Brown; Kristen Sullivan Massey; Rebecca Shea; and Carol Herrnstadt Shulman. For further information about this testimony, please contact Robin M. Nazzaro, Director, Natural Resources and Environment (202) 512-3841.  appendix provides information on federal expenditures used to clean up abandoned hardrock mines by fiscal year (table 5) and by state (table 6) Range of estimated abandoned mines previously (2001) (2007) Mineral Policy Center (2003) Earthworks (formerly Mineral policy Center) ( 2007) (2004) “openings” No data provided Western Governors’ Association and National Mining Association, Cleaning Up Abandoned Mines: A Western Partnership, 1998. We concluded that the data are appropriate as used and presented. We did not base any conclusions or recommendations on these data. EPA spent substantially more to clean up mines that are generally on nonfederal lands. OSM provided grants with an annual median value of about $18 million to states and Indian tribes through its SMCRA program. Wyoming was the largest recipient of OSM grants for cleaning up hardrock mine sites—receiving about $99 million. See appendix II for more detailed information on agency expenditures by fiscal year. The Forest Service was was $1.billion.billion in 2007. The median amount spent for the public lands was about $5 million. OSM has provided more than $3 billion to clean up dangerous abandoned mine sites. Its Abandoned Mine Land Program has eliminated safety and environmental hazards on 314,108 acres since 1977. Between fiscal years 1998 and 2007, the four federal agencies spent at least $2.6 billion to reclaim abandoned hardrock mines on federal, state, private, and Indian lands. EPA has spent the most—$2.2 billion. In 2004, EPA’s Office of Inspector General in 2004, 63 hardrock mining sites were on the National Priorities List. amendments to the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) of 1977, can provide grants to fund the cleanup and reclamation of certain hardrock mining sites. OSM has provided more than $3 billion to the U.S. since the act was passed in 1977. The Secretary of the Interior grants the request if it is at the request of a state or Indian tribe to address problems that could endanger life and property, constitute a hazard to the public and safety, or degrade the environment. We limited our year-by-year presentation of expenditure data to the past 10 years (1998 through 2007) Because of limited time in preparing, we presented these data in 2008 constant dollars. We presented EPA’s data, for fiscal years 1988 through 2007; and OSM’S data, from fiscal years 1993 to 2007. We performed a limited reliability assessment of the expenditure data and determined that we would limit the presentation of the data to just the last 10 years of spending. in 2008 constant dollars. Because of limited time in preparing this testimony, we were unable to fully assess the reliability of the agencies’ expenditure data. We concluded that the data are appropriate as used and presented to meet our objectives because we (1) attribute the data to what agencies report as their expenditures, (2) present rounded data to minimize the perception of precision, and (3) do not base any conclusions or recommendations on the data. To answer our second objective, we summarized selected prior survey efforts by federal agencies and organizations. As a secondary confirmation that states provided data consistent with the definition, our data collection instrument included a section for states to provide a brief description of how the various data points were calculated. Based on comments in these fields, and basic logic checks on the data, we followed up as needed through telephone interviews to clarify and confirm problematic responses. Our definitional and editing processes provided us with reasonable assurance that the data were as clean and consistent as possible. We calculated the final edited data, and using these final editedData, we calculated the Reclamation involves regrading and reshaping disturbed land to conform with adjacent land forms and to minimize erosion. One of the agencies’ key responsibilities is to ensure that adequate financial assurances, based on sound reclamation plans and cost estimates, are in place to guarantee reclamation costs. If a mining operator fails to complete required reclamation, BLM or the Forest Service can take steps to the number of associated hazards, and the value and coverage of the financial assurances operators use to guarantee them. reclamation, BLM or the Forest Service can take steps to obtain funds from the financial assurance provider to complete the reclamation. Both agencies allow several types of financial assurances to guarantee estimated reclamation costs for hardrock operations on their lands. BLM also allows surety bonds, state bond pools, trust funds, and property. EPA administers the Superfund program, which was established under the Comprehensive Environmental Environmental Protection Act of 1972. The Forest Service is developing a database to collect this and other information on hardrock operation by late summer 2008. provide the data directly from their systems without manipulation or estimation. As of November 2007, hardrock mining operators had provided financial assurances valued at approximately $982 million to guarantee the reclamation costs. The report also indicates that 52 of the 1,463 hardrockmining operations had inadequate financial assurances. The $33 million shortfall is about $61 million less than needed to fully cover estimated reclamation Costs. The number of operations with inadequate financial. assurances by state, the financial assurances required, BLM’s calculation. of the shortfall in assurances, and our estimate of. the shortfall. plan-level operations, a greater percentage of plan-level. operations had inadequate financial assurances than did notice- level operations. Over one-third of the number of all hardrock operations and about 84 percent of the value of all financial assurances are for hardrock mining operations located in Nevada. See appendix IV for further details on the number and value of hardrockmining operations in each state. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or Members of the Committee may have.  BLM’s approach to determining the adequacy of financial assurances is not useful because it does not clearly lay out the extent to which financial assurances are inadequate. For example, in California, BLM reports that, statewide, the financial assurances in place are $1.5 million greater than required, suggesting reclamation costs are being more than required. In contrast, we totaled the difference between inadequate financial assurances. and the actual shortfall for each of the 52 operations for which BLM had determined that financial assurances were inadequate. increase their financial assurances because they anticipate expanding their hardrock operations. While financial assurances were inadequate for both notice- and plan-level operations, a greater percentage of plan- level operations had inadequate assurances. The appendix provides information from BLM’s November 2007 Bond Review Report, which includes information on the number of financial assurances in place for hard rock operations on BLM lands in 11 western states. The value of these financial assurances by state is shown in the table below, as well as the differences between financial assurance requirements and the actual value of the operations. greater than required, suggesting reclamation costs are being more than fully covered. However, according to our analysis of only those California operations with inadequate financial assurances, the financial assurances in place are nearly $440,000 less than needed to fully cover reclamations costs. BLM officials agreed that it would be valuable for the Bond Review Report to report the dollar value of the difference between financial assurances and required for those operations where financial assurances are inadequate and have taken steps to modify LR2000. Officials said that financial assurances may appear inadequate in the Bond review report. assurances may appear inadequate in the Bond Review Report when expansions or other changes in the operation have occurred, thus requiring an increase in the amount of the financial assurance. Conversely, hardrock mining operators may have financial assurances greater than required for a number of reasons. For example, they may increase their financial assurances because they anticipate expanding their hardrock operations. For more information, visit the Hardrock Mining Association’s website at: http://www.hardrockmining.org/news/press-releases. possible, and using these final edited data, we calculated the estimated number of abandoned mine sites, the number of features that pose physical safety and environmental hazards. To answer our third objective, we requested the BLM Bond Review Report from BLM’s Legacy Rehost System 2000 (LR2000) database. Because we had previously reported reliability problems with data on financial assurances in LR2000, we conducted a limited reliability assessment. We used the data to determine the value and coverage of financial assurances to guarantee coverage of reclamation costs. financial assurances in LR2000, we conducted a limited reliability assessment of the bond report data. This limited assessment included (1) basic logic checks on the data we received, (2) interviews with BLM minerals management officials knowledgeable of the changes made to LR2000 to address GAO’s 2005 recommendations. We concluded that the data are of undetermined reliability, but our limited assessment indicates that management controls were improved for the generation of bond review reports from LR2000. The data are not considered reliable.