Overall, 84% of children had one preventive health care visit in the year preceding the 2011-2012 National Survey of Children's Health. Non-Hispanic white children had the highest rate (86%) of preventive health visits in the preceding year, followed by non-Hispanic black children (84%) and Hispanic children (81%). Children who were uninsured (54%) were less likely than those covered by public insurance ( 84%) to have received preventive care in the past year. Older children and teenagers less likely to have gotten preventive care than infants and preschool-aged children. preventive care than infants and preschool-aged children. Children with special health care needs often need health, mental, and social services beyond preventive care. They also are more likely to have injuries that require medical care. Accessing these additional services may create additional access and financial burdens on families. They may qualify for Medicaid or CHIP, and they are more Likely to have health insurance. In the 2009-2010 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs, access to preventive and health care services is measured by a series of questions on use of services. by a series of questions on use of services and unmet needs. Overall, 76% of children did not have an unmet need for specific health care services in the year prior to the survey. Shared decisionmaking between families of children with special health care needs and their children's health care providers is another goal for the MCH Services Block Grant. The 2009-2010 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs found that families with insurance coverage were more likely to report family-centered coordinated care than families without insurance coverage. Almost 95% of all children have health insurance coverage, according to the 2011-2012 National Survey of Children's Health. However, the survey found that the proportion of children with unmet health care needs is higher. Participants were asked if their children had at least one preventive care visit in the prior year, whether they had unmet Health Care needs, and whether or not they had a medical home. They were also asked whether they have public, private, or no insurance coverage. The National Survey was conducted by the National Institute of Health and Human Services. without insurance coverage. 45% of families with private insurance coverage reported that they received family-centered care. 47% of children with special health care needs had a medical home, according to the 2011-2012 National Survey of Children's Health. As others have noted, access to medical homes for children has been associated with improved health care among children withspecial health careneeds. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The rate of pregnant women entering prenatal care in the first trimester is generally higher among non-Medicaid populations than among women enrolled in Medicaid. There may be a number of reasons women do not receive prenatal care, including lack of insurance coverage and lack of access to a primary care provider. These barriers tend to be higher among racial and ethnic minorities. Among Medicaid enrollees, researchers have identified limited availability of maternity care providers,limited availability of transportation, and late enrollment in Medicaid as barriers to early prenatal care. Of the 50 states, Mississippi had the highest IMR (9.97 per 1,000 live births) and New Hampshire had the lowest (3.95) Risk factors for infant mortality, including higher rates of teenage births, prematurity, and inadequate prenatal care in the first trimester, disproportionately affect low-income families. The infant mortality rate is generally higher among Medicaid-eligible populations.higher in the South and Midwest, and lower in other regions. HRSA data show that, in addition to the state-by-state differences in infant mortality noted above, the disparity in IMR is even more pronounced. In South Dakota, the infant mortality rate for women enrolled in Medicaid was 10.3 infant deaths per 1,000 live births, compared with 7.7 for those not in the Medicaid program. Prenatal care is recognized as an important factor in the health and well-being of mothers and children. Women who receive late or no prenatal care are more likely to experience complications of childbirth, including complications of the placenta and the umbilical cord. In the U.S., the rate of infant mortality varies widely by state. HRSA differentiates between health "performance" measures and health "outcome" measures. The performance measures include data on breastfeeding, oral health care, the suicide rate, and the teenage birth rate. Outcome measures include the infant mortality rate, the ratio of the black infant mortality rates to the white infant mortality Rate. These measures are compiled from a number of different sources, including state birth and child death rates. The data is based on data from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Most recent data reported to HRSA by the states are shown in Figure D -1. IMR is generally higher in the South and Midwest, and lower in other parts of the country. Comparing data from both HRSA and CDC, the data show similar variability in rates by state and region. The most recently available single-year linked birth and death certificate information on IMR has been published by CDC's National Center for Health Statistics. For more information, visit the CDC's website. The proportion of children with health insurance coverage varies considerably by race, ethnicity, and poverty status. For example, 81% of children living in households at or below the federal poverty level have health insurance. 90% of Hispanic children had health insurance, compared with 96% of non-Hispanic white children and 95% ofNon-Hispanic black children. The infant mortality rate (IMR) is frequently used as a proxy indicator for the health status of children. For more information, visit www.healthinsurance.gov. are eligible for programs such as Medicaid and SSI are receiving services, or whether pregnant women have access to adequate prenatal care. For example, states report the number of Medicaid-eligible individuals who received a service paid for by the Medicaid program. HRSA must annually compile the information reported by states and present the data to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Senate Committee on Finance in a Report to Congress. The Secretary must also provide a report on funded SPRANS and CISS projects to those committees. States are required to report data on these maternal and child health indicators by county, race, and ethnicity. States are also required toreport data on whether individuals who are eligible for programs such as Medicaid and SSI are. States must report pediatric and family practice workforce data to HRSA, including information on the number of obstetricians, family practitioners, certified family nurse practitioners and certified nurse midwives who were licensed in the state in that year. State must also report information on how many people are enrolled in Medicaid or SSI. Grant, as well as other maternal and child health funding, are discussed in the following section. Progress toward national health objectives, such as reduction of the infant mortality rate, has shown past improvement but has stagnated in recent years. Title V funding is only one component affecting these measures. Other federal and state programs and policies, including Medicaid and WIC, also affect the health and well-being of low-income children and their families. Due to the flexibility of funding, varying circumstances in and submit an annual report to the Secretary on all Title V activities. States must provide a list of activities and recipients of Title V funding, along with a description of progress toward meeting national and state health objectives. The reports must be presented in a standardized format. While the measures are designed to standardize reporting across the states, they are not intended to replace state-by-state reporting. The measures are intended to provide a framework for state-to-state comparisons. They are not meant to replace individual state- to state reporting. Goals are to ensure access to quality health care for mothers and children, especially those with low income or limited availability of care. The seven goals are as follows: reduce infant mortality, provide access to comprehensive prenatal and postnatal care to women (especially low-income and at-risk pregnant women) Increase the number of children receiving health assessments and follow-up diagnostic and treatment services; provide and ensureAccess to preventive and health care services for certain blind and disabled children, as well as rehabilitative services; implement family-centered, community-based systems of coordinated care for children with special health care needs. Since 2011, all states have reported annually on their progress toward achieving the targets they set for 18 National Performance Measures (NPMs) The new performance measurement system has three tiers: NPMs, national outcome measures (NOMs), and evidence-based/informed strategy measures (ESMs) A comprehensive list of national performance measures is provided in Appendix E . In addition to state-reported measures, the Maternal and Child Health Bureau administers two surveys, the National Survey of Children's Health and the National survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs. be performed every two years. HRSA, in turn, must report to Congress on the activities carried out under the SPRANS and CISS programs. States have also developed and reported additional state-level measures. The first national performance measures (NPMs) for MCH were instituted in 1997. In 1998, HRSA introduced the Title V Information System (TVIS) to collect and publicly report state- level Title V data. This interactive, web-based system provides public access to Title V performance measures. include alignment with and support of the Title V Block Grant, specifically population domains and National Performance Measures, where reasonable. The overall number of performance measures has been reduced from prior DGIS data collection. The structure of the data collection has been revised to better measure the various models of programs and the services each funded program provides. This revision will allow a more accurate capture of the scope of services provided through this grant funding. The average number ofperformance measures each grantee will be required to report is reduced as well. shows the national performance measures for Title V for FY2016 and later years. In addition, the Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) funds more than 700 projects each year through discretionary grants. The MCHB Discretionary Grant Information System (DGIS) electronically captures performance measures (see Table E-5 ), program, financial, and abstract data, and products and publications about these discretionary grants from the M maternal and child health bureau. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. The MCHB is planning to revise the performance measures requirements for its discretionary programs. The notice pertaining to changes in the DGIS was published in the Federal Register on March 15, 2016. The purpose of revising performance measures is to better measure progress toward program goals. These program goals include alignment with and support of the Title V Block.and products and publications about these discretionary grants from the grantees. The data collected are used to monitor and assess grantee performance as well as assist in monitoring and evaluating M CHB's programs. each funded program provides. This revision will allow a more accurate and detailed picture of the full scope of services provided through grant programs administered by MCHB. It will also give a better idea of the cost of the services provided by each funded program. It is hoped that the revision will provide a better picture of how much money is spent on each program. The total cost of each program is estimated to be around $1.5 million. The cost of a single program is approximately $1,000,000.  Block grants to states provide funding for core public health services provided by maternal and child health agencies. These core services are often presented as a four-level pyramid. The four levels of services are infrastructure building, population-based, enabling, and direct health care. There is no federally prescribed means test for recipients of services funded by the block grants toStates. The allocation formula, and not as a criterion for receiving Title V-funded services, should be used as a guide for state funding. are foundation-building activities that provide for the development and maintenance of health services systems. Infrastructure building services increase a health system capacity by supporting training and other workforce development activities. Population-based services promote core public health functions such as universal screening, health promotion, and disease prevention campaigns. Enabling services are services that facilitate access to services for vulnerable populations, including those with special health care needs. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. It is impossible to globally track the direct impact of maternal and child health block grant funds on national health indicators such as IMR. Congress and the executive branch cannot direct states to specifically target one data point with block grant funding, but may use other approaches. Some have argued that the decentralized nature of block grants makes it difficult to measure program performance and accountability and to hold state and local governments accountable for their decisions. In addition, the quality of services provided under block grants is not currently tracked. requirements of federal funds, which provides more flexibility for the states to direct those funds where they are needed. State funds are not required to be directed toward specific populations in the same proportions as the federal block grant allocation. The following sections present selected national and state indicators of maternal and child health. Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), when available, are also presented as a point of comparison. Selected measures are presented in this report to provide readers with context to help them understand the data. block grants to states are intended to fill gaps in a broad range of health services provided to women and children. Funds may not be used for inpatient services, other than for children with special health care needs, high-risk pregnant women, and infants (unless approved by the Secretary of HHS) States may not use the block grant funds to provide cash payments to recipients of health Services. Block grant funds may not been used for research or training at a private, for-profit entity. In order to receive block grant money, states must submit an application that includes a statewide needs assessment (to be conducted once every year) Block grant funding is also used to support school-based health centers. Title V programs serve women and children who are covered by public and private insurance, as well as those who have no insurance coverage. By law, at least 30% of federal block grant funds must be used for primary and preventive care for children with special health care needs, unless a waiver is granted by HRSA. State matching funds and other sources of maternal and child health funding are not required to follow the allocation requirements of federal funds. with special health care needs (CSHCN), and 40% for services for either of these groups or for other appropriate maternal and child health activities. Services funded by the block grant may include prenatal care, well-child care, dental care, immunization, family planning, and vision and hearing screening services. Block grant funding is also used to support school-based health care services. They may also include inpatient services for children with special health needs, screening services for lead-based poisoning, and counseling services for parents of sudden infant death syndrome victims. Direct health care services provided under Title V are intended to fill the gaps in primary and preventive health care that are not otherwise available through other funding sources or providers. Enabling services are services that facilitate access to care, such as case management, transportation, purchase of insurance, and coordination with other programs. In FY2015, the largest category of expenditures nationwide under the block grant was direct health care Services for low-income mothers and children and children with special health care needs (63.3%) In 2012, state toll-free hotlines recorded 1.3 million calls regarding Medicaid enrollment. The Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant is not a single program. It is a combination of block grants to states and two discretionary grant programs to achieve national maternal and child health objectives, including Medicaid coverage for children with special health care needs. To facilitate access to coverage, state hotlines provide callers with state-specific Medicaid enrollment information. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Title V requires the state agency or agencies administering the Title V program to create an agreement coordinating block grant services with the state's Medicaid program. The primary purpose of this coordination effort is to make Medicaid services accessible, to enroll those who are eligible, and to avoid duplication of effort among the programs. States may also include coordination with other services, such as WIC, under the agreement. HRSA's 2008 analysis recommended specific components for interagency agreements and provided a model interagency agreement. The SPRANS program is a HRSA-administered discretionary grant program for state programs. avoid duplication of effort among the programs. State block grant administrators must also coordinate with other related programs, including the Special Supplemental Program for Women, Infants, and Children. Most state MCH and Medicaid agencies have created interagency agreements that outline the expected areas and levels of coordination. Most states specify the services provided by each agency under the agreement. Commonly, the Title refers to the block grant program, not to the individual program or the program's funding source. The federal government provides block grants to states for health, developmental disability and family planning programs. Title V was enacted by Congress in 1935 as part of the Social Security Act (SSA, P.L. 74-271) to promote and support the health of mothers and children. Two grant programs were established under the original Title V of the SSA, to enable states to improve maternal and child health services, especially those in low-income and rural areas. The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA, P-L. 99-272 ) Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA, P.L. 99-272 ) replaced the term "crippled" with "children with special health care needs" CSHCN is defined by HRSA as "those who have or are at increased risk for a chronic physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional condition" Over time, additional programs targeting children and low-income women and children were added to the Public Health Service Act (PHSA) and the SSA. Title V was converted to the MCH Services Block Grant in 1981 by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) OBRA 1981 consolidated the existing categorical programs listed above. Title V includes certain services for children with disabilities who receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI, formerly ยง1615 [c] of the SSA) Title V also includes lead-based paint poisoning prevention programs, genetic disease programs, hemophilia treatment centers, adolescent pregnancy grants and sudden infant death syndrome programs. OBRA 1981 consolidated the existing categorical programs listed above into a single block grant. The consolidated block grant was intended to give the states more flexibility in determining how to use federal funds to address maternal and child health needs. Additional changes were made to the block grant under the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989. These changes increased the authorization of appropriations, called for greater accountability, and created stricter rules for application and reporting requirements for the program. It required that each state receive the combined funding of the programs that were consolidated under OBRA 1981. state, or federal funds may be used to support MCH activities, and certain MCH programs generate income through insurance payments and Medicaid reimbursements. In FY2014, 59 states and jurisdictions received MCH Services Block Grant Funding. These programs directly served 2.0 million pregnant women and 36.9 million children (aged 1 to 22) Figure 4 shows the proportion of children, pregnant women, infants, children with special health care needs (CSHCN), and others (called "classes of individuals") served nationally. In FY2014, there were nearly 50.4 million persons served by Title V programs. The largest category of individuals served nationally are children aged 1 to 22. Women of childbearing age, infants, children with special health care needs, and pregnant women are also served. Title V Programs serve women and children who are covered by private and public insurance, as well as those who have no insurance coverage. In FY2012, the most recent year for which data are published, the number of people served by the MCH Services Block Grant was more than 50 million. Title V contains a number of provisions that were added or amended by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Most of the provisions created under the ACA included mandatory appropriations for FY2010 through FY2014. However, the existing data required by Title V may be used to determine whether states are efficiently funding their gap areas with block grant funds. In addition to the MCH Services Block Grant, Title V also includes the Postpartum Depression Block Grant. This appendix provides a summary of those provisions. For more information, visit http://www.tracked.org/. P.L. 114-10 (the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015) extended PREP ($75 million per year) through FY2017 (i.e., September 30, 2017) Appendix B. Source of Funding for Title V Block Grants to States, the District of Columbia, and Other Jurisdictions, by State, FY2015 Appendix C. MCH Services Block Grant Funding History Appendix D. Selected Maternal and Child Health Measures, by state, FY2011-2015. FY2012, the most recent year for which data are published from the HRSA TVIS, 33% of pregnant women who received Title V-funded services were covered by private health insurance. 56% were enrolled in Medicaid, 4% had no insurance coverage, and the insurance coverage status of 7% of Title V clients was unknown. Insurance coverage status was unknown for 27% of children receiving Title V services. Among children ages 1 to 22 years old who receivedTitle V- funded services, 34% werecovered by Medicaid. The MCH Services Block Grant provided services to over 34 million children in FY2013. Of those children, nearly 15 million had Medicaid or CHIP coverage. Changes to public and private insurance markets under the ACA may affect the number of pregnant women and children served by the block grant. States may argue that block grant funds can and should be redirected to meet other maternal and child health goals, and not decreased, if Medicaid coverage expands to those who currently receive block grant-funded services. One general concern with block grants is that federal funds are being used to address state-specific issues. issues and are not held accountable to national concerns. Congress has addressed the issue of national concerns with MCH Services Block Grant by requiring the SPRANS set-aside. States may be best suited to use block grant funds in situations where there is wide variability in burden and cost, as shown by data collected by both HRSA and CDC. Filling in the gaps left by Medicaid and CHIP is one such area, due to variable enrollment eligibility among the states. The indicators discussed in this report are referred to as outcome measures and performance indicators by HRSA. Title V of the Social Security Act (SSA) authorizes funding for services and projects that are intended to improve the health of mothers and children. This report focuses on the MCH Services Block Grant, which receives the largest single appropriation under Title V. The Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) administers the grant. The indicators have been selected for this report based on their relevance to the seven goals of the M CH Services Block grant. Mariana Islands, American Samoa, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and Palau through the block grant to states. Some of these funds are reserved for CISS grants, and others are devoted to research via the SPRANS grants. Title V of the Social Security Act established seven broad goals for the MCH Services Block Grant. Maternal and child health services, research, training, demonstrations, and other activities funded by the block Grant must be linked to one or more of these goals. includes a statewide needs assessment (to be conducted once every five years) and a plan for meeting the needs identified in the needs assessment. The needs assessment must identify statewide health status goals (consistent with national health objectives, such as Healthy People 2020) The plan must include a description of how and where block grant funds will be used within the state to address those needs. Beginning in 2015, the result will be the result of the state's needs assessment, which will be published in 2015. the measures are designed to standardize reporting across the states, there is still variation among states in terms of capacity for collecting and reporting data. Priority needs that were frequently identified in states' FY2013 MCH Services Block Grant applications include family support services, oral health services, childhood obesity treatment and prevention and access to services for children with disabilities. The statute requires states to report 7 to 10 priority needs in their five-year strategic plans. states may annually adjust the strategic plans as their priorities change. and children with special health care needs (63.3%), followed by enabling services (18.7%), population-based services (10.5%), and infrastructure (7.6%). Although the expenditures nationwide are inverse to their location in the MCH pyramid, the distribution of funds between service categories varies widely by state. Distribution of funds depends on the needs of the states' populations, and the gaps left by other health and social service programs that are identified by the states. Additionally, direct health care services may cost more per person served than other services. determined by a formula that takes into consideration the proportion of the number of low-income children in a state. The first $422 million is distributed to each state based on the amount the state received under the consolidated MCH programs in 1983. Any funds above that amount are distributed based on number of children in each state who are at or below 100% of the federal poverty level (FPL) In addition, the funds are distributed as a proportion of total number of kids below 100%. The Personal Responsibility Education program is administered by the Administration for Children and Families. It is designed to educate adolescents on both abstinence and contraception for prevention of pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS. The adulthood preparation subjects are (1) healthy relationships, including marriage and family interactions; (2) adolescent development, including the development of healthy attitudes and values about adolescent growth and development; and (3) body image, racial and ethnic identity.Funds were not appropriated for this program. for follow-up services. Preference is given to applicants who demonstrate that activities in these categories will be carried out in areas with a high infant mortality rate. In FY2016, these congressional directives comprised about 16% of SPRANS funding. In addition, the Family-to-Family Health Information Centers (F2F HICs) program funds family-staffed and family-run centers in the 50 states and the District of Columbia. The F2FHICs provide information, education, technical assistance, and peer assistance. The F2F HICs provide information, education, technical assistance, and peer support to families of children (including youth) with special health care needs. They also assist in ensuring that families and health professionals are partners in decisionmaking at all levels of care and service delivery. CISS is a HRSA-administered discretionary grant program that funds projects which seek to increase service delivery capacity at the local level. It aims to promote community-based health systems for mothers and children, particularly for children in rural areas. The MCH Services Block Grant is to fill gaps in core public health services for low-income mothers and children. The law provides that block grant funds are to be used by the states "to provide ... access to quality maternal and child health services" States are required to use at least 30% of their block grant allocations for preventive and primary care services for children, and 40% for services for those with special health care needs. Public or private organizations or institutions are eligible for these grants. The SPRANS program is a HRSA-administered discretionary grant program for research and training for maternal and child health and children with special health care needs. Public or nonprofit private institutions of higher learning are eligible for these grants. SPRANS projects must (1) support national needs and priorities or emerging issues, (2) have regional or national significance, and (3) demonstrate ways to improve state systems of care for mothers and children. Approximately 15% of the grants are awarded to non-profit organizations. 15% of MCH Services Block Grant funds are set aside for SPRANS programs. The FY2016 budget included appropriations language that provided SPRANS set-aside funds for oral health, epilepsy, sickle cell, and fetal alcohol syndrome. SPRANS may also be used for genetic disease testing, counseling, and information development and dissemination programs. Preference is given to applicants who demonstrate state systems of care for mothers and children. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. a not-for-profit hospital; maternal and child health projects to serve rural populations; and outpatient and community-based services programs for children with special health care needs. The statute provides that roughly 85% of the funds appropriated for MCH Services Block Grant must be distributed by formula to states and territories. It also requires that 12.75% of any amounts appropriated above $600 million must be reserved for CISS. Individual state allocations are determined by a formula that takes into consideration the proportion of CISS funding. program also receives 15% of funds remaining above $600 million after CISS funds are set aside. Congress has directed some SPRANS funds through authorizations and appropriations for specific programs. Currently, SPRANS has additional funding of $5 million to develop Family to Family Information Centers through FY2017. The CISS program is initiated whenever the MCH Services Block Grant appropriation exceeds $600m. Of any amount appropriated over $600M, 12.75% is set aside for CISS. These funds are distributed on a competitive basis to public and private organizations. of children below 100% of the FPL nationally. In addition, the MCH Services Block Grant requires a state match. Each state must contribute $3 for every $4 of federal funds awarded. States may use no more than 10% of their federal allocations for administrative costs. states are required to maintain at least the state's FY1989 level of funding for maternal and child health programs. Block grant funds are awarded each fiscal year in quarterly installments and remain available for expenditure for the current and subsequent fiscal year. ACA, including the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting program, is funded through FY2016. entities that propose activities focusing on areas with a high infant mortality rate are given preference. The MCH Services Block Grant program is currently authorized to receive $850 million annually. The final appropriation for FY2016 was $638.2 million. Full-year appropriations for FY2017 have yet to be enacted. However, decreased federal funding for the block grant may be temporarily offset by funding for new Title V programs authorized in the ACA, including the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting programs. created stricter rules for application and reporting requirements for the states, including the addition of a statewide needs assessment requirement. The MCH Services Block Grant was appropriated $638.2 million in funding for FY2016. The majority of this funding is distributed to the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, the Federated States of Micronesia, the a state chooses to not apply for block grant funds, or indicates that it does not plan to use its full allotment. for FY2010 through FY2014 for the home visitation grant program. 3% must be reserved for research and evaluation, and 3% for making grants to tribal entities for home visitation services to Indian families. This program provides grants for epidemiologic research, improved screening and diagnosis, clinical research, and public education to expand understanding of the causes and treatments for postpartum depression and related conditions. The ACA authorized funding of $3 million for these grants for FY2010, and such sums as necessary for each of FY2011 and FY2012. FY2010 through FY2014, with the exception of the Postpartum Depression program, which was authorized but has not been funded. SSA ยง510, Abstinence Education This program provides funding to states for abstinence education. ($50 million per year) through FY2015 (i.e., September 30, 2015). P.L. 113-93 (the Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014), which was enacted on April 1, 2014, extended the Title V Abstinent Education block grant. and values about adolescent growth and development, body image, racial and ethnic diversity, and other related subjects. The ACA appropriated $75 million annually for each of the five fiscal years FY2010 through FY2014. P.L. 113-93 (the Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014 extended PREP ($75 million per year) through FY2015) P. l. 114-10 (the Medicare Access and CHIP Act of 2013 extended PREp ($75million per year), through FY 2015.