Fifty-four of the IGs we surveyed reported having certain responsibilities for identifying management challenges in their agencies. Most of the 203 management challenges they reported for fiscal year 2010 focused on issues specific to their agencies’ missions and performance. Not all agencies with IGs have requirements to report management challenges. Most IGs appointed by the President and 27 of the DFE IGs reported their agency’s management challenges and provided examples of audit reports that addressed about 90 percent of those challenges reported. focused on issues specific to their agencies’ missions and performance management. For example, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s IG reported that major changes to the direction of the nation's space program present several management challenges. The Department of Health and Human Services IG cited the management challenges associated with Delivery of Health Care. The other management challenges addressed by the IGs relate to information technology, procurement, financial management, and human resources. In addition, to provide oversight coverage of management challenges, the presidential IGs issued reports that addressed about 93 percent of the management. challenges for fiscal year 2010, with a focus on their agencies’ missions, information technology, and performance management. The Farm Credit Administration’s IG reported management challenges related to the safety, soundness, and mission accomplishment of the Farm Credit System. Information technology, including information security, was often identified as a management challenge. The management challenges included in the “other” category included concerns over internal controls, improper payments, and the security of federal property. In addition, the DFE IGs issued reports that addressed almost 90 percent of the management challenges identified and contained recommendations for corrective actions. issued reports that addressed about 93 percent of the management challenges identified. The DFE IGs reported 124 management challenges for fiscal year 2010. The reports contained recommendations for improving the weaknesses specified by the challenges. For example, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation IG recommended strengthening specific controls over managing the closing process for failed financial institutions. Also, the Social Security Administration IG identified transparency and accountability issues as an agency management challenge and provided report recommendations for improved performance in this area. For more information, visit the DFE’s website. The IGs identified $43.3 billion in potential savings from audits and investigations. They reported over 5,900 criminal actions, 1,100 civil actions, 4,460 suspensions or debarments, and over 6,100 indictments resulted from their work. Based on this information, the potential dollar savings reported by these IGs represent a return on investment of approximately $18 for every IG dollar spent when compared to total IG fiscal year 2009 budget appropriations of $2.3billion. under the act with establishing and maintaining a user friendly website to foster greater accountability and transparency in the use of Recovery Act funds. To help prevent fraud and other potential wrongdoing, the IGs offered training to federal, state, and local employees, as well as contractors, private entities, and award recipients. The IGs’ training was intended to improve awareness of the legal and administrative requirements of the Recovery Act programs. The management challenges reported annually by federal agencies in their performance and accountability reports along with relevant IG reports to address these challenges are key to focusing on effective IG oversight. members to prevent and detect fraud, waste, and abuse in the stimulus-funded programs. Altogether, there are 30 IGs involved with the oversight of Recovery Act funds. Recovery Act requires IG reviews of concerns raised by the public about investments of stimulus funds and provides IGs the authority to examine records and interview Recovery Act fund contractors and grantees. The Recovery Act established the Recovery Board whose members include 12 IGs and an additional IG as the chair, to coordinate and conduct oversight of funds distributed under the act. the IGs’ requested budget amounts identified separately within their respective agency budgets, along with any comments provided by the IGs on the sufficiency of their budgets. The Recovery Act provided for IG oversight of the funds by creating the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board (Recovery Board) The Recovery Board has an IG Chairman and 12 additional IG board members to prevent and detect fraud, waste, and abuse in IGs. We summarized the reported management challenges to identify the major focus of the Recovery Board. of the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board. Jackson W. Hufnagle, Assistant Director; Jacquelyn Hamilton; Werner F. Miranda Hernandez; Rebecca Shea; and Clarence A. Whitt made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The Dodd-Frank Act amended the IG Act with provisions to enhance the independence of IGs in DFEs with boards or commissions. If the DFE has a board or commission the amendments would now require each of these IGs to report organizationally to the entire board. The Reform Act also included a provision intended to provide additional IG independence through the transparent reporting of their budgets. Of these 26 DFE IGs, 14 reported that the act’s provision designating the boards and commissions as the D FE heads enhances their independence. Dodd-Frank Act amending the IG Act is intended to provide an additional degree of independence to those IGs in DFEs with boards or commissions. Survey also obtained information about the extent to which the IGs found it necessary to communicate particularly flagrant problems to their agency heads and the Congress. Most responded that the requirements for a two- thirds concurrence among the board or commission members prior to an IG’s removal increased their independence. In reported that no IGs had used the 7-day letter during the period of January 1990 through April 1998. designating the boards and commissions as the DFE heads enhances their independence, and 20 responded that their independence is enhanced by requiring a two-thirds majority for their removal. A smaller number of affected IGs stated that these provisions had no effect on their independence. One DFE IG affected by the provisions did not respond to these survey questions. Also, a former D FE IG stated that reporting to his commission would reduce his independence, according to the survey. The survey was carried out by the European Commission. to the budget if the amount of the IG budget submitted by the agency or the President would substantially inhibit the IG from performing the duties of the office. The fiscal year 2011 budget included amounts for 28 of the 30 presidentially appointed IGs. The IG Council has responded that it will review and assess this matter and, if necessary, work with congressional and administration and work with the IG Council to find a solution to the problem. The budget provisions are intended to help ensure adequate funding and additional independence of IG budgets. the President are generally located in the largest departments and agencies of the government. The presidentially appointed IGs and the DFE IGs reported to us total budget authority for fiscal year 2010 of about $2.2 billion with approximately 13,652 authorized full-time equivalent staff and 13,390 staff on board. The DFEs have smaller budgets and their IGs have correspondingly small budgets and fewer staff. The President’s budget authority constituted about 84 percent (about $1.8 billion) of the total. administration of programs or operations. The IG Act requires the agency head in turn to transmit the IG report to the appropriate committees or subcommittees of the Congress within 7 calendar days. We asked whether any of the 62 IGs we surveyed had used the 7-day letter at any time during fiscal years 2008, 2009, and 2010. Only one, a presidentially appointed IG, had used it during this time frame. Generally, issues have been resolved more informally before getting to the point of using a 7- day letter. GAO surveyed 62 federal IGs appointed under the IG Act. The IGs reported pay that was at the specified levels required by the Reform Act. GAO reviewed the President’s fiscal year 2011 budget submission to the Congress. To the extent the IGs’ budgets are separately identified, the added transparency of these amounts can help increase IG independence, GAO says.. The IG Council agreed to review and assess the matter, and the IG Council has provided written comments to the GAO. with boards or commissions on whether their independence was enhanced by these provisions designating their boards and commissions as DFE heads rather than individual chairmen. We also obtained information from the President’s budget submission to the Congress for fiscal year 2011, to determine whether the IG budget amounts were separately identified along with any comments by the IGs regarding the sufficiency of their budgets. To address the effectiveness of the IGS, we obtained information on the accomplishments of theIGs, as well as their comments on sufficiency. stated that reporting to his commission would reduce his independence because the commission has both federal and state members. The current IG who took office during our review stated that the primary concern is how nonfederal members would exercise their authority over a federal IG. The Reform Act amended the IG Act to require that IG budget requests include certain information and be separately identified in the President’s budget submission to the Congress. In addition, along with the separately identified IG budgets, the IGs may include comments with respect to the budget if the amount of the IG budget is included. same provisions for both the DFE IGs and the IGs appointed by the President. We obtained and analyzed survey responses from 62 IGs established by the IG Act. We augmented the survey data with information obtained from prior GAO reports, the President’s budget submission to the Congress for fiscal year 2010, and other information. We addressed our reporting objectives through our summary of responses to a survey sent to the federal statutory IGs. We also analyzed the responses from 30 IGs who were appointed bythe President and confirmed by the Senate. IG Act and summarized the number of IGs in each area. We conducted our work from November 2010 to September 2011 in accordance with all sections of GAO’s Quality Assurance Framework that are relevant to our objectives. We believe that the information and data obtained, and the analysis conducted, provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions. We requested comments on a draft of this report from the IG Council. The IG Council has not yet responded to our request for comments on the report. The Department of State IG provides oversight of the Broadcasting Board of Governors. The IG is a member of the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board. In addition to. IGs established by the IG Act of 1978, as amended, with appointment by the. President and Senate confirmation, the Department of. State IG is responsible for overseeing the Broadcasting. Board of. Governors, which is a designed federal entity. In. addition to the IG. Report, please contact me at (202) 512-8486 or raglands@gao.gov. oversight to a wide range of government programs. We also received, and incorporated as appropriate, technical comments from several IG offices. We will send copies of this report to members of the IG Council, including the Office of Management and Budget’s Deputy Director for Management. If you have any questions or would like to discuss this report, please contact me at (202) 512-8486 or raglands@gao.gov. The report will also be sent to the Chairman and the Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on Finance. The 62 federal IGs responding to our survey reported information on their expertise and qualifications. The IGs’ information showed a wide range of backgrounds, skills, and professional certifications relevant to their work consistent with the areas of demonstrated experience specified by the IG Act. Most of the IGs appointed by the President reported that they had a background in postal operations. The number of IGs in each IG provided recommendations to improve the efficiency of postal operations related to performance management in sorting the mail. by the President reported that they had a background in criminal justice, investigations, law enforcement, and public administration. Most of the IGs reported having degrees in areas that are relevant to performing in an IG position and in areas of demonstrated experience specified by the IG Act. Other academic degrees reported by presidential and DFE IGs included mathematics, science, sociology, education, psychology, and English. With respect to professional certifications, 6 IGs appointed by the. President reported having a degree in management analysis. professional certifications, 6 IGs appointed by the President reported having professional certifications. 28 DFE IGs reported they possessed at least one professional certification related to their IG responsibilities. We received comments from the IG Council (reprinted in app. V), on September 13, 2011. The council commented that the draft provided useful information on the independence, activities, and accomplishments of the federal inspectors general. The draft will contribute to a greater understanding of the work of the IGs in providing oversight to a wide range of government programs. The IG Reform Act of 2008 (Reform Act) amended the IG Act by adding requirements related to IG independence and effectiveness. The budgets of the DFE IGs made up about 16 percent (about $352 million) of the total budget authority for IGs. In a March 1995 report, we reported that the IG pay cannot be less than the average total compensation (including agencies) for all agencies. The Act requires that the grade, level, or rank designation for the D FE IGs be set at or above that of a majority of the senior-level executives. pay cannot be less than the average total compensation (including bonuses) of the senior-level executives at that agency calculated on an annual basis. Of the 30 IGs appointed by the President, 27 reported being at or even above the required pay level; with the remaining 3 IGs reporting that they were in acting positions and the requirement was not currently applicable to them. of the 32 DFE IGs who responded to our survey, 29 reported that their pay and salaries were consistent with those of the Senior Executives of their agencies. The IG community expressed concerns that IGs with attorneys located organizationally in their agencies’ offices of general counsel would not always receive independent legal advice. The results from our survey show that all the IGs established by the IG Act reported having access to a legal counsel that is organizationally independent. All 32 DFE IGs who responded to our survey indicated that they obtain independent legal counsel, with 26 employing their own counsel, 5 using the legal counsels of other IGs’ office, and 1 using legal resources of the IG Council. The IG Act created independent IG offices at 30 major departments and agencies. In 1988, the IG Act was amended to establish additional IG offices in 33 DFEs. Generally, the DFE IGs have the same authorities and responsibilities as those IGs originally established by the Act. However, they are appointed and may be removed by their agency heads rather than by the President and are not subject to Senate confirmation.. There are 10 IGs established by other statutes with provisions similar to those in the IGs Act. to be at a specified level, and for the DFE IGs, at or above a majority of other senior-level executives at their entities. The Reform Act also requires an IG to obtain legal advice from his or her own counsel or to obtain counsel from another IG’s office or from the Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency. The IG Act also provides protections to the independence of the IGs while keeping both their agency heads and the Congress fully and currently informed about particularly flagrant problems and deficiencies.