DOD has made significant investments in its military prepositioning programs. The services have collectively used an average of over $1 billion each year to operate and maintain these assets. Prepositioned assets have been used extensively to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Army spent $386.1 million in fiscal year 2005 for storage and maintenance of prepositioned. assets, including $76.5 million for assets in South Korea and $38.3 million for. assets in Southwest Asia. The military services store stocks of equipment and supplies at several land sites and aboard prepositioning ships around the world. The Air Force prepositions stocks to meet initial contingency requirements and to sustain early deploying forces. The Navy’s prepositioned war reserve stocks include bare base sets; vehicles; munitions; and a variety of consumable supplies, such as rations, fuel, support equipment, aircraft accessories, and medical supplies. Figure 1 shows the major locations ofprepositioned stocks. The military services have prepositioning programs to store combat or support equipment and supplies near areas with a high potential for conflict. The Army’s program involves three primary categories of stocks: combat brigade sets, operational projects, and war reserve sustainment stocks. Key contributors to this report are listed in appendix III. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. At (202) 512- 8365. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Temporary shelters are available in a range of sizes, materials, and features. They can be acquired faster than permanent facilities, which may take several years to plan, fund, and build. The military services have made prior use of temporary shelters in several locations, for both prepositioned and non-prepositioned equipment. For example, the Marine Corps uses temporary humidity-controlled facilities in Florida to store some of its prepositioning assets awaiting maintenance and upload.tested every 30 months, vehicles stored without humidity control require exercising every 12 months. One of the benefits of humidity control is avoiding or at least minimizing these increased maintenance requirements. The Army National Guard estimates that it will have achieved a total of over $1.2 billion in cost savings by fiscal year 2010. Most of the projected savings is based on having to perform less maintenance on equipment that is using corrosion data regarding non-prepositioning programs. Guard officials told us that they collected and analyzed an extensive amount of information on corrosion and its cost impacts on selected pieces of equipment. They estimated that a significant amount of corrosion-related costs could be avoided by using humidity-controlled storage facilities. The humidity-controlled sheltering program includes combat vehicles, trailers, radar systems, and other equipment located at Guard facilities in 45 states and U.S. territories. According to Army storage and maintenance guidelines, storage of equipment in facilities without humidity control invites greater and more rapid deterioration because of corrosion. For example, whereas combat vehicles in humidity- controlled facilities need to be exercised and road tested every 30 months, vehicles stored without humiditycontrol require only once a year. The Army says it will have to perform less maintenance on equipment that is being preserved better in humid conditions. all of its prepositioned assets (numbering about 11,000 items) in Southwest Asia. At the Army’s prepositioning facility in Goose Creek, South Carolina, equipment is stored outside during the time it is not undergoing maintenance because of a lack of storage facilities. For example, 44 M1A1 tanks and 10 fuel tankers sat outdoors for more than a year after undergoing maintenance and experienced a total of $1.2 million in corrosion-related costs. The amount of time equipment is storage outside ranges, on average, from 1 month to more than 3 months. storage facilities. In South Korea, Army officials told us the lack of available land limits their ability to construct new, or expand existing, facilities. Estimated storage needs is difficult because of uncertainties regarding the consolidation and reconfiguration of U.S. Forces Korea facilities. Army prepositioning afloat officials said that the Goose Creek facility primarily is a maintenance facility and is not meant for the storage of equipment. Although building additional storage will require Army investment, the use of humidity-controlled storage is possible. Army and Marine Corps have taken some measures to reduce the impact of corrosion on prepositioned assets. Army could increase its use of storage facilities for land-based assets, authors say. Most of the equipment drawn for military operations in Iraq during 2003 had been stored in humidity-controlled facilities. Army officials told us that the use of humidity- controlled facilities is effective at minimizing equipment corrosion and maintaining high readiness levels, they say. The Army is currently storing a substantial amount of equipment in such facilities. The Army and Marine Corps consider collection of corrosion data on prepositioned assets to be a low priority and, consequently, do not systematically collect them. Sheltering assets, especially sheltering in humidity-controlled facilities, is a key anticorrosion practice. Without such data, the services may may may not be able to achieve long-term costs savings through corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. This practice is wasteful given the large investment in acquiring the equipment and the annual costs of maintaining it. The collection of such data could provide additional information to identify the underlying causes of maintenance problems. The Army is currently storing a substantial portion of its prepositioned equipment outdoors. Temporary shelters may be a feasible option to address immediate storage needs. Army officials from the 3rd Infantry Division have stated that with the exception of rubber seals on some vehicles, prepositioning equipment entering Southwest Asia was in good shape and had minimal, if any, corrosion. These officials said they did not see any signs of corrosion on the equipment entering the region during the 2003 invasion of Iraq. It was reported to be in good working condition and was not degraded by corrosion. As of April 2006, the Army was storing outside nearly all of its prepositioned assets (numbering about 11,000 items) in maintenance and experienced a total of $1.2 million in corrosion-related damage. Army officials in South Korea noted that it costs more to maintain equipment that is stored outside in part because the equipment needs to be inspected three times more often than equipment in humidity-controlled storage. In Kuwait, Army officials said that even with the additional planned storage facilities, substantial amounts of equipment will still be stored outdoors. The Army is storing a significant amount of land-based prepositioned assets outdoors without adequate sheltering. At these locations, assets are left relatively unprotected from moisture, sand, and other elements that contribute to corrosion. At Camp Carroll in South Korea, about 30 percent of the Army’s Heavy Brigade Combat Team equipment is stored outdoors in an often damp and humid region. Army officials told us that the equipment had been poorly maintained and, as a result, experienced many significant defects and readiness shortfalls. exercise in South Korea was generally in the same good operating condition it was when first uploaded about 2 years previously. With the exception of minor hydraulic leaks and o-ring deterioration, the equipment was generally free of corrosion problems. The primary measure to reduce corrosion of Army and Marine Corps prepositioned assets has been the use of humidity-controlled storage facilities. Most of the prepositioning equipment has been moved to a new location in the South Korean port city of Pusan, where it will be used for military exercises. Army and Marine Corps policies require that repaired equipment be restored to good condition. Army maintenance regulations require prepositioned equipment to be maintained at “10/20” standards. Marine Corps policy indicates that all equipment generally will be in “Code A” condition at the time it is placed in storage. equipment meeting this standard would have little to no corrosion, Marine Corps officials said. For equipment stored on theprepositioned ships, inspections are conducted on a periodic basis. had minimal, if any, corrosion. These officials said they did not experience any corrosion that affected their ability to perform operations. Officials with the 3rd Marine Expeditionary Force said the equipment on the prepositioning ship USNS Lummus that was used in a 2004 training exercise in South Korea was generally in the same good condition as it was in 2004. The equipment was in a high state of readiness and could not recall any instance where corrosion affected their. ability to do their jobs. Collection of corrosion data for prepositioned equipment could better enable the Army and Marine Corps to support similar corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts in their prepositioning programs. Without such data, the services may lack the incentive to support efforts to more effectively prevent and mitigate corrosion and achieve long-term cost savings. Effectively addressing corrosion onprepositioned stocks of equipment can enable the services to achieve significant cost savings and increase readiness and safety for rapidly fielding combat-ready forces around the world.its $3.2 billion overall life cycle savings to the Hellfire corrosion prevention measures. percent of the $110,000 needed, on average, to repair motorized lighterage prepositioned equipment. Corrosion prevention measures may reduce the amount of maintenance needed, thereby extending the availability of equipment items over their life cycle. The Army has had previous success using corrosion data regarding non-prepositioning programs to support corrosion prevention, according to the Army’s website. The information could be used to more effectively prevent and mitigate corrosion and achieve long-term cost savings. and these services provided most of the equipment used in current operations in Southeast Asia. To assess the measures taken by the Army and Marine Corps to reduce the impact that corrosion has on prepositioned assets, we met with DOD and service command officials. In addition, we visited selected prepositioning locations and maintenance facilities, including the Army’s facilities in Goose Creek, South Carolina, and Camp Carroll, South Korea. We also discussed additional actions that could be taken to further prevent and mitigate corrosion. Long-term deployments of U.S. troops in Southwest Asia are likely to magnify the effects of corrosion on military equipment, including prepositioned assets. Higher rates of corrosion result in increased repairs and replacements, drive up costs, and take critical systems out of action, reducing mission readiness. Corrosion can also reduce the safety of equipment items. Although reliable cost data are not available, it is estimated that corrosion costs in the military are in excess of $1 billion a year. The Army and Marine Corps are not collecting data about the current costs to prevent and mitigate corrosion of prepositioned assets. The military services have estimated that at least 25 percent of overall maintenance costs are corrosion related. The Army determined that about $8.7 million (31 percent) of the estimated $28 million spent to restore this equipment to serviceable condition was used to address corrosion-related problems. Marine Corps officials estimated that corrosion costs make up at least 50 percent of the $110,000 needed to repair motorized equipment. We reviewed a wide range of reports and other documentation on Army and Marine Corps prepositioned equipment and found these to be almost devoid of corrosion-related data. In almost every instance, this corrosion information was not available. Army officials said most of those responsible for documenting the maintenance action do not want to take the extra time to include corrosion information because they see it as having low priority. We discussed the barriers that exist to identifying and quantifying the impact of corrosion on prepostioned assets’ maintenance costs and material condition. Corrosion-related data that could enhance efforts to prevent and mitigate corrosion of prepositioned assets is unavailable. Army and Marine Corps consider collection of this information to be a low priority and, consequently, do not systematically collect it. Marine Corps officials said that the desire for the collection of corrosion information applies to all Marine Corps activities, including prepositioning programs. The mission of the Marine Corps’ Corrosion Prevention and Control Program is to reduce maintenance requirements and costs associated with corrosion. Officials from both the Army and the Marine Corps said that corrosion is routinely treated as part of the overall maintenance process. For example, Army officials at Camp Carroll, South Korea, told us that corrosion observed on the engine blocks in 5-ton trucks would be repaired during maintenance performed on the entire engine and would not be noted in the maintenance logs. According to Marine Corps officials, corrosion information has value but not enough to be included with more critical information, such as the amount of corrosion on equipment. on prepositioned assets and support additional corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. DOD concurred with our recommendations that the Army consider the feasibility of using temporary shelters, including humidity-controlled facilities. DOD did not provide specific information on planned actions, milestones, and resources for implementing the recommendations. With respect to the Marine Corps, DOD stated that collection of adequate data is not a matter of ‘if’ but ‘when’ The Army and Marine Corps should collect and use corrosion-related data to support additional. corrosion Prevention and Mitigation efforts. Having corrosion data helps the department learn what works so it can be more effective in reducing corrosion. Defense Science Board in 2004 stated that “accurate and objective corrosion data collection and new incentives to reward life-cycle cost reduction efforts must be implemented” As noted in our report, we were told by Marine Corps officials that collection of these data has been a low priority. We believe that funding and priorities should be aligned to the greatest extent possible to provide greater assurance that the department’s resources are being used prudently. of equipment items. Estimates of corrosion costs DOD-wide have ranged from $10 billion to $20 billion annually. DOD and the military services did not have an effective management approach to mitigate and prevent corrosion, authors say. We recommended that DOD develop a departmentwide strategic plan with clearly defined goals, measurable outcome-oriented objectives, and performance measures. DOD concurred and in December 2003 issued its corrosion strategy. According to DOD’s corrosion strategy, knowing the costs of corrosion is essential to adequately implementing the strategy. information systems needed to better collect, track, report, and manage efforts to prevent and mitigate corrosion. We interviewed officials and obtained documentation at the following locations: Office of the Secretary of Defense Corrosion Policy and Oversight Office Headquarters, Department of the Army U.S. Army Materiel Command, Fort Belvoir, Virginia Tank-Automotive and Armaments Command, Warren, Michigan, and Rock Island, Illinois. U.s. III Army Corps, Fort Hood, Texas. preservation effort will save a total of about $1.2 billion through fiscal year 2010. Army officials cited similar results after collecting corrosion data on Hellfire missile launchers. The types and areas of the launchers that were most prone to corrosion were identified and documented. Based on this research, maintenance technicians knew better to look for corrosion and how to control it before it worsened. The Army Missile Command’s tactical missile program executive office attributed a large portion of its $3.2billion overall long-term life cycle savings to the effort. Battalion Afloat, Goose Creek, South U.S. Forces Korea, Yongsan Garrison, South Korea. Field Support Battalion Far East, Camp Carroll, Materiel Support Center Korea. 19th Theater Support Command, Camp Walker, Daegu, South Korean. U.s. Army Pacific, Fort Shafter, Hawaii. Marine Corps Headquarters, Quantico, Virginia. Blount Island Command, Jacksonville, Florida. Office of the Inspector, Jacksonville,. Florida. The Marine Corps Logistics Command, Albany, Georgia. Georgia Blount Island Command, Jacksonville, Florida Office of the Inspector General of the Marine Corps Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. Naval Facilities Engineering Command CNA Corporation, Alexandria, Virginia U.S. Navy Inspector General Naval Air Systems Command, Fort Detrick, Maryland. Navy Expeditionary Medical Command, Cheatham Annex, Headquarters, Seventh Air Force, South Korea. United States Pacific Command United States Forces Korea. We conducted our work from May 2005 through February 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. reviewed available data for inconsistencies and discussed the data with DOD and service officials. We determined that the data used for our review were sufficiently reliable for our purposes. The report is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions, please contact me at (202) 512- 8365.. The GAO is sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense, the. Secretary of the Army, and the Commandant of the Marine Corps. CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery. Visit CNN.com/Travel each week for a new gallery of snapshots from across the U.S. and around the world. Click here for more travel snapshots from around the country and the world, and click here for a gallery of photos from around Europe and the Middle East, as well as a selection of images from CNN iReporters around the globe. To see more iReport snapshots, visit CNN.gov/Travel.