EPA has not completed any actions to ban or limit toxic chemicals under section 6 since the court rejected its asbestos rule in 1991. With EPA’s limited actions to control toxic chemicals, state and federal actions have established controls for some toxic chemicals. For example, a California statute enacted in 2007 prohibits the manufacture, sale, or distribution of certain toys and child care articles after January 1, 2009, if the products contain concentrations of phthalates exceeding 0.1 percent. In 2008, Congress took similar action. In 2008, Congress took similar action. California has also enacted limits on formaldehyde in pressed wood. In response to a petition asking EPA to use section 6 of TSCA to adopt the California formaldehyde regulation, EPA recently issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking. However, because of the legal hurdles the agency would face in regulating formaldehyde under TSC a, some stakeholders have recommended that EPA pursue legislation to control formaldehyde. In our previous reports on TSCa, we identified a number of issues that need to be addressed. not calculated the risk levels for intermediate levels of regulation because it believed there was no asbestos exposure level for which the risk of injury or death was zero. The court noted that TSCA’s requirement that EPA impose the least burdensome regulation reinforces the view that EPA must balance the costs of its regulations against their benefits. After completing the 1989 asbestos rule, EPA has completed only one regulation to ban or limit the production or use of an existing chemical (for hexavalent chromium in 1990) Since Congress passed TSCA nearly 33 years ago, EPA has issued regulations under the act to ban or limit or restrict the production or use of only five existing chemicals or chemical classes. Significantly, in 1991, EPA’s 1989 regulation broadly banning asbestos was largely vacated by a federal appeals court decision. In contrast to the United States, the European Union, as well as a number of other countries, studies of the health risks of asbestos as well and public comments on the proposed rule, EPA determined that asbestos is a potential carcinogen. European Union, as well as a number of other countries, has banned all, or almost all, asbestos and asbestos-containing products. Asbestos, which refers to several minerals that typically separate into very tiny fibers, is a known human carcinogen that can cause lung cancer and other diseases if inhaled. EPA invested 10 years in exploring the need for the asbestos ban and in developing the regulation. Based on its review of over 100 studies of the health risks of asbestos, EPA decided to ban it. at the time a chemical company submits a premanufacture notice for the chemical for EPA’s review. According to some chemical companies, the cost of initial testing could be reduced by amending TSCA to require EPA to review new chemicals before they are marketed. About half of the premanufactured notices the agency receives from chemical companies are for new chemicals that, for various reasons, never enter the marketplace, EPA says. The act contains no similar requirement for existing chemicals unless EPA determines by environmental release levels. to provide EPA with greater authority to require testing targeted to those areas in which EPA’s analysis models do not adequately predict toxicity. EPA could be authorized to require such testing if it finds that it cannot be confident of the results of its analysis. Under such an option, EPA could establish a minimal set of tests for new chemicals to be submitted at the time a chemical company submits a premanufacture notice. It could also require testing on chemicals with molecular structures similar to those of the new chemicals submitted by chemical companies. EPA estimates that most premanufacture notices do not include test data of any type. Only about 15 percent include health or safety test data. Chemical companies do not have an incentive to conduct these tests because they may take over a year to complete, and some tests may cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. EPA uses models to compare new chemicals with chemicals with similar molecular structures for which test data on health and safety is available. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. EPA officials told us that finalizing rules can take from 2 to 10 years. Given the time and resources required, the agency has issued rules requiring testing for only about 200 chemicals. Because EPA has used authority to issue rules to require testing so sparingly, it has not continued to maintain information on the cost of implementing these rules, officials said. The agency has not said how much it will cost to implement these rules. The cost of testing a person for exposure to a chemical can range from $1,000 to $10,000. demonstrate a need for data on a chemical’s toxicity rather than on a company to demonstrate that a chemical is safe. As a result, EPA does not routinely assess the risks of the roughly 80,000 industrial chemicals in use. EPA officials told us that in cases where chemical companies do not voluntarily provide test data and health and safety studies in a complete and timely manner, requiring the testing of existing chemicals of concern is the only practical way to ensure that the agency obtains the needed information. Congress could give EPA more authority to obtain test data from companies. In Canada and the European Union, testing requirements for low-volume chemicals are less extensive and complex. Another option would be to provide EPA with greater authority to require testing targeted at specific chemicals. The U.S. Department of Justice has been reviewing the effectiveness of TSCA since it was passed in 1990. The agency has not commented on this latest report, but says it will continue to review the issue of chemical testing. EPA officials told us that it is time-consuming, costly, and inefficient for the agency to use TSCA’s two-step process. EPA could review substantially more chemicals in less time if they had the authority to require chemical companies to conduct testing and provide test data on chemicals once they reach a substantial production volume. A major drawback to testing is its cost to chemical companies, possibly resulting in a reduced willingness to perform chemical research and innovation. To ameliorate such costs, or to delay them until the new chemicals are produced in large enough quantity to offset the costs, revise the act. effects of the chemical on the environment and the magnitude of the environment’s exposure to the chemical. EPA must also develop substantial evidence in the rulemaking record in order to withstand judicial review. Potential changes to TSCA include reducing the evidentiary burden that EPA must meet to take regulatory action under the act and amending the standard for judicial review that currently requires a court to hold a TSC a rule unlawful and set it aside unless it is supported by substantial evidence. We identified a number of options that could strengthen EPA”s ability to regulate harmful chemicals. TSCA authorizes EPA to issue regulations that may, among other things, ban existing toxic chemicals or place limits on their production or use. The statutory requirements EPA must meet to do so present a legal threshold that has proven to be difficult for EPA. In order to regulate an existing chemical under section 6 of TSCA, EPA must find that there is a reasonable basis to conclude that the chemical presents or will present a threat to health or safety. Such a basis could be based on a condition of manufacture or import above some specified volume.such as that included in EPA’s High Production Volume (HPV) Challenge Program. TSCA requires EPA to find that current data is insufficient; testing is necessary; and that the chemical is or will be produced in substantial quantities. TSCA places the burden on EPA to demonstrate that data on health and environmental effects are needed. EPA estimates that most of the chemicals tested were not harmful to humans or the environment. The agency estimates that the most common chemicals tested by EPA were not dangerous to humans and the environment, according to a report by the Center for Responsible Toxicology. TSCA requires chemical companies to report to EPA any data that reasonably support a conclusion that a chemical presents a substantial risk. TSCA also authorizes EPA to promulgate rules to require manufacturers to perform tests on chemicals in certain circumstances or provide other data, such as production volumes, on existing chemicals. If EPA finds a chemical’s risks are unreasonable, it can prohibit or limit its production, processing, distribution, use, and disposal or take other action, like requiring warning labels on the substance. The Toxic Substances Control Act was enacted in 1976. TSCA authorizes EPA to review chemicals already in commerce (existing chemicals) and chemicals yet to enter commerce (new chemicals) Of the over 83,000 chemicals currently in the T SCA inventory, about 62,000 were already inCommerce when EPA began reviewing chemicals in 1979. Since then, over 21,000 new chemicals were added to the inventory and are now in use as existing chemicals. To assess risks, EPA examines a chemical’s toxicity or potential adverse effects and the amount of human and environmental exposures. EPA bases its exposure estimates for new chemicals on information contained in premanufacture notices. The anticipated production volume, uses, exposure levels, and release estimates outlined in these notices generally do not have to be amended once manufacturing begins. However, the potential risk of injury to human health or the environment may increase when chemical companies increase production levels or expand the uses of a chemical. TSCA addresses expanded uses of chemicals by authorizing EPA to promulgate a rule specifying that a particular use of achemical would be a significant new use. no similar requirement for existing chemicals unless EPA determines by rule that they are being put to a significant new use. Because of the large number of existing chemicals, EPA would need the flexibility to identify which chemicals should be given priority. TSCA could be amended to require individual chemical companies or the industry as a whole to compile and submit chemical data, such as that included in EPA’s High Production Volume (HPV) The proposal would put existing chemicals on a more equal footing with new chemicals. Key contributors to this testimony were David Bennett, Antoinette Capaccio, Nancy Crothers, Christine Fishkin, Richard Johnson, and Ed Kratzer. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other copyrighted images, we ask that you share them with us. Reach places the burden on manufacturers, importers, and downstream users to ensure that they manufacture, place on the market, or use such substances that do not adversely affect human health or the environment. While TSCA authorizes EPA to review existing chemicals, it generally provides no specific requirement, time frame, or methodology for doing so. Significantly, chemical companies are not required to develop and submit toxicity information to EPA on existing chemicals unless the agency finds that a chemical may present an unreasonable risk of injury to human health. reasonable basis to conclude that the chemical presents or will present an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment. A finding of unreasonable risk requires an extensive cost-benefit analysis. In addition, before regulating a chemical under section 6, the EPA Administrator must consider and publish a statement regarding the effects of the chemical on human health and the magnitude of human exposure to the chemical. EPA officials believe that demonstrating an unreasonablerisk is a more stringent requirement than demonstrating, for example, a significant risk, and that a finding ofreasonable risk is more difficult to prove. the rule is not supported by substantial evidence in the rulemaking record. As several courts have noted, the substantial evidence standard is more rigorous than the arbitrary and capricious standard normally applied to rulemaking. Further, according to EPA officials, the economic costs of regulating a chemical are usually more easily documented than the risks of the chemical. It is difficult to show substantial evidence that EPA is promulgating the least burdensome requirement. EPA has had difficulty demonstrating that harmful chemicals pose an unreasonable risk. to human health or the environment or is or will be produced in substantial quantities and that either (a) there is or may be significant or substantial human exposure to the chemical. EPA must also determine there are insufficient data to reasonably determine the effects on health and the environment. This structure places the burden on EPA to demonstrate a need for data on a chemical’s toxicity rather than on the chemical itself. It must also show testing is necessary to develop such data before it can require a company to test its chemicals for harmful effects. EPA is required under the act to protect trade secrets and privileged or confidential commercial or financial information against unauthorized disclosures. Chemical companies may claim some of the information they provide to EPA under TSCA as confidential business information. EPA challenges about 14 such claims each year and that the chemical companies withdraw nearly all of the claims challenged, the authors say. Some state officials believe this information would be useful for informing and managing their environmental risk programs, they say. They say EPA does not have data on the number of inappropriate claims. The EPA does not have the resources that would be needed to investigate and, as appropriate, challenge claims to determine the number that are inappropriate. EPA focuses on investigating primarily those claims that it believes may be both inappropriate and among the most potentially important. The claims relate to health and safety studies performed by the chemical companies involving chemicals currently used in commerce. The EPA official responsible for data on the number of inappropriate claims says the agency does not know how many there are. The agency's goal is to find out how many are inappropriate and challenge them. that chemical companies provide to EPA, subject to regulations to be established by EPA in consultation with the chemical industry and other interested parties. In our September 1994 report, we recommended that the Congress consider limiting the length of time for which information may be claimed as confidential without resubstantiation of the need for confidentiality. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or Members of Congress may have about this issue. I am happy to answer them. TSCA and REACH have provisions to protect information claimed by chemical companies. TSCA requires greater public disclosure of certain information, such as basic chemical properties. REACH places greater restrictions on the kinds of information chemical companies may claim as confidential. For example, REACH includes a provision for public access to basic chemical information, including brief profiles of hazardous properties and authorized uses. It combines a variety of ways that the interests of the public’s right to know is balanced with the need to keep certain information confidential. The European Union’s recently enacted chemical control legislation, REACH, represents a regulatory model that differs from the TSCA framework in key ways. REACH generally requires that chemical companies provide to, and in some cases develop for, government regulators information on chemicals’ effects on human health and the environment. We have previously recommended that the Congress amend T SCA to reduce the evidentiary burden that EPA must meet. The European Union has recently revised its chemical control policy through REACH. TSCA authorizes EPA to release chemical information obtained by the agency under the act. TSCA provides that certain information can be claimed as confidential business information by chemical manufacturers. EPA generally must protect such information against public disclosure unless such disclosure is necessary to protect against an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment. Like the United States, the European Union has laws and regulations governing the manufacturing and use of chemicals. The EU has recently revised its chemical control policy through legislation known as REACH also includes a provision under which confidential information can generally be shared. recently revised its chemical control policy through legislation known as Registration, Evaluation and Authorization of Chemicals (REACH) REACH went into effect in June 2007, but full implementation of all the provisions of REACH will be phased in over an 11-year period. Under REACH, authority exists to establish restrictions for any chemical that poses unacceptable risks and to require authorization for the use of chemicals identified as being of very high concern. These restrictions could include banning uses in certain products, banning uses by consumers, or even completely banning the chemical. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or see http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/.