a system to register HHS employees and certain other volunteers, but it has not completed its effort. Using experience the importance of ensuring comparability of services for all responders. Although NIOSH’s proposal for a project to develop strategies for addressing responder health issues is a step in the right direction, HHS has not developed a department-level plan that incorporates the five lessons from the WTC. In the absence of a department level plan, NIOSH developed a proposal for an initiative to ensure responder safety and health. HHS has not indicated whether its policies and actions following a disaster would apply these lessons, such as by building epidemiologic research into the design of screening and monitoring services. HHS has not described the roles and responsibilities of its components in designing and implementing responder health programs. Until HHS completes this work, responders to a future disaster could be left vulnerable if they experience health problems as a result of carrying out critical response and recovery activities. NRF recommends that the Secretary of HHS take the following action: develop a department-level responder screening plan that incorporates the five lessons from the WTC program. Under the NRF, HHS is the primary agency for coordinating the federal government’s public health and medical response. Under ESF#8, HHS can deploy its public health. and medical personnel, including civilian volunteers, to the affected area. HHS can also assist state, tribal, and local officials in establishing a registry of potentially exposed individuals and conducting long-term. monitoring for potential health effects. HHS’S ASPR coordinates ESf#8 actions. HHS is a cooperating agency with the Department of Labor. related to the Worker Safety and Health Support Annex only if, after a disaster, FEMA issued a mission assignment to OSHA. HHS has not identified which components would be involved in responder health programs, which component would take the lead, and how efforts would be coordinated. In the absence of a department-level plan describing the roles of all relevant HHS agencies, NIOSH developed a proposal in February 2008 for working with some of the relevant HHS components to develop strategies to ensure responder safety and health. for worker safety and health are described in the NRF’s Worker Safety and Health Support Annex. OSHA, in coordination with HHS, is responsible for providing technical assistance, advice, and support for medical surveillance and monitoring and for evaluating the need for longer-term medical monitoring of response and recovery workers. NIOSH would receive funding specifically to carry out activities related to the Worker SafetyandHealth Support Annex only. However, OSHA and NIOSH have established an interagency agreement that broadly describes NIOSH's role in carrying out the Annex. NIOSH partnered with other HHS components, such as ASPR and NIEHS, to develop the proposal. As part of the project, NIOSH officials plan to meet with ATSDR officials about adapting the RRR and other surveillance tools to collect more specific information about a responder’s occupation and exposure. NIOSH has held or is planning meetings with state health department representatives, risk managers with an interest in responder safety and health, and other federal organizations to obtain their perspectives on the project. NIOSH official: Project would help HHS determine how it would respond to an activation of the NRF. One of the objectives of the project would be to produce a guidance document for federal, state, and local governments and private businesses and organizations to assist them in providing services to responders. A second objective is to develop a responder surveillance system to document and integrate data on exposures and health effects to identify ways to ensure responder safety and health, the official said. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. Section 709 of the Security and Accountability for Every Port Act of 2006 (also known as the SAFE Port Act) provides that the President, acting through HHS, may establish and implement a program to provide screening and monitoring services for certain individuals affected by a presidentially declared disaster. The act specifies that such a program may include collecting exposure data, developing and disseminating information and educational materials, performing baseline and follow-up follow-ups. These personnel include members of the National Disaster Medical System (NDMS) HHS’s ATSDR has developed and tested a Rapid Response Registry (RRR) survey instrument that state and local entities can voluntarily adopt. The RRR survey instrument, a two-page form that can be distributed in paper or electronic format, is designed to collect information that would enable officials to inform individuals about follow-up health services and facilitate research studies. It contains 38 questions that are intended to collect basic demographic and health information, including contact information; exposure; and contact information. As of February 2008, 21 states had included the RRR survey in their disaster planning. NIOSH has also taken some steps that relate to the registering of responders. In 2005, NIOSH posted interim guidance on its Web site to help occupational health and other clinicians conduct postexposure medical screening of workers leaving hurricane disaster recovery areas. The data would be collected and maintained by state or local entities with ATSDR’s and RTI’S assistance. The instrument has been shared with other federal agencies, all state health departments, and local response organizations. who their employer was or where they reside. HHS has taken steps to ensure that responders are registered, but it has not developed a department-level plan for responder health programs. ATSDR has developed a survey instrument that state and local entities can voluntarily adopt to register responders. ASPR is also taking steps to establish a system to register HHS employees and certain other volunteers, the agency says. The agency says it is working with HHS to develop a plan for responding to natural disasters in the U.S. ATSDR established a contract with Research Triangle Institute International (RTI) in October 2005. RTI’s responsibilities include providing information to the entire at-risk population on how to enroll in the RRR. RTi is also responsible for identifying individuals who left the disaster area before being enrolled. According to an ATSDR official, data would be collected and maintained. The RRR survey instrument would be used during responses to disasters. It would collect basic demographic and health information, including contact information and exposure information. medical screening of workers leaving hurricane disaster recovery areas. The guidance outlines minimum screening information needs, including contact information, health status information, type of response work, exposure information, and injuries or symptoms. ASPR is required under the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act to register federal public health and medical personnel who are deployed under the Secretary of HHS’s authority. It has not completed efforts to ensure that federal health, medical, and other personnel are registered under the Act. their employer or geographic location. HHS provided additional information about ASPR’s responsibilities and activities under the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act, which we incorporated as appropriate. HHS did not comment on our recommendation that HHS develop a department-level responder screening and monitoring plan, but acknowledged that any overall HHS plan should include guidance on treatment referral processes and methods to ensure comparable treatment services across all responder groups. For example, HHS discussed ASPR's establishment of the Center. 26, 2006, ASPR was the administrator. In addition to the contact named above, Helene F. Toiv, Assistant Director; George Bogart; Hernan Bozzolo; Frederick Caison; Anne Dievler; and Roseanne Price made key contributions to this report. September 11: Improvements Still Needed in Availability of Health Screening and Monitoring Services for Responders outside the New York City Area. GAO-08-429T. Washington, D.C.: January 22, 2008. HHS’s authority, it has not completed efforts to ensure that these responders would be registered in the event of an emergency or a disaster. As part of its efforts, ASPR recently established the Center for Responder Safety, Health, and Risk Management. The Center is working to develop a system to register responders and record their health problems and make referrals. HHS has not developed a department-level plan for registering responders in an emergency. The agency is exploring how to adapt two existing electronic record systems used by NDMS. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. HHS also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact us at [email protected] or call (844) 615-3800. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7114 or bascettac@gao.gov. In addition to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) all responders, excluding FDNY firefighters and emergency medical service technicians and current federal employees. In December 2004, DHS issued the National Response Plan (NRP), which detailed missions, policies, structures, and responsibilities of federal agencies. The NRP was to be invoked when the President issued a major disaster or emergency declaration under the Stafford Act. The NRF is intended to provide resource and programmatic support to states, localities, and other entities. It was first invoked in August 2005 in response to Hurricane Katrina and was subsequently updated in May 2006. In January 2008, DHSissued the NRF to supersede the NRP. The NRF is intended to provide a coordinated approach to disaster and emergency response and short-term recovery. FEMA is responsible for assigning work and providing funding to other federal agencies for performing operations included in the NRF. To execute this responsibility, FEMA uses mission assignments, which are interagency agreements. When a disaster or emergency is declared under the authority of the Stafford Act and FEMA issues a mission assignment, a federal agency has 60 days after the declaration to complete tasks described in the mission.to supersede the NRP. of Health Screening and Monitoring for All Responders. GAO-07-892. Washington, D.C.: July 23, 2007. September 11: HHS Has Screened Additional Federal Responders for World Trade Center Health Effects, but Plans for Awarding Funds for Treatment Are Incomplete. September 10: Health Effects in the Aftermath of the World Trade 11: Health effects in the aftermath of. the World trade Center Attack. September 8: September 8, 2004: September 9: September 10, 2004. HHS’s disaster response and recovery activities operate within an administrative and legal framework. FEMA, the federal agency responsible for coordinating federal disaster response efforts, collaborates with HHS on health issues related to disasters. Following the attack on the WTC, the Congress appropriated approximately $8.8 not continuously available for all responders. In addition, some of the screening and monitoring programs initially faced difficulties referring responders for treatment. Throughout the history of these programs, program officials have raised concerns about whether the duration of federal funding would be adequate. The Congress appropriated approximately $8.8 billion to FEMA, over several years, for response and recovery activities. FEMA entered into interagency agreements with HHS agencies, such as NIOSH, ASPR, and ATSDR, to distribute funding to government and private organizations to implement health screening and monitoring programs for responders and other affected groups. In fiscal year 2006, the Congress appropriated $75 million to CDC that was available for monitoring and treatment services for certain WTC responders. The Congress made additional appropriations to CDC available for the same purpose in fiscal years 2007 and 2008. Mental health effects among responders and other affected individuals included symptoms associated with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, and anxiety. Behavioral health effects such as increased alcohol and tobacco use were also reported. The Mount Sinai School of Medicine clinical center of the NY/NJ WTC Consortium found that about half of the participants in its screening program met the threshold criteria for being referred for a clinical mental health evaluation. Some of them did not have training in disaster response and were therefore more vulnerable to the stress of the event. lack of previously tested, scientifically based protocols for conducting physical and mental health screening, making it difficult to obtain conclusive data. One clinician noted that the mental health protocol used by the NY/NJ WTC Consortium focused on delivering good clinical services but that there was not enough emphasis on making the protocol scientifically sound for drawing definitive conclusions. Officials involved in the WTC health programs and other experts have learned that screening and monitoring programs need to be able to scientifically document the health effects of the disaster on responders. mild depression might prevent a major depressive disorder from developing. Treating depression might also prevent alcoholism. Including a treatment referral process in screening and monitoring programs could improve the ability of responders to gain access to needed treatment. Before federal funding became available in fiscal year 2006 to pay for treatment of responders’ health effects, WTC health program officials told us that it was a challenge to find providers who would treat responders whose screening or monitoring examination indicated a need for treatment. As clinicians at the FDNY WTC program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium began screening responders, thorough physical health assessment. The mental health status of responders was initially assessed with a short written questionnaire, and depending on a person’s score, individuals were referred for an in-person clinical mental health evaluation. Recognizing the seriousness of mental health problems among responders, the Mount Sinai School of Medicine Department of Psychiatry sought private funding from the Robin Hood Foundation to develop a broader mental health component to the screening program. With the additional funds, the program was able to develop and use a more extensive mental health questionnaire and have a trained mental health professional conduct in-Person interviews. have a trained mental health professional conduct in-person interviews. Screening and monitoring programs that integrate physical and mental health assessments can have several benefits. For example, gastrointestinal problems can sometimes be a sign of psychological stress. Timely mental health screening and monitoring can also prevent some mental health conditions from progressing to more serious disorders. obtaining treatment for mild depression might prevent a major depressive disorder from developing, for example, in the first place. For more information, visit the National Institute of Mental Health's website. monitoring programs need to be able to scientifically document the health effects of a disaster. In 2007, NIOSH officials identified a need for additional funding to allow the monitoring programs to continue. In addition, conducting scientific research of health effects can help public health officials determine whether long-term monitoring is needed. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Corps of Engineers, to obtain their perspectives on the project. HHS said that it was possible to infer from our draft report that long-term monitoring and treatment, including referral for treatment, are appropriate each time a Stafford Act declaration occurs. However, our discussions of the lessons on the importance of registering responders and of designing responder health programs to foster epidemiological research noted that implementing these lessons would help public health officials determine whether a specific disaster resulted in health effects. HHS also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as well. The WTC screening and monitoring programs were not explicitly designed and implemented to conduct research, in particular epidemiologic research. NIOSH officials told us that the FDNY WTC program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium were not designed to conduct epidemiology research. Designing and implementing screening and. monitoring programs that foster the ability to conduct Epidemiologic. research could improve the understanding of health effects experienced by responders, the authors say. They say there remains some uncertainty and controversy about the health risks associated with the disaster. total population of responders. The WTC health programs have had to rely on participants’ recollection of their exposure. Most of the federally funded WTC health. programs were not started immediately, but rather months after the disaster, which. affected the ability of participants to remember their exposures accurately. For example, WTC Health Registry officials have been unable to determine the relationship between level of exposure and changes in physical. and mental health. It has been difficult to determine. the relationshipBetween level of Exposure and Changes in Physical and Mental Health. Responders to the WTC disaster were at high risk for mental health problems. Many workers and volunteers worked for extended periods of time without sufficient respite. Providing timely mental health screening and monitoring that is integrated with physical health screening could improve the ability to accurately diagnose physical and mental health conditions and prevent more serious mental health issues from developing. There is a need for additional funding to allow the monitoring programs to conduct research and answer important scientific questions about the health of WTC responders. Some of them did programs are designed to foster epidemiologic research. WTC Health Registry officials told us they did not begin surveying responders until 2 years after the WTC disaster. Registering responders during a response to a disaster would help ensure that responders are contacted before some scatter and become more difficult to locate. Having a complete registry could improve the ability of responder health programs to conduct outreach for screening and monitoring services, improve efforts to plan services and allocate resources, and provide data for epidemiologic research. For more information on the WTC Health Registry, visit www.wchealthregistry.org. NIOSH’s project would address some aspects of the lessons from the WTC health programs. For example, regarding the first lesson, register all responders during the response to a disaster. The proposed guidance document would include guidelines for tracking responders during an event, including their activities, exposures, and physical and mental health effects. In addition, the project’S objective to develop a responder surveillance system acknowledges aspects of a second lesson: screening and monitoring programs are designed to foster epidemiologic research.  Screening and monitoring programs for responders to the WTC disaster were set up as separate programs on the basis of the responder’s employer and geographic location. CDC issued a request for organizations to indicate their interest in coordinating a national program for WTC responders. In the event of a future disaster, providing comparable services to all responders would ensure more equitable access to services. This could help prevent future disasters. The program would ensure that all WTC responders who reside outside the NYC metropolitan area have access to federally funded screening, monitoring, and treatment services. HHS’s WTC Federal Responder Screening Program provides screening services to federal responders nationwide through its network of FOH clinics. The FDNY WTC Program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium primarily serve, respectively, firefighters and other workers and volunteers who reside in the NYC area or travel to that area for services. Table 1 provides information on the numbers of responders who have received various health services. NIOSH is the HHS administering the WTC health programs and problems with their implementation have been noted. WTC health programs have recognized the value of designing responder health programs that provide comparable services to all responders. NIOSH took steps to increase the availability of services to nonfederal responders outside the NYC metropolitan area. In June 2007 it arranged for QTC Management, Inc., to provide screening and monitoring examinations nationwide for 1 year. In March NIOSH hired a company to provide screenings and monitoring for non-NYC responders outside of the NYC area for one year. The company was based in New York City but has since moved to Washington, D.C. an ethical obligation to be able to refer people in need of care to treatment services. Making comparable services available to all responders, regardless of their employer or geographic location could ensure more equitable access to services. Screening and monitoring programs for responders could help ensure that data collected about responders’ health are consistent and comprehensive. A working group of agency officials and other experts examining responder mental health issues concluded that providers who identified a need for treatment during screening examinations acquired a responsibility to provide access to care. WTC health programs provide voluntary health screening, monitoring, or treatment services to responders at no cost. Federal funds appropriated or awarded for the WTC health programs from October 2001 through December 2007 have totaled about $369.2 million. Unlike the other key programs, the WTC Health Registry does not provide in-person screening or monitoring services. Instead it uses periodic surveys of self-reported health status to collect health information on responders, as well as people who resided, worked, attended school, or were in the vicinity of the WTC. and disseminating information and educational materials, performing baseline and follow-up clinical and mental health evaluations, establishing and maintaining an exposure registry. The act also authorizes the President, acting through HHS, to establish cooperative agreements with a medical institution, including a local health department or a consortium of medical institutions. We have identified five important lessons from the experience of the WTC health programs. These lessons relate to the need to improve the quality of health care in the U.S. and around the world. HHS officials, clinicians involved with the WTC health programs, and other experts said that an integral part of screening and monitoring is the establishment of a linkage to treatment services. Some indicated that as professionals they also felt an ethical obligation to be able to refer people in. Case study: WTC responders who carried out cleanup services after the WTC attack often did not have health insurance, according to a labor official. Case case: WTC workers who were construction workers often lost their health insurance when they became too ill to work the number of days required for coverage. neither NYC nor the federal government developed a registry of all responders who worked at the WTC disaster site. WTC health program officials subsequently had to compile a list of responders who were potentially eligible to receive services. According to an ATSDR official, some government agencies and many employers did not cooperate with program officials, primarily because of concerns about confidentiality. Not registering responders during disaster response efforts affects outreach activities and hinders efforts to plan services. An official from the NY/NJ WTC Consortium said that without a definitive list ofresponders, the program had to issue widespread and costly public service announcements to identify and enroll eligible responders. service announcements to identify and enroll eligible responders. The lack of a complete registry with demographic and exposure information also made it difficult to quantify the needs for screening, monitoring, and treatment services for responders. Without acomplete registry of responders, it is difficult to accurately determine the incidence and causes of health problems experienced by the responder population. The number of responders who were exposed is not known. The WTC health programs have been able to collect information only on responders who seek out their services or fill out their surveys. Because these responders constitute a self-selected population, program officials have not been able. to determine incidence of health effects among the total population. status information on this population. In addition, in our discussions with clinicians and researchers affiliated with the NY/NJ WTC Consortium, they raised concerns such as the program lacking sufficient in-house experience for conducting research. For example, it did not have an adequate electronic medical records system. Information collected by the program had to go through a protracted data cleaning process before it could be analyzed. WTC health program officials and others also noted that there was a lack of previously tested, scientifically based protocols for conducting physical tests. NIOSH is the HHS administering agency for all the WTC health programs, except the WTC Health Registry. In February 2006 the Secretary of HHS designated the Director of NIOSH to take the lead in ensuring that the WTC's health programs are well coordinated. Information collected by the WTC programs and other researchers has helped to identify the physical and mental health effects of the WTC disaster. Physical health effects included injuries and respiratory conditions, such as sinusitis, asthma, and a new syndrome called WTC cough. WTC cough consists of persistent coughing accompanied by severe respiratory symptoms. Almost all firefighters who responded to the attack experienced respiratory effects, including WTC cough. One study found that exposed firefighters on average experienced a decline in lung function equivalent to that which would be produced by 12 years of aging. A study conducted by WTC Health Registry researchers found that responders’ risk of newly diagnosed asthma increased with greater exposure to the WTC disaster site, as indicated by arriving at the site at an earlier date or working there. NY/NJ WTC Consortium relied on other resources to conduct research, and the programs vary in the type and amount of studies they have published. Many of the studies have been descriptive, such as reports of the incidence of upper and lower respiratory symptoms among responders. Although the FDNY WTC program was able to refer firefighters to its Bureau of Health Services, which provided treatment, the NY/ NJ WTC Consortium did not have a similar option. For example, according to a labor official, responders who lacked health insurance were often the case. effects or to compare participants’ health with the health of a comparison group. FEMA placed restrictions on the funding for the programs. FEMA primarily provides funding for programs to address the short-term effects of a disaster. HHS’s Federal Responder Screening Program also was not designed to collect any information on responders’ Health after a disaster, an HHS official said. The National Institutes of Health says it did not design and implement FDNY and Consortium monitoring programs to conduct research because of FEMA restrictions. was not designed to collect any information on responders’ health for the purposes of research. The interagency agreement between FEMA and ASPR to establish the program limited the program to a onetime screening examination. HHS officials said they did not have the resources to conduct epidemiologic research with the federal responder population. Because of the restrictions on the use of federal funding for research, the FDNY WTC program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium relied on other resources toconduct research. In hindsight, such research clearly would have provided useful data and benefited the program.