Despite association of IRA ownership to individuals with higher incomes, data show that lower- and middle-income individuals also own IRAs. A study by the Congressional Budget Office found that in 2003, 4 percent of workers earning $20,000 to $40,000 (in 1997 dollars) contributed to traditional IRAs and 3 percent of these workers contributed to Roth IRas. More households with Roth IRAs or employer-sponsored IRAs contribute to their accounts than households with traditional IRas, according to the Investment Company Institute. Since 1998, IRA assets have comprised the largest portion of the retirement market. From 1998 to 2004, more than 80 percent of funds flowing into IRAs came from rollovers. In 2007, the median amount in a traditional IRA with rollover assets in 2007 was $61,000, while the median Amount in a Traditional IRA without Rollover assets was $30,000. In addition, IRA accounts withRollover assets were larger than those without rollover Assets in 2007. For example, in 2007 the Median Amount In A Traditional IRA With Rollover Assets In 2007 Was $61k, While In 2007 It Was $30k. For more information, visit www.irs.gov. largest portion of the retirement market. IRA assets in 2004 totaled about $3.5 trillion compared to DC assets of $2.6 trillion. More households own traditional IRAs, which were the first IRAs established, than Roth IRAs or employer-sponsored IRAs. Ownership of traditional and Roth IRas is associated with higher education and income levels. In 2004, 59 percent of IRA households were traditional IRA owners. In 2007, nearly 33 percent of all households owned traditional IRas, and about 15 percent owned Roth IR as. ICI study: median household contribution to traditional IRAs was $2,300 compared to the median contribution to Roth IRAs of $3,000. Median contribution to SIMPLE and. Salary Reduction Simplified Employee Pension IRA (SAR-SEP IRA) was $1,500. More than half of households with Roth, SIMPLE, or Salary reduction IRA contributed to their accounts in 2004. Less than one- third of households. with traditional IRas did so. This, again, may be partly attributed to the emerging role of traditional IR as a means to preserve rollover assets rather than build retirement savings. In 2004, 59 percent of IRA households were headed by an individual with a college degree. Over one- third of these IRA households earned $100,000 or more. Research shows that higher levels of education and household income correlate with a greater propensity to save. However, despite the association of IRA ownership to saving, IRA ownership is not linked to saving more money, according to a recent study by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) The AICPA also found that IRA ownership increases as education and income levels increase. Mr. Chairman and Members of the subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement and I would be happy to respond to any questions the subcommittee may have at this time. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Barbara D. Bovbjerg, Director, Education, Workforce, and Income Security Issues at (202) 512-7215. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this statement. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony can be contacted at (800) 515-8255 or bovbj Bergb@gao.gov. GAO is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material.page of this statement. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony include Tamara Cross (Assistant Director), Matt Barranca, Susan Pachikara, Raun Lazier, Joseph Applebaum, Susan Aschoff, Doreen Feldman. may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-TALK (8255). For confidential help in the UK, call the helpline on 0800 555 111 or visit the National Suicide  Prevention Line on the Samaritans. small employers to offer IRAs to their employees: Savings Incentive Match Plans for Employees (SIMPLE) SIMPLE IRAs, available only to employers with 100 or fewer employees, allow eligible employees to direct a portion of their salary, within limits, to a SIMPLE IRA. Simplified Employee Pensions (SEP) IRAs allow employers to make tax-deductible contributions to their own and IRAs if they are to encourage employees to save for retirement. Labor told us that it has received no input from IRA providers as to what that flexibility would be. Several bills have been introduced in Congress to expand worker access to payroll-deduction IRAs. Tax credits should be made available to defray start-up costs for small employers of payroll- deduction IRAs, experts said. IRA providers and small business groups said increasing contribution limits for SIMPLE IRAs to levels closer to those for 401(k) plans would encourage more employers to offer these plans. Other experts said doing so could provide incentives to employers already offering 401(K) plans to switch to SIMPLEIRAs, which have fewer reporting requirements. Costs of managing SIMPLE and SEP IRAs may be prohibitive for small employers. Certain contribution requirements for these plans may, in some cases, limit employer sponsorship of these plans. Small business revenues are inconsistent and may fluctuate greatly from year to year, making required contributions difficult for some firms. For example, employers offering SIMPLE IRAs must determine before the beginning of the calendar year whether they will match employee contributions or make nonelective contributions to all employees’ accounts. Two experts said small firms may be discouraged from offering these plans because of the requirement that employers must set up a SEP IRA. The median contribution to SIMPLE and SAR-SEP IRAs was $5,000. The study noted that this difference may be related to higher contribution limits for employer-sponsored IRAs than for traditional and Roth IRAs. Few employers appear to offer their employees the opportunity to contribute to IRAs through payroll deductions, but data are insufficient to make this determination. Many small business groups said many small employers are unaware that payroll-deduction IRAs are available or that employer contributions are not required. The majority of employers with fewer than 100 employees do not offer an employer-sponsored by Labor. Employers may also provide payroll-deduction IRA programs, which allow employees to contribute to traditional or Roth IRAs through payroll- deductions by their employer. Payroll- deduction IRAs have fewer requirements for employee communication than SIMPLE and SEP IRAs, and employers are not subject to ERISA fiduciary responsibilities. Under ERISA contributions, and most low- and middle-income workers would be eligible to contribute. payroll deductions than they are without these automatic deposits. In theory, all workers under age 70½ who lack an employer-sponsored retirement plan could be eligible to contribute to a traditional IRA through payroll deduction, should their employer offer such a program. Further, based on the contribution rules for traditional and Roth IRAs, many of these individuals would beeligible to claim a tax deduction for their traditional IRA contributions, and most low- and middle-income workers would be eligible for such a deduction. Experts: Most employers would incur little or no costs since they already make payroll deductions for Social Security and Medicare, as well as federal, state, and local taxes. Labor: Costs to employers also are significantly influenced by the number of IRA providers to which an employer must remit contributions on behalf of employees. Some employers are hesitant to offer a payroll-deduction IRA program because they find Labor’s guidance limits their ability to effectively publicize the program to employees, IRA providers say. Millions of U.S. workers have no retirement savings plan through their employer. Employer-sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs afford an easier way for workers to save for retirement. Yet, barriers exist, such as administrative costs, that may discourage employers. Encouraging employers to offer IRAs to their employees can be much more difficult, authors say. IRAs play a major role in preserving retirement assets, but a very small role in creating them, they say. In 2006, almost half of all U.S. private sector workers were employed by firms with fewer than 100 employees. Only 1 in 4 of these workers worked for an employer sponsoring a retirement plan. To address the issue of low retirement plan sponsorship among small employers, Congress created SIMPLE and SEP employer-sponsored IRAs with less burdensome reporting requirements than 401(k) plans. Under a regulation issued by Labor, employers may also provide payroll-deduction IRA programs, which are not required by law. Since the early 1980s, roughly half of the private-sector work force has participated in either a defined benefit (DB) retirement plan, commonly known as a pension. Congress created IRAs, in part, to help those individuals not covered by a DB or DC plan save for retirement. Employees of small firms, for example, are unlikely to work for an employer or union sponsoring a DB plan. About 62 million workers participated in such a plan in 2006, according to the AFL-CIO. Payroll deductions are a key feature in 401(k) and other DC plans. Neither Labor nor IRS is able to determine how many employers offer payroll-deduction IRAs. The Congressional Budget Office reported that 29 percent of all workers contributed to a DC plan in 2003, while only 7 percent contributed to an IRA. Saving for retirement in the workplace through payroll deductions helps workers save by providing a “commitment device” to make automatic contributions to retirement, the authors say. retirement and savings experts said that very few employers do so. providing a “commitment device’ to make automatic contributions to retirement savings before wages are spent. Such a commitment device helps some workers overcome a common tendency to procrastinate or not take action to save. According to Labor’s guidance on payroll-deduction IRAs and several experts we interviewed, individuals are more likely to save in IRAs through payroll deductions than they are without these automatic deposits. Payroll deductions allow workers to contribute to retirement Savings automatically before wages were spent. Experts say expanding the scope of the Retirement Savings Contribution Credit could encourage IRA participation among workers who are not covered by an employer-sponsored retirement plan. They said expanding the saver’s credit to include more middle-income earners and making the credit refundable could encourage more moderate- and low-income workers to save for retirement. The tax credits could also increase public awareness about the importance of saving for retirement and how to do so. It could also encourage more people to enroll in payroll-deduction IRAs. they do not owe income tax—could encourage more moderate- and low-income individuals to participate in IRAs. An expanded and refundable tax credit would have revenue implications for the federal government. Other experts told us that automatically enrolling workers into payroll-deduction and SIMPLE IRAs could increase employee participation. Small business groups and IRA providers said that mandatory automatic enrollment could be burdensome to small employers. Low- income workers may opt out of automatic enrollment programs or be more inclined to make early withdrawals. IRS does not produce IRA reports on a consistent basis. IRS officials told us they are in the early stages of determining ways to correct it. Labor officials and retirement and savings experts say they use studies by financial institutions to find out how IRAs are being utilized. The IRS has published IRA data for tax years 2000, 2001, 2002 and 2004, but none for tax year 2003. In addition, IRS officials said they had problems with the IRAData for taxyear 2003, which prevented them from issuing a report for that year. IRA information by IRS, they use studies by financial institutions and industry associations for research purposes. Some may double- count individuals because one person may have more than one IRA at different financial institutions. More consistent reporting of IRA information could help them ensure that their analyses reflect current and accurate information about retirement assets, such as the fair market value of IRAs. Since IRS is the only agency that has data on all IRA participants, it is the best source of information for the IRS to work with. numerous errors, making it difficult and time-consuming for IRS to edit them for statistical analysis. They also said that the IRA rules, and changes to those rules, are difficult for some taxpayers, employers, and trustees to understand. Also, in the past, one particular IRS employee, who has recently retired, took the lead in developing a statistical analysis on IRAs. Since IRS does not have a process in place to train another employee to take over this role, a knowledge gap was created that IRS is trying to fill. Regulators lack information about employer- sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs. IRS collects information on employer-sponsored IRAs but does not share the information collected to offer IRAs to their employees. Providing complete and consistent data on IRAs would help ensure that regulators have the information they need to make informed decisions about IRAs, the authors say. They say changes at IRS and Labor could encourage employers to offerIRAs and improve IRA information and oversight. The authors say increasing public awareness of the importance of saving for retirement and educating individuals about how to do so could increase IRA participation. IRS does collect some information on these IRAs through several “information’ forms provided by financial institutions and employers. Key information on IRAs is currently not reported, such as information that identifies employers offering payroll-deduction IRAs. Without such information, experts said they are unable to determine how many employers and employees participate in payroll- Deduction IRas. The limited reporting requirements prevent information from being obtained about the universe of employers that offer employer- sponsored and payroll- deduction IR as. Retirement plans are reported annually by employers and others to IRS on its Form W-2. IRS cannot share the information it receives on employer-sponsored IRAs with Labor because it is confidential tax information. Labor also does not receive relevant information from employers, such as annual financial reports, as it does from private pension plan sponsors. The Bureau of Labor Statistics National Compensation Survey surveys employee benefit plans in private establishments, receiving information on access, participation, and take- up rates for DB and DC plans. Bureau of Labor Statistics: 8 percent of private sector workers in firms with fewer than 100 employees participated in a SIMPLE IRA in 2005. IRS evaluation of employer-filed W-2 forms estimated that 190,000 employers sponsored SIMPLE IRAs in 2004. IRS did not provide an estimate of the number of employers sponsoring SEP IRAs, and we were unable to reach them. The number of people who have a SEP IRA is estimated to be in the hundreds of thousands. A minimum level of oversight is important to ensure that employers are acting in accordance with the law and within Labor’s guidance on payroll-deduction IRAs. Labor officials said that they do not have a process for actively seeking out and determining whether employer- sponsored IRAs are engaging in prohibited transactions or not abiding by their fiduciary responsibilities. The only agency that has data on all IRA participants, consistent reporting of these data could give policymakers and others a more comprehensive view of the IRA landscape. Congress should consider whether payroll-deduction IRAs should have some direct oversight. Labor should also have an accurate accounting of the costs to employers, authors say. Without direct oversight, employees may lack confidence, they say. They are pleased that the Committee on Ways and Means and this subcommittee are interested in retirement savings, they add. But any direct oversight should be done in a way that does not pose an undue burden on employers or their employees, the authors say, and they are continuing their work on IRAs. on employer-sponsored IRAs but does not share the information collected with Labor. Currently, Labor has no process in place to monitor employer- sponsored IRAs, and has no jurisdiction over payroll-deduction IRAs. Without direct oversight, employees may lack confidence in their retirement savings. If current oversight vulnerabilities are not addressed, future problems could emerge as more employers and workers participate in employer-Sponsored IRAs and other types of retirement plans, authors say. They make recommendations to Congress, Labor, and IRS to improve IRA information and oversight. rolling assets into IRAs or converting assets from a traditional IRA into a Roth IRA. Labor and IRS work together to oversee IRA prohibited transactions. IRS has responsibility for imposing an excise tax on parties that engage in a prohibited transaction. ERISA and the Internal Revenue Code contain various statutory exemptions from the prohibited transaction rules, and Labor has authority to grant administrative exemptions and establish exemption procedures. (See fig. 1 for a description of IRS and Labor responsibilities regarding IRAs.) Most assets flowing into IRas come not from direct contributions, but from transfers, or rollovers, of retirement assets from other retirement plans, including 401(k) plans. access to SIMPLE and SEP IRAs appears limited. Payroll-deduction IRA programs are not subject to ERISA requirements for employer-sponsored retirement plans and have no reporting requirements. Under ERISA Title I, there is no reporting requirement for SIMPLE IRAs, and there is an alternative method available for reporting of employer- sponsored SEPIRAs. The IRS receives information reports for all traditional and Roth IRAs but those data do not show how many were for employees using payroll-deductions. IRS and Labor share oversight responsibilities for IRAs. IRS enforces Title II of ERISA for all types of IRAs, which details participant eligibility, vesting, and funding requirements. Payroll-deduction IRAs are not under Labor’s jurisdiction; however, Labor does provide guidance regarding the circumstances under which an employer may provide a payroll-deductuction IRA program without being subject to ERISA Title I requirements. Labor primarily relies on participant complaints as sources of investigative leads to detect employers that are not making required contributions. Labor does not have jurisdiction to monitor whether employers are managing such programs within the bounds of Labor’s safe harbor. Labor officials told us that they are not aware of employers improperly relying on the safe harbor regarding payroll-deduction IRAs. Without accurate cost estimates and a determination of what constitutes “reasonable compensation” to employers, employers may not be able to provide adequate protections to employees. Without direct oversight of payroll- deduction IRAs, employees may lack confidence that payroll- Deduction IRas will provide them with adequate protections.